
H-WEC-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |BA (Perceived bias - Israel |
|On 29 March 2004           |        |- Gaza) Israel [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00118                       |
|Prepared 1 April 2004      |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|27 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice-President                                  |
|Mr C Thursby                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr B Lams of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant who is a former resident of the Gaza Strip, appeals
    against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr M  Shrimpton,  who
    dismissed his appeal on  both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
    against the decision made on 11 February  2003  giving  directions
    for his removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

Background

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15  December  2002
    using a forged passport supplied by an agent.  He was  accompanied
    by his brother  Mohamad.   The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  17
    December 2002.  His claim was refused for the reasons set  out  in
    the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  7  February  2003.   The
    Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision  on  15  August
    2003.

3.    The basis of the Appellant's claim can briefly be  summarised  as
    follows.  He was born on 26 February 1978 in  Rafah  in  the  Gaza
    Strip.  His father  had  been  born  in  Haifa  but  was  forcibly
    displaced from there with his  parents  in  1948.   The  Appellant
    attended a primary school for refugees from the  age  of  6  until
    1990 when he attended an intermediate school for boys until he was
    16.  He then worked with his father until he left.

4.    In his statement in support of his  application  for  asylum  the
    Appellant says that there were always clashes between Palestinians
    and the Israeli forces in  the  Gaza  Strip.   The  Israelis  were
    always shooting at the Palestinians and would use the  area  where
    they lived as a firing range.  As a  Palestinian  his  freedom  of
    movement was  restricted.   If  he  wanted  to  go  to  any  other
    Palestinian town he needed permission from the Israeli authorities
    and would have to go through their checkpoints.  If he did  so  he
    would be exposed to humiliating and  degrading  treatment.   There
    was an occasion when he was 15 when he went  with  his  school  to
    Khanyounis.  He had to undergo a full search by  Israeli  soldiers
    and was made to wait in the hot sun until they had  finished  with
    him.  In March 1998 his school  arranged  a  protest  against  the
    Israeli occupation.  Israeli soldiers  fired  into  the  crowd  of
    students and his brother Mohamad was hit by an M.16  bullet.   His
    condition was critical. He was taken to hospital where  he  stayed
    for one month before he was discharged.  He then  rested  at  home
    for another one-and-a-half months before returning to school.

5.    The Appellant described living in the Gaza  Strip  as  unbearable
    and like living in a big prison.  He  was  unable  to  visit  holy
    places such as Jerusalem,  Ramala  and  Bethlehem.   He  has  been
    persecuted because of his race as a  Palestinian  Arab  living  in
    Palestine.  He was not able to go where he wanted or to  be  free.
    He had never joined any of the militant groups such  as  HAMAS  or
    the  Islamic  Jihad  Movement.   His  situation  had  always  been
    unbearable but became worse after October 2002 when his  home  was
    bombed by Israeli tanks.  The family left the house  and  went  to
    hide in surrounding streets.  When  they  returned  the  following
    morning they found that their  house  had  been  bombed.   It  had
    caught fire and had been destroyed.  Following this  incident  his
    father contacted an agent to arrange for  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother to leave.  They were taken through a tunnel into  Egyptian
    territory and then driven to Cairo.   On  15  December  2002  they
    travelled by plane to the United  Kingdom.   They  did  not  claim
    asylum at the airport but a day or so later they were  advised  to
    make a claim at Croydon.

6.    The Adjudicator was prepared to accept the Appellant's account at
    least to the lower standard of proof required in  asylum  appeals.
    He found that none of the acts complained of by the Appellant even
    arguably amounted to persecution.  He had never been  detained  or
    ill-treated by the Israeli government.  On his own account he  had
    been searched at a checkpoint when he  was  15  but  this  was  to
    establish his identity and to ensure  that  he  was  not  carrying
    weapons.   The  restriction  on  movement  did   not   amount   to
    persecution.  The Appellant acknowledged that he  had  never  been
    politically active and had said that  his  home  was  attacked  at
    random.  The Adjudicator was satisfied that the Israeli occupation
    of the Gaza Strip  was  lawful  and  in  these  circumstances  the
    Israeli authorities were entitled to take  proportionate  measures
    within the  occupied  territories  to  protect  its  own  civilian
    population and  to  respond  to  the  threat  of  terrorism.   The
    Appellant did not  establish  that  he  was  at  a  real  risk  of
    persecution nor that any risk would arise for a Convention reason.
     The appeal was dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal

7.    In the grounds of  appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  Adjudicator
    wrongfully failed to recuse  himself  given  his  recent  personal
    contact with the Israeli army and Israeli government officials and
    historians.  In his determination the Adjudicator had referred  to
    the fact that he had recently received  a  briefing  from  an  IDF
    checkpoint and had had discussions with senior Druze IDF officers.
     When considering the legality of the occupation  the  Adjudicator
    had referred to a respected Israeli historian whom the Adjudicator
    "had the great privilege of meeting" in Jerusalem  in  June  2003.
    It is argued that these comments give rise to  a  perception  that
    there was a real possibility of bias.  The Adjudicator  had  erred
    by not withdrawing from the appeal.

8.    The second ground argues that the Adjudicator  erred  in  law  by
    taking irrelevant matters into consideration.  This refers to  the
    "floodgates" argument arising from the Adjudicator's  comments  in
    paragraph 7 and particularly in paragraph 67 that if the Appellant
    were allowed asylum "any and every ethnic Palestinian in the  Gaza
    Strip" would similarly be  allowed  asylum.   The  Adjudicator  is
    criticised for commenting that such a state of affairs might  lead
    to loss of life  through  increased  use  of  the  secret  tunnels
    between  Gaza  and  Egypt.   The  third  ground  argues  that  the
    Adjudicator erred in law  in  his  consideration  of  the  Amnesty
    International report.  He failed to obtain Home Office information
    if it was felt necessary to reach a balanced view.  He  was  wrong
    in his consideration of the legality of the occupation of the Gaza
    Strip.

Submissions

9.    Mr Lams adopted these grounds in his submissions.  He argued that
    the appeal should be remitted for a fresh  hearing  because  there
    had been a perception of bias which had affected the Adjudicator's
    reasoning process.  The perception of justice was  paramount.   He
    submitted that the  Appellant  should  be  restored  to  the  best
    possible position where there were doubts as to whether he had had
    a fair hearing. The Tribunal should make a point of remitting  the
    appeal for this reason.

10.   On this issue Mr Parker submitted that there was  no  reason  for
    the appeal to be remitted.  The Adjudicator had  made  a  positive
    credibility finding: the Tribunal should proceed to  consider  the
    appeal on its merits.

11.   The Tribunal indicated to the representatives that it was not our
    view at this preliminary stage that a remittal was necessarily the
    most appropriate way of disposing of the appeal and that we wished
    to hear full arguments on the merits before making our decision.

12.   Mr Lams referred the Tribunal to Gashi (13695) and in  particular
    to the Tribunal's adoption of Professor Hathaway's  categorisation
    of rights.  He submitted that there would be a breach of all three
    categories of right if the Appellant were to be  returned  to  the
    occupied territories.  There was a  persistent  denial  of  rights
    within categories 2 and 3.  The judgments of the Court  of  Appeal
    in Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 were not inconsistent  with  this
    categorisation.  When assessing whether the actions of the Israeli
    authorities in the Gaza Strip would amount to persecution, it  was
    important  to  consider  whether  the  actions  were  intentional,
    unlawful, prolonged and discriminatory.  The  floodgates  argument
    had no place in this assessment.  The reality of the situation  in
    Gaza had to be considered.  The motivation behind their actions of
    the authorities was relevant:  see the judgment of Simon Brown  LJ
    in Ravichandran.  There was  a  policy  of  collective  punishment
    confirmed by the Amnesty International report.  The  international
    community  did  not  recognise  the  legality   of   the   Israeli
    occupation.  It was the 1967 borders  which  were  internationally
    recognised.  The occupation was in breach of Resolution 242.   The
    conditions affecting the population  were  intolerable.   Violence
    was caused by the establishment of unlawful settlements which  the
    Israeli authorities  then  sought  to  protect  by  acts  such  as
    targeted killings and the demolition of property.

13.   Even if the actions of the Israeli authorities  were  legitimate,
    the extent went beyond any permissible basis.  It was  not  lawful
    to impose collective punishment on  sections  of  the  population.
    The policy of destroying houses was specifically intended to deter
    other potential attackers.  The Adjudicator was  wrong  to  reject
    the evidence from Amnesty International.  The Appellant  would  be
    at risk firstly as  a  resident  and  secondly  as  a  young  male
    resident.

14.   Mr Parker submitted  that  regardless  of  the  legality  of  the
    occupation, the Israeli authorities have governed the  territories
    within the requirements of the relevant Hague Conventions.  Israel
    inevitably  had  an  interest  in  maintaining  its  borders   and
    targeting terrorists.  Looking at the facts as they related to the
    Appellant there would be no breach  of  the  rights  described  in
    Gashi.  The Appellant had never been arrested or detained save for
    the incident at the checkpoint in 1995.  He had been able to  work
    for his father after he was 16.  It could not be said that he  had
    been deprived of employment.  He  had  been  able  to  receive  an
    education until the age of 16.  His brother  had  received  proper
    medical care after he was shot.

15.   So far as the incident  relating  to  the  Appellant's  home  was
    concerned,  there  was  no  evidence  to  indicate  any   specific
    targeting of him or his family.  There was no  reason  to  believe
    that the Appellant would have particular problems on return.   The
    general conditions were not such that it could be said that  there
    was a specific risk to him amounting to a real risk of persecution
    or treatment contrary to Article 3.

16.   In reply Mr Lams submitted that even if the  Israeli  authorities
    were acting subject to the Hague Convention on war, this  did  not
    establish a sovereign right to occupy.  These Conventions  covered
    the conduct of their armed forces but did not support a contention
    that  the  occupation  itself  was  lawful.   There  had  been  no
    revocation  of  Resolution  242.   The  Appellant  fell  within  a
    category of people at risk:  as a resident  or  as  a  young  male
    resident.  He had been personally affected  as  evidenced  by  the
    demolition of his home  which  was  his  motivation  for  leaving.
    There would be a real risk that he would be  caught  up  again  in
    actions imposing collective punishment on Palestinian residents.

The Allegation of Bias

17.   The Tribunal will deal firstly with the issue  raised  in  ground
    one that the Adjudicator should have recused himself and that  his
    determination is vitiated through apparent bias.

18.   The grounds set out the relevant test formulated by Lord  Philips
    MR in Director General of Fair Trading v  Proprietary  Association
    of Great Britain [2001] 1 WLR 700 at page 721:

      "The Court must first ascertain all the circumstances which  have
       a bearing on the suggestion that the Judge was biased.  It  must
       then ask whether those circumstances would  lead  a  fair-minded
       and  informed  observer  to  conclude  that  there  was  a  real
       possibility, or a real danger, the two being the same, that  the
       Tribunal was biased."

19.   The argument is based firstly on the fact  that  the  Adjudicator
    has had recent personal contact with the Israeli army and  Israeli
    government officials and historians.  The Adjudicator disclosed in
    paragraph 13 of his determination that he had recently visited the
    occupied territories and observed a checkpoint in  action  on  the
    West Bank at Janine as part of an international group  of  lawyers
    who received a  briefing  from  the  checkpoint  commander.   When
    assessing in paragraphs 42-61 of his determination the legality of
    Israel's occupation of the Gaza Strip, the Adjudicator  refers  in
    paragraph 47 to the fact that he had had "the great privilege"  of
    meeting Dr Oren in Jerusalem in  June.   Dr  Oren  is  an  Israeli
    historian who edited, "Six Days of War".   It  is  argued  in  the
    grounds that the Adjudicator does not disclose whether he  himself
    has any personal or cultural ties to  Israel  or  the  purpose  or
    ambit of his visit to the West Bank.  There is no indication  that
    the  Adjudicator  talked  to  any  members  of   the   Palestinian
    authorities during the  visit  and  it  is  pointed  out  that  he
    described Fatah as a terrorist organisation in paragraph 27 of his
    determination.  It is correct that the Adjudicator  said  that  he
    regarded Hamas  and  Fatah  as  paradigm  terrorist  organisations
    applying accepted definitions in public international law.   These
    comments were made in the context of the  Adjudicator's  criticism
    of an Amnesty International report to which he was referred.   The
    Adjudicator also refers in paragraph 64 of  his  determination  to
    the fact that there are a number of Druze  officers  in  the  IDF.
    The Adjudicator goes on to say that he is not  sure  whether  they
    are referred to in the background material and that he is in  part
    relying on his own personal experience of discussions with  senior
    Druze IDF officials but he understands that they are  particularly
    respected.

20.   It is not clear  from  the  determination  or  from  the  grounds
    whether the Adjudicator raised this  issue  at  the  hearing.   In
    paragraph  13  the  Adjudicator  acknowledged  the  importance  of
    disclosing to  representatives if  he  had  recently  visited  the
    country in issue.  He indicates that he in fact visited  the  West
    Bank not the Gaza Strip as  part  of  an  international  group  of
    lawyers which received a briefing from the  checkpoint  commander.
    He would have recused himself had he met or had any dealings  with
    any  Israeli  soldier  or  commander  involved  in  any  operation
    concerning the Appellant or any member of his family or  for  that
    matter if he had witnessed operations at the particular checkpoint
    near Khanyounis.  However, he had not visited the Gaza Strip  only
    the West Bank many miles away from the area  under  discussion  in
    the appeal.

21.   In our judgment the fact that the  Adjudicator  was  part  of  an
    international group of lawyers which paid a visit to the West Bank
    would not indicate to a fair-minded  and  informed  observer  that
    there was a real danger of bias when assessing a claim relating to
    a resident of the Gaza  Strip.   The  Adjudicator's  reference  to
    having the great privilege of meeting Dr Oren does not seem to  us
    even arguably to indicate bias.  It is  clear  from  paragraph  47
    that  the  Adjudicator  did  make   clear   to   the   Appellant's
    representatives the material on which he was  proposing  to  rely.
    The fact that the Adjudicator may have met  Dr  Oren  during  this
    visit  seems  to  us  immaterial.   The  issue  is   whether   the
    Adjudicator was right to find that the  Gaza  Strip  was  lawfully
    occupied by Israel following the six day war in 1967  and  if  so,
    the relevance to this appeal.

22.   When assessing whether there would be a real possibility of  bias
    it is important to take into consideration  what  the  Adjudicator
    said about the Appellant's own account of  events.   It  is  clear
    from paragraph 30 that the  Adjudicator  was  prepared  to  accept
    that account to the appropriate standard of proof in asylum cases.
     Can it seriously  be  said  that  a  fair-minded  observer  would
    conclude that there was a real danger  of  bias  in  circumstances
    where the Adjudicator believed that what the  Appellant  had  said
    was or might  be  true?   By  inference  it  is  argued  that  the
    Adjudicator's sympathies for Israel prevented him  from  making  a
    fair assessment of the risk to the Appellant on return to the Gaza
    Strip.  We are not satisfied that this is even arguably the  case.
    The fact that the Adjudicator has paid a visit to the West Bank as
    part of an international group of lawyers and has  met  a  leading
    Israeli  historian  does  not  in  our  view  indicate  that   the
    Adjudicator was biased in his assessment of risk nor  would  there
    be any perception of bias.

23.   In this context it is also argued that the Adjudicator was unduly
    influenced by the  "floodgates"  argument  when  he  commented  in
    paragraph 22 that if the Appellant was persecuted by the  Israelis
    within the meaning of the 1951 Geneva Convention then so was every
    other  Palestinian  resident   in   the   Gaza   Strip.    Neither
    Adjudicators nor the Tribunal are concerned with numbers.  We  are
    concerned with whether the individual applicant in any  particular
    appeal is at real risk of persecution on return.  It may  be  that
    an applicant can show that he falls within a category at real risk
    or it may be that his own personal profile and  circumstances  put
    him at risk.    Each case must be looked at  on  its  own  merits.
    The only use of a "floodgates" argument is to test the validity of
    an argument put forward on behalf of an applicant.   The  Tribunal
    is not satisfied that it is arguable that the Adjudicator  applied
    some sort of numbers test or similar policy consideration as  part
    of his reasoning in concluding that the Appellant did not  qualify
    for asylum.

24.   In summary the Tribunal is not satisfied that the  allegation  of
    perceived bias is made out.  Even if it was, in the light  of  the
    Adjudicator's findings of fact there is no  good  reason  why  the
    Tribunal should not go on to assess  risk  in  the  light  of  the
    current background evidence.  Mr Lams argued  that  the  Appellant
    should not be deprived of  a  full  and  fair  hearing  before  an
    Adjudicator  with  its  consequential  right  of  appeal  to   the
    Tribunal.  However, that right of appeal can now only be exercised
    on a point of law and the Appellant has in  any  event  a  similar
    right of appeal from this Tribunal to the Court  of  Appeal.   The
    Tribunal is not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  good  public  or
    judicial policy reason for remitting the appeal for rehearing.

The Other Grounds

25.   The Tribunal will  now  turn  to  the  merits  of  the  arguments
    relating to the assessment of risk on  return.   We  have  already
    touched on ground two which argues that the Adjudicator  erred  in
    law by taking irrelevant  matters  into  account,  the  floodgates
    argument referred to in paragraph 67.   The Adjudicator  described
    the suggestion that any and every ethnic Palestinian living in the
    Gaza Strip was entitled to leave and  present  themselves  at  the
    frontiers of a Convention State and insist on being granted asylum
    as an irresponsible proposition firmly to be discounted.   As  the
    Tribunal have already indicated each case must  be  determined  on
    its own facts.    The Adjudicator did comment that such a  finding
    may lead to illegal movement across the Gaza Strip and into  Egypt
    and that it would be very difficult for a border guard to tell the
    difference between an unarmed asylum seeker and an armed terrorist
    and perhaps suicide bomber.  These comments  may  or  may  not  be
    right but they are not material to the  proper  disposal  of  this
    appeal. We note that they follow  the  Adjudicator's  reasons  for
    finding  that  the  Appellant   could   not   demonstrate   either
    persecution or a Convention reason.  The Tribunal is not satisfied
    that the Adjudicator took into account what ground  two  describes
    as public policy issues in his assessment of whether the Appellant
    was entitled to asylum.

26.   The third ground argues that the Adjudicator erred in law in  his
    consideration  of  the  Amnesty  evidence.   The  Adjudicator  was
    critical of the Amnesty International report adduced in  evidence.
    In paragraph 26 he said  that  it  was  overstating  the  case  to
    describe that evidence as objective.  The Amnesty report  referred
    to Israeli soldiers "often" using "Palestinians as human shields".
     The Adjudicator commented that the Israeli government would  take
    issue with that description.  The important sentence  is  the  one
    which follows that comment.  The Adjudicator said that  it  by  no
    means followed of course that  the  Israeli  government  would  be
    correct but that it was impossible to describe the view of Amnesty
    International as balanced and objective.  He also took issue  with
    the description of "Palestinian armed groups" which in his view in
    reality were terrorist organisations.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
    accept the conclusions under the headings "Killings by the Israeli
    army" at page 60  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  of  evidence.   He
    commented  that  he  would  much  prefer  to  have   the   Israeli
    government's point of view but he qualified that remark by  saying
    that that was not because it  should  be  automatically  accepted,
    plainly that would not be right but because it would enable him to
    reach a balanced judgment.  The Adjudicator clearly accepted  that
    he had to determine the appeal on the  evidence  he  had.   He  is
    entitled to make  comments  on  the  objective  evidence  and  the
    Tribunal is not satisfied that his comments fell outside the  area
    of proper comment open to him on the evidence.

27.   Ground four argues that if  the  Adjudicator  felt  that  further
    evidence was necessary to  reach  a  balanced  view  and  in  this
    context he had referred to the fact that there was no Home  Office
    Country Assessment, he should have adjourned for the  Home  Office
    to appear.  In the view of the Tribunal there was no proper  basis
    for an adjournment.  It was  unfortunate  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was not represented at the hearing and the  Adjudicator  was
    rightly critical about this  failure.   However,  it  is  entirely
    different to say that the Adjudicator  should  adjourn  not  least
    when the gist of the Adjudicator's complaint was that there was no
    CIPU Assessment for  the  Occupied  Territories.   An  adjournment
    would not have achieved any purpose.

28.    Ground  five  argues  that  the   Adjudicator   erred   in   his
    consideration of the legality of the occupation of the Gaza Strip.
     Although the Adjudicator was satisfied that the  Gaza  Strip  was
    lawfully occupied by the Israeli State, he says  in  paragraph  57
    that his decision would have been the same even if he had come  to
    the contrary view because he did not  consider  that  any  of  the
    matters complained  of  by  the  Appellant  properly  amounted  to
    persecution.   Mr  Lams  submitted  that  the  lawfulness  of  the
    occupation was a relevant consideration and that the Adjudicator's
    finding in this  respect  was  incorrect  and  this  error  has  a
    material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.

The risk on return to the Gaza Strip

29.   The Tribunal will now turn  to  the  facts  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant as supporting his claim to be in fear of persecution  on
    return to the Gaza Strip.  He relies on an incident  when  he  was
    aged 15 on a school trip to Khanyounis when he was searched  at  a
    border post.  The Adjudicator was entitled to conclude  that  this
    amounted  to  a  brief  detention  to  establish  the  Appellant's
    identity and to search him to ensure  that  he  was  not  carrying
    weapons.  He refers also to the occasion in March  1988  when  his
    brother Mohamad was shot by a bullet fired from  an  M.16  assault
    rifle.  This incident took place  in  the  context  of  a  violent
    demonstration.  The Appellant also relies on the  restrictions  on
    his movement by the Israeli  authorities.   The  Adjudicator  said
    that these restrictions were perfectly proper  security  measures.
    The incident which led the Appellant to leave was  the  demolition
    of his home. The Adjudicator found that it was impossible  to  say
    with no evidence at all as to the surrounding  circumstances  that
    this  was  persecution.   If  terrorist  operations   were   being
    conducted from the neighbourhood for  example  from  an  adjoining
    house it may simply have been a case of a tank round going  astray
    but even if the house had been targeted as the Appellant  and  his
    family had left the house previously they would not be able to say
    who was in the house at the time it was attacked.   The  Appellant
    himself had said that he had never  been  politically  active  and
    that the attack on the house was "at random".  The Adjudicator was
    not satisfied that these  events  amounted  to  persecution,  that
    there was a risk of persecution on return nor that  any  incidents
    would arise for a Convention reason.

30.    Mr  Lams  referred  the  Tribunal  to  Gashi  and  to  Professor
    Hathaway's classification of rights.  That  classification  is  of
    assistance in considering on the  facts  of  any  particular  case
    whether persecution is established.  In Ravichandran, Staughton LJ
    said that persecution must at least be persistent and serious ill-
    treatment without just cause by the state or from which the  state
    could provide protection but chose  not  to  do  so.   In  Horvath
    (2000) Imm  AR  205  the  Court  of  Appeal  emphasised  that  the
    threshold for establishing  persecution  was  set  high  and  that
    anything short of a really serious flouting of a  citizen's  human
    rights and dignities would not do.  Mr Lams argues that  residents
    of  the  Gaza  Strip  are  at  risk  of  persecution  because  the
    activities  of  the  Israeli  authorities  are  intended   to   be
    persecutory.  The motivation behind their actions is to intimidate
    the resident population.  Their actions are unlawful  particularly
    in protecting the  settlements  and  in  administering  collective
    punishment to act as a deterrent.  It is discriminatory because it
    is aimed at the Palestinian community.

31.   The background evidence to which the Tribunal has  been  referred
    confirms that most Palestinian towns and villages  have  been  cut
    off from each other and from surrounding villages for most of  the
    year in 2002 and there is no evidence to show that  the  situation
    has improved.  The closures and curfews which affect  the  freedom
    of movement of more than three million Palestinians did not affect
    Israeli settlers.  It is also recorded that the IDF blew up scores
    of houses belonging to  the  families  of  Palestinians  known  or
    suspected of involvement in  attacks  against  Israelis  and  that
    often nearby houses  have  been  destroyed  by  these  explosions.
    There were also reports that the IDF have forced  Palestinians  to
    serve as human shields making them enter or approach houses  where
    there might be armed Palestinians or explosives.

32.   In the US State Department Report  2002  the  background  to  the
    current arrangements in the occupied territories  is  set  out  at
    page 16 onwards.  Israel and the Palestinians  have  entered  into
    negotiations and by the Oslo Accord have established  a  framework
    for  negotiating  transition  and   final   status   arrangements.
    Following the May 1994 Gaza-Jericho Agreement  and  the  September
    1995  Interim  Agreement,  Israel  has  transferred  most  of  its
    responsibilities for civil government in the Gaza Strip and  parts
    of the West Bank to the Palestinian authority but Israel  retained
    responsibility  for  external  security,  foreign  relations,  the
    overall security of Israelis including public order in the Israeli
    settlements and  over  certain  other  matters.   Territories  are
    divided into areas  A,  B  and  C  denoting  different  levels  of
    Palestinian and Israeli control but there is no clear evidence  to
    indicate the boundaries of those areas or how they relate  to  the
    Appellant's claim.

33.   The international community has considered the  Hague  Convention
    applicable to the behaviour of the Israeli  authorities  in  these
    areas and Israel has  maintained  that  it  largely  observes  the
    Geneva Convention's humanitarian  provisions.   This  report  says
    that  Israel's  overall  human  rights  record  in  the   occupied
    territories remains  poor  and  has  worsened  in  several  areas.
    Israel has carried out policies of demolitions, strict curfews and
    closures that directly punished innocent civilians.   It  confirms
    that homes of families and relatives of suspected terrorists  have
    been demolished.  The report also confirms  that  the  Palestinian
    Authority's overall human rights record remains poor and  that  it
    has continued to commit numerous serious abuses.  The  tragedy  of
    the situation is clear from the incidents described on page 21  of
    this report.  There is a reference to a Palestinian suicide bomber
    strapped with nail studded explosives  blowing  himself  up  in  a
    pizzeria at an Israeli settlement killing three Israeli  children.
    Israeli settlers acting individually and within small groups  have
    attacked and occasionally killed Palestinians.   Hamas,  PIJ,  the
    PFLP, the DLFP and Fatah affiliated groups  such  as  the  Al-Aqsa
    Martyrs' Brigade and the Brigades of Return continue to  kill  and
    injure Israelis.  Several  Palestinian  authority  officials  have
    made public statements justifying Palestinian attacks on  Israelis
    and Fatah leaders make public statements  urging  Palestinians  to
    continue all aspects of the intifada including violent attacks.

34.   Assessing the Appellant's own circumstances in the light of  this
    background evidence, the conclusion to which the Tribunal has come
    is that  the  Appellant  has  been  an  innocent  victim  in  this
    conflict.  The Tribunal is not satisfied that the past  events  he
    has relied on amount to persecution within the Refugee Convention.
     The risk to him on return to  the  Gaza  Strip  is  of  being  an
    arbitrary victim in the conflict between the  Israeli  authorities
    and settlers and the Palestinians.  In our  judgment  the  general
    situation is not such that it can be said  that  all  Palestinians
    are at risk because they are Palestinian.  We also do  not  accept
    that young Palestinian males form a category who can  properly  be
    described as at risk for a Convention reason.

35.   The Tribunal need not deal with the Adjudicator's  findings  that
    the Gaza Strip  is  lawfully  occupied  by  the  State  of  Israel
    following its victory in the  six  day  war.   The  lawfulness  or
    otherwise of the occupation  does  not  in  our  view  affect  the
    outcome of this appeal.  The Tribunal must look at the reality  of
    the situation as it applies to  this  Appellant  and  then  assess
    whether it can be said that there is a real  risk  that  he  faces
    persecution for a  Convention  reason  or  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3.  For the reasons the Tribunal have attempted to set out
    we are not satisfied that he does.

Conclusion

36.    In  the  bundle  of  documents  before  the  Tribunal   is   the
    determination relating to the appeal by the  Appellant's  brother,
    Mohamad Al-Ali.  His appeal was  heard  by  an  Adjudicator  on  3
    November 2003.  He was not satisfied that the Appellant's  brother
    would face a risk of differential treatment in the Gaza Strip when
    compared  with  the  dangers  of  everyday  life  with  which  the
    Palestinian population now have to contend.  It was his view  that
    he would not be of any interest to the  Israeli  authorities.   In
    concluding his determination the Adjudicator commented as follows:

      "One cannot read  the  objective  evidence  without  feeling  the
       utmost sympathy for the Palestinians,  who  have  been  uprooted
       from their homeland  and  treated  with  harshness,  and  indeed
       sometimes cruelty by troops who themselves feel under threat  of
       death at the hands of suicide bombers, snipers etc.   The  whole
       scene is a nightmare and there must be  literally  thousands  of
       fellow inhabitants of the Gaza Strip who  would  happily  change
       places with this Appellant and find themselves in a  safe  haven
       such as the UK."

    The Tribunal endorses these comments.   Individuals  in  the  Gaza
    strip are caught up in circumstances beyond  their  control.   The
    role  of  Adjudicators  and  the  Tribunal  is  to  look  at   the
    particulars of an individual's circumstances and assess whether he
    falls within either the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

37.   In summary for the reasons the Tribunal  has  given  we  are  not
    satisfied that the Adjudicator's comments would lead  an  informed
    observer to conclude that there was a real  possibility  of  bias.
    The tribunal agree with the Adjudicator's conclusions.

38.   It follows that this appeal is dismissed.










                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
