
Heard at Field House

On the 23rd April 2004


AB (Reliance on photocopies) Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) [2004] UKIAT
00172





                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL








                 Date Determination Notified  11th June 2004







                                   Before


                       DR H H STOREY (Vice President)
                              MS L A FREESTONE
                                MS V S STREET



                                   Between






                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr L Alara, Solicitor of Benedict Charles and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



    1. This case is reported in order to clarify the position  that  arises
       when the Home Office accepts that it has lost original documents and
       the Appellant has to rely on photocopies.


    2. The Appellant,  a  national  of  Republic  of  Congo  (Brazzaville),
       appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C J  Lloyd,
       who dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision  made  on
       13th February 2002.

    3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom (UK) on  the  3rd  November
       2001.  His claim can be summarised as follows.

    4. He had been persecuted by Cobra, the special police  force,  because
       of his political activities and ethnic origin.  He was  arrested  in
       October 1999 and detained for over a year in a military prison where
       he was tortured.  He was released in January 2001.  On  his  release
       he was required to report his  party's  activities  to  the  police,
       being an active supporter  of  the  MCDDI  (Congolese  Movement  for
       Democracy and Integral Development).  He did not  do  this.  On  the
       29th September 2001 representatives from Cobra came looking for  him
       and, although he managed to avoid them,  his  brothers  and  sisters
       were beaten.  He decided to leave the country immediately.

    5. It was accepted by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  may  have
       belonged to the MCDDI as a low level member but it was not  accepted
       he had been arrested, detained and ill-treated, nor was it  accepted
       that there was  a  visit  by  military  personnel  to  his  home  in
       September 2001.

    6. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant  was  a  member  of  the
       MCDDI but did not accept that he was  detained,  released  and  then
       sought again by the authorities who wanted to kill him.

    7. On the basis of her adverse  credibility  findings  the  Adjudicator
       dismissed both the asylum appeal and the human rights appeal.

    8. The Appellant appealed the decision  on  a  number  of  grounds  the
       majority  of  which  were  to  do  with  the  Adjudicator's  adverse
       credibility findings.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  one
       ground only and that was in relation to the preliminary issue before
       the Adjudicator which was the non-production by the Home  Office  of
       original documents handed over when the Appellant made his  original
       application.  Only photocopies of those documents were on file.  The
       appeal hearing before  the  Adjudicator  had  been  adjourned  on  a
       previous occasion  with  directions  that  the  Home  Office  should
       produce the original arrest warrant and release document, but  those
       originals were not produced.

    9. The one ground of appeal on which permission was granted stated that
       when the Home office either failed to bring  original  documents  to
       court  or  had  lost  them,  the  Adjudicator  should  accept  those
       documents as genuine.  We have to decide  in  this  particular  case
       whether the approach taken by the Adjudicator in respect of the lack
       of original documents was flawed and unsustainable.

   10. The Adjudicator considered the documents  at  paragraph  20  of  her
       determination and compared the information  contained  within  those
       documents to the rest of the Appellant's evidence.  She  found  that
       the information in  the  documents  did  "not  correspond  with  his
       evidence in his statement". She pointed  out  discrepancies  between
       the  dates  contained  within  the  documents  compared   with   the
       Appellant's account of his arrest and detention.

   11. The Adjudicator then went  on  to  make  other  adverse  credibility
       findings and at paragraph 20(iii) said that "I do not consider  that
       the arrest warrant and release order are genuine in the  context  of
       my overall credibility findings".

   12. The Adjudicator carefully considered the documents. She was  careful
       not to make any findings on the authenticity by looking at  them  in
       isolation from all the other  evidence.  She  treated,  as  she  was
       entitled to do, the lack of original documents at court as a neutral
       factor and did not let it influence her findings. The Appellant  has
       not been prejudiced in any way by the reliance on photocopies rather
       than  the  originals.  Effectively  the  Adjudicator   treated   the
       secondary evidence in the form of photocopies as admissible to prove
       the contents of the missing primary evidence.  As she has considered
       all the evidence before coming to a decision about the  authenticity
       of those documents, we find that her approach was entirely  in  line
       with the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 and that there was
       no error in her approach.

   13. There may be cases when the loss of original documents could have  a
       bearing on credibility findings particularly if an Appellant (or the
       Secretary  of  State)  is  not  able  to  produce  copies  of  those
       documents.  There  may  be  situations  where  an  original  may  be
       verifiable in ways in which a  copy  is  not,  for  example  if  the
       original contains a rare emboss confirmed by an expert. But this  is
       not one of those situations.  The Secretary of State, in his reasons
       for refusal letter at paragraph 11, was not prepared to  accept  the
       documents as "independent corroboration" of  the  Appellant's  claim
       "considering the ease with which such documents  can  be  obtained".
       The Appellant did not provide  any  evidence  in  rebuttal  of  this
       reason. We find that the Adjudicator was entitled to  conclude  that
       the documents were not genuine for the reasons that she gave.


   14. The Appellant had provided originals of  a  driving  licence  and  a
       MCDDI membership card to the Respondent.  Neither of those originals
       were provided by the Home Office. However it was  accepted  both  by
       the Respondent and the Adjudicator that the Appellant was  a  member
       of the MCDDI and we do not find that the Appellant was prejudiced by
       the non-production of the original membership card.  We do not  find
       that the non-production of an original  driving  licence  takes  the
       Appellant's case any further.

   15. In the Appellant's grounds of appeal at paragraph 6 he claimed  that
       the photocopies were  poor  and  incomplete  but  it  is  clear  the
       Adjudicator was able to obtain all the information  there  was  from
       those photocopies.

   16. We conclude  that  the  Adjudicator  gave  sustainable  reasons  for
       concluding that the  arrest  warrant  and  release  order  were  not
       genuine and that she was entitled to come to her adverse credibility
       findings.

   17. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.







Ms LA Freestone

Legal Member


25th April 2004
