
H-AMN-V3

|Heard at Field House       |        |AR (Articles 2 and 3 -      |
|                           |        |removals policy) Iraq [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00273                 |
|On 27 July 2004 by video   |        |                            |
|link                       |        |                            |
|with Manchester            |        |                            |
|Prepared on: 9 August 2004 |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..........28/09/2004.............                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge Huskinson - Vice President                       |
|Mr N H Goldstein - Vice President                                 |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation

For the Appellant:     Mrs L. Singh (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr G.  Brown  (Counsel  -  instructed  by  Thornhill,
                    Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals to the Tribunal, with permission, from
    the Determination of Mrs C. J. Martin, Adjudicator,  promulgated  on  3
    September 2003 whereby she dismissed on asylum grounds but  allowed  on
    human rights grounds the appeal by  the  Respondent  (hereafter  called
    "the Claimant") against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum to the Claimant and against his decision to refuse the  Claimant
    leave to enter the United Kingdom and to  give  (or  propose  to  give)
    directions for the Claimant's removal to Iraq.

2.    The Claimant is a citizen  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  born  in
    Sulaimaniyah on 10 December 1973.  For  the  purposes  of  the  present
    Determination it is  not  necessary  to  set  out  in  any  detail  the
    Claimant's account on the basis of which he claimed asylum.  In summary
    it can be noted that the Claimant's claim to asylum was based upon  the
    fact that he had been a member of the  Iraqi  police  force  and  also,
    separately, by reason of some claimed fear of  adverse  treatment  from
    members of the Abarash tribe.  He feared he could not return safely  to
    Iraq because he contended the Abarash tribe would wish to kill him  and
    are powerful within the PUK.  He contended  he  would  also  be  killed
    because of his time in the police force for the Iraqi regime.

3.     The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  the   Claimant's   claim   lacked
    credibility.  She also however concluded that even if his account  were
    true there was no longer any risk to him from the Ba'ath Party  or  the
    PUK or the Abarash tribe.  For reasons she gave she concluded  that  he
    would not be at risk on return by reason of his service  in  the  Iraqi
    police force nor would the Abarash tribe be interested in the  Claimant
    now.  Accordingly  the  Adjudicator  dismissed  the  Claimant's  asylum
    appeal.  There has been no cross-appeal by the Claimant in  respect  of
    this dismissal.

4.    However the Adjudicator allowed the Claimant's appeal under  Articles
    2 and 3 of the ECHR.  Her reasoning on  this  aspect  of  the  case  is
    contained in paragraphs 24-28 of her Determination  which  are  in  the
    following terms:

      "24.  The Human Rights issue is less clear and comes down to  whether
              returning the Appellant to Iraq today would carry a real risk
              that his rights under Article 2 or 3 would be breached.

      25.   The Bulletins that I have been provided with by the  Respondent
              run to 116 pages in total.  Bulletin 7 is little more than an
              Operational Guidance Note and I  find  it  is  not  objective
              therefore.  Furthermore, it seems to suggest that  it is safe
              to return  to  Iraq  and  in  particular  to  Northern  Iraq.
              However, that Bulletin takes no account of  the  contents  of
              Bulletin 5 which is the report of  the  joint  British/Danish
              Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Damascus,  Oman  and  Geneva   on
              conditions in Iraq and is dated 23rd July 2003.  Miss Heywood
              referred me to sections in the Bulletins which suggested that
              Northern Iraq was safe to return to and that the situation in
              Mosul  is  calm  and  stable  with  electricity,  water   and
              communications working well.  That is contained  at  3.10  in
              Bulletin 3/2003 and the information is from  13th  May  2003.
              However, there are numerous references in  the  Fact  Finding
              Mission to the fact that the situation is far from  safe.   I
              refer to such matters as:-

            Paragraph 2.1 "UNHCR in Geneva was of the opinion that although
                 major confrontations between Kurds, Arabs and  Turkmen  in
                 Northern Iraq have been avoided so far, there are  reports
                 of tensions caused by reverse movements to the Arabisation
                 policy in particular in the area of Kirkuk and Mosul."

            Paragraph 2.2  "As  the  situation  is  unstable  and  changing
                 continuously, neither persecution by non-state agents  nor
                 further deterioration physical, material and legal  safety
                 for an  increasing  number  of  persons  in  Iraq  can  be
                 excluded."

            Paragraph 2.8 "Conditions in Mosul and Kirkuk were fairly  good
                 immediately after the war.  They have  deteriorated  since
                 early/mid June, with increasing tension between Kurds  and
                 Arabs over de-Arabisation although these problems have not
                 been as severe as anticipated."

            Paragraph 2.11 "The coalition was able to bring  down  the  old
                 government, but so far  it  has  been  unable  to  provide
                 security for the Iraqi people."

            Paragraph  2.14  "The  situation  in  the  Centre  Governorates
                 (Kirkuk, Mosul and Tikrit) remains unstable, with  regular
                 violent incidents, confrontations  between  ethnic  groups
                 and  manifestations   organised   by   former   government
                 employees.  The motivations  behind  these  incidents  are
                 often  a  mixture  of  political,  ethnic   and   economic
                 considerations."

      26.   CIPU then reports specifically on the situation in the  Kurdish
              Autonomous Area in the north and these reports themselves are
              mixed.

      27.   The situation is currently that UNHCR are  urging  against  the
              return  of  refugees.   The  UNHCR  have   been   unable   to
              investigate  the  situation  properly  due  to  the  security
              situation and their being unable to travel safely.

       28.    Given  the  vastly  contradictory  reports  in  the   Country
              Information, I bear in mind the very low  standard  of  proof
              and am forced to the conclusion that returning the  Appellant
              to Iraq at this time would lead  to  a  real  risk  that  his
              rights under Article 2 and 3 would be breached."

5.    Before turning to the  substance  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal against the Adjudicator's findings under Articles 2  and  3
    it is first necessary to deal with a procedural point raised by Mr
    Brown.

6.    The procedural point is based upon the fact that there exists  at
    present a policy in place under which the Secretary of State  does
    not forcibly return citizens  of  Iraq  to  Iraq.   We  asked  for
    confirmation from Mrs Singh as to what  the  policy  was  and  she
    informed us that as at the date of the hearing  the  Secretary  of
    State does not carry out  any  enforced  removals  to  Iraq.   She
    stated that there is no indication given by the Secretary of State
    as to how long this policy will last for.  She further stated that
    no fresh removal directions would be issued against  the  Claimant
    as and when this policy ceased to operate.  She drew attention  to
    the wording  of  the  removal  directions  which  state  that  the
    Secretary of State has given or proposes to  give  directions  for
    the removal of the Claimant:

      "....by a scheduled service at a time and  date  to  be  notified
         to... IRAQ".

7.    It should be noted, having regard to the date of the Secretary of
    State's refusal of asylum in the present case and the date of  the
    decision regarding removal directions  (respectively  18  February
    2002 and 26 March 2002) that the Claimant's right of appeal in the
    present case arose under  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
    Section 69 (so far as concerns the asylum appeal) and  Section  65
    (so far as concerns the human rights appeal, if any - as to  which
    Mr Brown raises an argument).

8.    The procedural point raised by Mr  Brown  in  the  light  of  the
    Secretary of State's present policy of no enforced removals is  as
    follows.  Mr Brown argues that at the present stage  there  is  no
    scope in this case for any human rights appeal under Articles 2 or
    3 at all.  It is premature  for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  such
    matters and it was premature for the Adjudicator  to  do  so.   It
    follows in his submission (and he accepts, indeed he avers,  this)
    that the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the  Adjudicator's
    finding in favour of the Claimant under Articles 2 and 3  must  be
    allowed.  However the appeal should not be allowed on the  merits.
    Instead the appeal  should  be  allowed  upon  the  jurisdictional
    point, namely that  the  Adjudicator,  having  found  against  the
    Claimant on the asylum appeal, should have noted the policy of  no
    enforced removal and should have concluded that, in the  light  of
    this policy,  it  was  premature  to  consider  any  human  rights
    argument.  Mr Brown argues that all human rights arguments will be
    for the future, namely if and when the Secretary of State  cancels
    the present policy and seeks to  enforce  a  removal  against  the
    Claimant.

9.    Mr Brown developed his argument both  by  reference  to  previous
    authority and by reference to practicality.  As regards the latter
    he commented how the circumstances in Iraq were speedily changing,
    as was obvious from the general  international  news  and  as  was
    expressly recognised by the Adjudicator in  paragraph  15  of  the
    Determination.  At present it was not known  when,  if  ever,  the
    Secretary of State would seek forcibly  to  remove  the  Claimant.
    Accordingly it was not known what the circumstances would be as at
    that date of enforced removal and accordingly  no  appellate  body
    (be it the Adjudicator or the Tribunal)  could  properly  consider
    whether the Secretary of State's decision to remove  the  Claimant
    would involve any real risk  of  infringement  of  the  Claimant's
    Article 2 or 3 rights.

10.   So far as concerns previous authority Mr Brown  referred  to  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in Dube [2003] EWCA  Civ  1271  dated  30
    July 2003 in relation to an applicant from Zimbabwe, in respect of
    which country there was also  a  policy  of  no  present  enforced
    returns.  In that case Lord Justice Simon Brown had adjourned  the
    case with a view to it being brought back  for  full  argument  on
    what is the correct and sensible approach to cases:

      "....which are brought on the wholly  fictional  basis  that  the
         Secretary of State is minded to return the  Appellant  to  his
         home country, on the basis that to do so would violate Article
         3, when in truth the Secretary of State has no such  intention
         whatever.  We also want fully argued that the  true  scope  of
         Section 65, the consequences of either further  adjourning  or
         dismissing, or indeed allowing such appeals  and  we  indicate
         that, until this matter has been restored and fully argued and
         decided, any similar appeals, both to this court or by way  of
         application for permission to appeal to the court or,  indeed,
         in the IAT should not be further processed".

11.   The Learned Lord Justice added this:

      "It may be that  the  court  thinks  it  perfectly  obvious  that
         appeals of this sort  should  not  be  heard,  the  Article  3
         argument being wholly artificial; and it may be that the  real
         issue ought to be what should the Secretary of State be doing,
         if anything, with regard to this category of Appellant".

      It was accepted by both representatives that in  fact  this  case
    never did return to the Court of  Appeal  for  full  argument  and
    there is consequently no reported judgment on the point.  Mr Brown
    also referred to [2003] UKIAT 00016 YL especially at paragraphs 62
    and 63 and to [2003] UKIAT 00017 SP especially at paragraph 6.  He
    particularly referred to the following passage in paragraph 63  of
    the former decision:

      "If the threat of removal is not imminent then there  can  be  no
         violation of the Convention: see Vijayanathan and  Pushparajah
         v France [1992] 15 EHRR 62.  Plainly if Home Office policy  is
         either not to remove or to  return  to  the  UK  persons  whom
         destination countries will not accept as entitled  to  return,
         there is no meaningful sense in which there can be said to  be
         an imminent threat of removal in the case of  persons  falling
         under this policy".

      Having regard to this case and the case of 17 SP Mr Brown  argued
    that the threat of removal had to be  an  imminent  one.   In  the
    present case he argued there was no imminent threat of removal and
    therefore there was no jurisdiction to consider the  human  rights
    appeal.

12.   In response Mrs Singh drew attention to the fact that the  policy
    was of no promised duration and could be  changed  at  any  stage.
    She drew attention to the wording of the removal directions, which
    indicated the removal was at a time and date to be notified.   She
    drew attention to the fact that no further removal directions were
    therefore needed or would be given.  The Claimant could be removed
    at any moment, subject only to the Secretary of State changing his
    policy, which he could do unilaterally and without  any  reference
    to the Claimant or anyone else.  Accordingly removal was imminent.
     She referred to a Tribunal Determination in [2004] UKIAT 00084 RH
    at paragraph 16 where on the facts of that case  (and  even  where
    there were no removal directions out against  the  applicant)  the
    Tribunal concluded that the  Claimant  was  at  imminent  risk  of
    removal and that  the  human  rights  aspects  of  the  case  were
    therefore justiciable.

13.   In reply Mr Brown sought to distinguish 84 RH on the basis  that,
    in that case, there was no policy in place  against  any  enforced
    removals, whereas in the present case the Secretary of  State  was
    publicly proclaiming through his policy that the United Kingdom is
    not at present removing persons against their will to Iraq.

14.   Having heard argument upon this  procedural  point  the  Tribunal
    indicated that we would reserve our  decision  on  the  point  but
    would, in any event, hear argument upon the merits of the  Article
    2 and 3 appeal so that we could  deal  with  this  aspect  of  the
    matter supposing, contrary to Mr Brown's  argument,  we  concluded
    that there was a justiciable Article 2 and  3  appeal  before  the
    Adjudicator and before  the  Tribunal.   Before  coming  to  these
    matters, we should now give  our  conclusions  on  the  procedural
    point.

15.   We are unable to accept Mr Brown's  argument.   Our  reasons  for
    doing so may be summarised as follows:

    (1)    Although treating with respect and giving all due weight to
         the observations of Simon Brown LJ in Dube, the  fact  remains
         that, unfortunately,  we  do  not  have  the  benefit  of  any
         concluded views from the Court of Appeal on this point.   What
         the Learned Lord Justice was there doing was drawing attention
         to the fictional basis of considering a human rights appeal in
         circumstances where it is obvious that, for  the  time  being,
         the applicant is not going  to  be  returned.   The  Court  of
         Appeal is drawing attention to the argument which needs to  be
         considered and decided upon.  However the case never came,  so
         we are assured, to any full argument or judgment.  Accordingly
         the points raised by way of questions for  argument  have  not
         been decided by the Court of Appeal.


    (2)    Section 65 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 provides:


      "A person who alleges that  an  authority  has,  in  taking  any
           decision  under  the  Immigration  Acts  relating  to   that
           person's entitlement  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom, .....acted in breach of his human rights may appeal
           to an Adjudicator against that decision....


      (2)  For the purposes of this Part -


      (a)....


      (b)  An authority acts in breach of a persons human rights if he
                    acts, or fails to act, in relation  to  that  other
                    person in a way which is made unlawful  by  Section
                    6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.


      (3)  Subsections (4) and (5) apply if, in proceedings before  an
                Adjudicator or the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  on  an
                appeal, a question arises as to  whether  an  authority
                has, in taking any decision under the Immigration  Acts
                relating to the Appellant's  entitlement  to  enter  or
                remain in the United Kingdom,.... acted  in  breach  of
                the Appellant's human rights.


      (4)  The Adjudicator,  or  the  Tribunal,  has  jurisdiction  to
                consider the question.


      (5)  If the Adjudicator,  or  the  Tribunal,  decides  that  the
                authority concerned -


      (a)...


      (b)  Acted in breach of the Appellant's human rights, the appeal
                    may be allowed on the ground in question."


    (3)    The Secretary of State has taken a decision relating to the
         Claimant's entitlement  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom, namely he has decided to give (or  propose  to  give)
         directions for the Claimant's removal by scheduled service  at
         a time and date to be notified to Iraq.  We were told  by  Mrs
         Singh that no further removal directions would be  issued  and
         we accept that this is  so.   Unless  some  appeal  either  on
         asylum grounds or human rights grounds  succeeds  against  the
         Secretary  of  State's  decision  to   issue   these   removal
         directions, the Claimant is at risk of removal,  subject  only
         to the policy of no enforced removals.


    (4)    However the Secretary of State's policy is a matter for him
         and a matter which is of no promised duration and which he can
         change at any moment without the Claimant having any right  to
         challenge this change of policy.  While  it  may  be  surmised
         that this policy may remain in place for a significant period,
         the Claimant has no legal entitlement to require that it  does
         so.


    (5)    Accordingly, having lost his  appeal  against  the  removal
         directions on asylum grounds under the Refugee Convention, the
         Claimant faces the fact that he is in law at risk of  imminent
         removal at whatever time the Secretary of State may choose  to
         change his policy and to enforce the  directions.   Save  only
         for the human rights argument, the  Claimant  has  no  further
         effective remedy.


    (6)    Accordingly we conclude that the risk of return to Iraq  is
         indeed an imminent one as a matter of law notwithstanding that
         one may suspect, as a matter of reality, that removal  is  not
         all that imminent.  We note the comment of the Tribunal in  17
         SP at paragraph 6 to the effect that a risk cannot be imminent
         if the Appellant has available  a  further  effective  remedy.
         Reference is made to the same case,  namely  Vijayanathan  and
         Pushparajah v France [1992] 15 EHRR 62 as is  referred  to  in
         paragraph 63 of the case of 16 YL.  However, save only for the
         human rights appeal,  the  Claimant  has  no  other  effective
         remedy available to him.


    (7)    Accordingly we conclude that the Claimant was  entitled  to
         allege before the Adjudicator that the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to issue  removal  directions  for  Iraq  constituted
         (notwithstanding the existence  of  the  no  enforced  removal
         policy) a decision under the Immigration Acts relating to  the
         Claimant's entitlement to remain in the United  Kingdom  which
         breached the Claimant's human rights.  This allegation  having
         been made by the Claimant, the result is  that  under  Section
         65(4) the Adjudicator and the Tribunal both have  jurisdiction
         to consider the question.


16.   We therefore now turn to the merits of the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal against the Adjudicator's conclusion that the Secretary  of
    State's decision to remove the Claimant was a breach of his  human
    rights under Articles 2 and 3.

17.   On this point Mr Brown conceded (as indeed he had to because  the
    point is a clear one) that the Learned Adjudicator did err in  her
    approach to the human rights  argument  in  paragraph  25  of  her
    Determination.  She appears to have thought that  certain  reports
    of tension and of the fact that the position is  unstable  and  of
    the fact that the security forces are unable to  provide  security
    in general, were matters which led to a real risk of  breaches  or
    Articles 2 and 3.  It should be noted that she had concluded  that
    there  was  no  real  risk  of  the   Claimant   being   targeted.
    Accordingly her conclusions were based on  the  general  situation
    for  a  non-targeted  returnee.   Mr  Brown  accepted   that   the
    Adjudicator should have considered the question of whether general
    country conditions could give rise to a real risk of Article 2  or
    3 infringing treatment for  the  Claimant  having  regard  to  the
    principles summarised in the next paragraph, which constituted the
    basis of Mrs Singh's argument as to the proper legal approach.  Mr
    Brown accepted  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  follow  such  an
    approach.

18.   Mrs Singh contended that having regard to Hariri [2003] EWCA  Civ
    807, especially at paragraph 8, and having regard to the  Tribunal
    Determination in [2003] UKIAT  00065  N  (Burundi)  especially  at
    paragraphs 13 to 15, general  reports  of  tensions  and  changing
    circumstances and deteriorating security and instability  was  not
    sufficient to show a real risk of infringement of Article 2  or  3
    rights.  Mrs Singh argued (and Mr Brown accepted) that,  as  shown
    by paragraph 8 of the Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  Hariri,  in
    circumstances where an applicant is not at risk of being  targeted
    by reason of his special circumstances, there  could  be  no  real
    risk of  Article  2  or  3  infringing  ill-treatment  unless  the
    situation to which the applicant would be  returning  was  one  in
    which such  violence  was  generally  or  consistently  happening.
    There would need to be shown a consistent  pattern  of  gross  and
    systematic violation of fundamental human rights.  We agree -  and
    in so agreeing we have not overlooked the later  Court  of  appeal
    decision in Batayav [2003] EWCA Civ 1489 especially at  paragraphs
    37 to 39.

19.   Mrs Singh referred to the general circumstances in  Iraq  in  the
    April 2004 CIPU Country Report at paragraph  6.15  and  following,
    especially at paragraphs  6.20  and  6.21  which  shows  that  the
    humanitarian situation in the three northern  governorates  to  be
    better than originally predicted.  It is noted  that  unemployment
    was virtually  zero  in  Sulaimaniyah  which  was  experiencing  a
    construction boom.

20.   While making  no  formal  concessions,  Mr  Brown  (to  whom  the
    Tribunal is grateful for the helpful and realistic way in which he
    presented the case) accepted that he was unable to  point  to  any
    objective evidence before the Tribunal showing  that  persons  who
    have returned to Iraq become victims of a  consistent  pattern  of
    gross and systematic violation of fundamental  human  rights.   He
    referred to the Amnesty International Report in  the  bundle,  but
    was unable to argue that this  demonstrated  any  such  consistent
    pattern.  Clearly any individual returnee may be  the  unfortunate
    person who suffers from random  violence  in  a  troubled  country
    where there are major security difficulties.   However  that  does
    not show that any individual returnee (assuming that that returnee
    will not be targeted) would be at any real risk of Article 2 or  3
    (or Article 2) infringing treatment.

21.   We also find helpful the analysis in paragraphs 12 to 15  of  the
    Tribunal Determination in 65 N  (Burundi).   We  remind  ourselves
    that the Claimant comes from Sulaimaniyah,  where  conditions  are
    better than in former Saddam Hussein  controlled  Iraq.   We  also
    bear in mind that the Claimant would merely be one member  of  the
    population suffering from the general difficulties in his  country
    along with his fellow citizens.  We reject any suggestion that the
    general conditions either in northern  Iraq  or,  indeed,  in  the
    remainder of Iraq are generally so  adverse  that  any  and  every
    citizen  (being  a  non-targeted  citizen)  will  be   living   in
    conditions which constitute Article 3 (or Article 2) infringement,
    or will be at any real risk of doing so.

22.   We have not overlooked the UNHCR  current  policy  which  advises
    against  returns.   The  UNHCR  guidance  recognises   that   some
    voluntary repatriation  movements  have  taken  place,  mainly  to
    southern Iraq from Iran and from Rafha Camp in Saudi  Arabia,  but
    UNHCR stresses that it is not  promoting  voluntary  returns  yet.
    UNHCR is however continuing to facilitate, so far as it can  under
    present circumstances, the return of  individuals  who  express  a
    clear wish to repatriate.  However UNHCR stresses  that,  with  no
    international staff inside the country, it is not in a position to
    monitor returnees nor to provide them with  assistance  once  they
    are inside Iraq.  The document continues:

      "UNHCR has therefore  requested  governments  not  to  adopt  any
         measures which are intended to  encourage  voluntary  returns,
         including of rejected cases"

      The Tribunal fully understands why, as a matter of logistics  and
    practicality, UNHCR is requesting  governments  not  to  encourage
    voluntary returns and also requesting a continued  ban  on  forced
    returns.  However we do not read the document as an indication  of
    an opinion by UNHCR, based on evidence, that the circumstances  in
    Iraq are so grave that an individual returned to Iraq would face a
    real risk of treatment infringing his Article 2 or 3 rights.

23.   In the result therefore we consider that the Learned  Adjudicator
    erred in law in her analysis of whether the Claimant would face  a
    real risk of Article 2 or 3  infringing  treatment  on  return  to
    Iraq.  We have endeavoured to identify the correct  principles  to
    be applied and we have applied them ourselves.  The result of this
    exercise is that we conclude that there do not  exist  substantial
    grounds for concluding that the Claimant would, on return to Iraq,
    face any real risk of treatment which would infringe his Article 2
    or Article 3 rights.

24.   If and when the Secretary of State seeks to enforce  the  removal
    directions it would be open to the Claimant,  if  there  had  been
    some relevant significant  change  in  circumstances  which  might
    place him at real risk of infringement  of  his  Article  2  or  3
    rights if returned at that date, to ask the Secretary of State  to
    reconsider the decision to remove him.

25.   In the result therefore the  Tribunal  allows  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.






                                                  His Honour Judge Huskinson
                                                              Vice President


