
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 19 March 2004           |        | AA (Credibility - Totality |
|                           |        |of evidence - Fair trial)   |
|                           |        |Sudan [2004] UKIAT 00152    |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|03 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Professor B L Gomes Da Costa JP                                   |
|Mr D C Walker                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr D Saldanha, a Solicitor of Howe & Co, N22
For the respondent:    Miss J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a citizen of  Sudan  born  on  8  February  1973  who
      claims to have entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 26 December
      2002 with the help of an agent.  He applied for asylum and submitted a
      self-evidence form and statement and was subsequently  interviewed  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State who refused his application  for  the
      reasons contained in a letter dated 12  February  2003.   He  appealed
      against that decision on both asylum and human rights grounds and  his
      appeal was heard on 25 June 2003 by Miss J M  Craig,  an  Adjudicator.
      The Secretary of State was not represented before her.  She  dismissed
      his appeal on the basis of adverse credibility findings.

2.    The basis of his claim is set out  aptly  in  the  refusal  letter  as
      follows at  paragraphs 2 and 3:

           "2.  You claim that you and three other trainees applied  for  a
           nursing job at the local medical centre.  You  claim  that  your
           friends were employed  with  a  salary  but  you  were  rejected
           because you did not have primary school certificate.   You  clam
           that  two  of  your  friends  did  not   have   primary   school
           certificate.  You claim  that  you  were  discriminated  against
           because of your colour.


           3.  You claim that while working at the clinic  you  found  that
           they were patients (sic) who had wounds that were not consistent
           with their illness.  You claim that you started being suspicious
           that organs were removed from patients without their  knowledge.
           You claim that one of your colleagues saw  big  machines  inside
           the room when he was passing and the door was  ajar.  You  claim
           that you overheard a conversation  between  doctors  where  they
           claim that they carried out these  operations  and  were  poorly
           paid.  You claim that you asked a  nurse  if  they  carried  out
           operations at the centre and he in turn asked you for the source
           of your information.  You claim that the nurse grabbed  you  and
           said that you knew something you should not have and this  would
           cause you your life (sic).  You claim that on  19  October  2002
           two armed officer (sic) in military uniform came to  the  centre
           and asked you to go with them.  You claim that you were taken to
           a military camp in the city of Kaduvli where you were questioned
           about the source of information and the  people  with  whom  you
           discussed the subject.  You claim that you were  questioned  for
           three days.  Two soldiers hit you on the back and left ear  with
           a riffle butt (sic) and sometime (sic) they beat you with  their
           hands.  You claim that you were accused of spying and treason as
           well as other charges that you did not  understand.   You  claim
           that on the fourth day you were put in a small cell alone.   You
           claim that the glare was strong in the cell to prevent you  from
           sleeping.  You claim that they would tie  your  hands  together,
           legs together and hang you from  a  rope  like  a  crossbar  and
           stretched your body.  You claim that after your  confession  you
           were asked if anyone else knew about it and you  told  them  no.
           You claim that you were transferred to a bigger  room  with  six
           other people who you did not know.  You claim that  you  managed
           to escape when a guard got bitten by a snake.   You  claim  that
           you ran away and went to a nearby village and from there boarded
           a lorry to Aldalang City.  From here you went to Kutsi and  then
           to Port Sudan."

3.    From the other material before us it is  clear  that  the  appellant's
      claim is that he worked as an unpaid nurse in the hospital referred to
      from October 2001 until his claimed arrest.

4.    The Adjudicator did not deal with much of his claim because  she  came
      to the view that his  account  of  events  at  the  hospital  was  not
      credible.  It would, as was accepted by Mr Saldanha,  follow  that  if
      that finding is sustainable the rest of the  story  collapses  because
      everything is dependent upon that being a credible  beginning  to  the
      account. The reasons for refusal letter makes it quit clear that there
      is a general challenge to credibility on the part of the Secretary  of
      State who, regrettably, was once more not represented at  the  hearing
      before the Adjudicator.

5.    The Adjudicator sets out her reasons for her adverse findings at  some
      considerable length in paragraph 19 of her determination,  and  it  is
      appropriate that we set out that paragraph  in  full  in  our  written
      determination.

           "19 (a)  The appellant says that he worked as a volunteer at the
           hospital, without pay, having  been  unable  to  secure  a  paid
           position.  I find this difficult to accept  in  a  poor  country
           such as Sudan, and the appellant says he had a wife to support.


           (b)  The appellant  says  that  the  hospital  authorities  were
           surprised and angry when he appeared to know  that  people  were
           having kidneys removed.  However,  if  he  was  being  asked  to
           provide post-operative care to these patients,  and  there  were
           other suspicious  factors  such  as  the  secret  room  and  the
           unexplained army minibus visits,  then  any  intelligent  person
           would have had suspicions.


           (c)  At paragraph 6 of his SEF statement the appellant said "All
           the patients that I looked after had  a  wound  consistent  with
           kidney transplant operations".  In evidence before me,  he  said
           he had only seen two such persons with  his  own  eyes  but  had
           suspicions about others.  Later in the  same  evidence  he  said
           that he had not meant to say  that  all  his  patients  had  the
           operation scar, just some or most of them.


           (d)  In his appeal statement at paragraph 5 the  appellant  said
           "I could have avoided what had happened  to  me  by  keeping  my
           mouth shut and acquiescing to the implicit demands of the  army,
           but I refused to do this".  At paragraphs 10 and 12 of the  same
           statement he said that he was a threat to the racket because  he
           could have told the local people what was  happening.   However,
           he said in evidence that the only other people he had told  were
           his wife and  two  of  his  colleagues.   However,  in  his  SEF
           statement (paragraphs 10 - 13)  he  said  that  upon  arrest  he
           initially denied any knowledge of the subject and only after  13
           days of torture did he say that he  had  discussed  the  subject
           with two other colleagues but that nobody else  knew  about  it.
           According (sic) on that version he had never told the army  that
           he would reveal his suspicions to the local population.   It  is
           therefore difficult to see why the army should have continued to
           detain him, they would either have killed him or released him.


           (e)  The appellant has not been consistent about  when  he  says
           that he realised that people had  been  having  kidneys  removed
           without their consent.  In his SEF statement he said that he had
           suspicions, but these were only confirmed when he overheard some
           doctors talking in the staff canteen.  However at  paragraph  10
           of his appeal statement he said  that  when  he  looked  at  the
           patients wounds after surgery he knew that these scars resembled
           those of kidney operations and "It was at  this  moment  that  I
           realised what was happening".


           (f)  The local population would hardly have needed him  to  tell
           them that something strange was happening if dozens of them were
           really going into hospital with minor complaints and coming  out
           with identical very large operation scars.


           (g)  When asked in evidence before me the  reason  the  patients
           with kidney scars had come into hospital in the first place, his
           answer was rather vague, saying that they were admitted if  they
           had a  slight  problem  like  diarrhoea  or  minor  injuries  or
           malaria.   I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  that  persons  with
           intestinal infections or malaria would have been suitable kidney
           donors.


           (h)  At paragraph 11 of his appeal statement the appellant  said
           that the organs had to be transported to where they were  needed
           which was likely to be far away given that  the  medical  centre
           was in a remote and poor part of southern Sudan.  He had already
           mentioned an army  minibus  calling  once  a  fortnight  at  the
           hospital, and went on to say in the same paragraph that  he  was
           aware that there were regular flights from the military bases in
           the area to Khartoum and other  major  centres  that  offered  a
           market for such organs.  However, it is  common  knowledge  that
           solid organs such as kidney, liver,  etc  must  be  transplanted
           fresh, i.e. within hours rather than days or weeks.  They cannot
           be preserved for later transplantation as can "tissues" such  as
           cornea, skin, ligaments etc.   This  whole  issue  of  timescale
           strikes at the heart of  the  appellant's  claim  as  any  donor
           kidneys  would  not  be  likely  to  survive  long  enough   for
           transplant purposes.


           (i)  While I acknowledge Dr Steadman's credentials as an  expert
           witness, and am grateful for his  careful  report,  nevertheless
           his report is of limited value.  He does not say what  documents
           he had available to him e.g. GPs records, witness statements etc
           nor does he say  how  long  his  examination  of  the  appellant
           lasted.  While he says that the scars were consistent  with  the
           appellant's claims, he does not say whether some other causation
           was equally  possible.   As  to  the  appellant's  psychological
           problems, Dr Steadman's conclusions depend  upon  him  accepting
           the appellant's version of  events,  whereas  credibility  is  a
           matter for me and I do not find the appellant to be  a  credible
           witness."

6.    Mr Saldanha accepted that in relation to  the  issues  dealt  with  at
      paragraphs (a) to (g) it would not be possible to argue that  any  one
      of those  specific  issues  and  findings  was  unsustainable  on  the
      totality of the evidence, but the thrust of his submissions to us,  as
      also appeared in the grounds of appeal, was that it was the finding at
      paragraph 19(h) which was pivotal to the Adjudicator's  determination.
      That was a finding which was unfairly reached because it had not  been
      raised at the hearing so that the appellant had not had an opportunity
      to deal with the  question  of  the  relevant  timescale.   It  was  a
      subsidiary point taken by him that the  findings  at  paragraph  19(i)
      dealt inadequately with  the  medical  report  which  was  before  the
      Adjudicator, but it seems to us that with respect to  the  submissions
      he  made  on  this  point,  which  are  recorded  in  our  record   of
      proceedings, that the outcome of the appeal is really wholly dependent
      on the central core submission relating to paragraph 19(h).

7.    We note that the appellant has not put  in  any  statement  trying  to
      deal with the  timescale  point  raised  by  the  Adjudicator  but  Mr
      Saldanha submits  to  us  that  nevertheless  there  may  be  possible
      explanations which would deal with this, although  not  placed  before
      us.  He says in this respect that the appropriate point for  those  to
      be dealt with would be in evidence before an Adjudicator  on  remittal
      if the present decision is unsustainable as he  contends.  We  do  not
      agree. The timescale point goes directly to  the  credibility  of  the
      claimant's account.

8.    For her part, Miss Sigley in her submissions said that  even  ignoring
      paragraph 19(h) it seemed to her that the Adjudicator's findings  were
      otherwise sustainable in the  rejection  of  the  credibility  of  the
      essential issues in the appellant's account but that,  in  any  event,
      there was no reason why the Adjudicator  should  not  have  relied  on
      "common knowledge" as she does clearly at paragraph  19(h).   In  this
      connection we note also that Mr Saldanha  had  produced  before  us  a
      document from medtech1.com with an  article  about  a  study  to  rate
      methods of kidney storage from which it is quite  clear  that  medical
      opinion supports the accuracy of what the  Adjudicator  refers  to  as
      "common knowledge" as she sets it out in her determination.

9.    The issue  which  we  have  to  resolve  is  in  essence  whether  the
      appellant has been  unfairly  disadvantaged  by  the  failure  of  the
      Adjudicator to raise issues in relation  to  paragraph  19(h)  at  the
      hearing so that he would have an opportunity to deal  with  them.   We
      note that the appellant made an initial  written  statement  submitted
      with his self-evidence form  which  had  clearly  been  professionally
      prepared. We take it that that was in circumstances where he was under
      no immediate pressure as he was being dealt with by his own solicitors
      and it purports to set out a clear and full account of  his  basis  of
      claim.  It was further explored at interview  where  nothing  is  said
      which would deal with the point raised at paragraph 19(h)  as  to  the
      timescale.  His evidence at the hearing took matters no further.  What
      the  Appellant said at paragraph 6 of his statement of 21 January 2003
      on this issue was:

           "I started  being  suspicious  that  organs  were  removed  from
           patients without their knowledge. We also noticed that  an  army
           forces mini bus would come to the centre every two weeks. We did
           not know what the mini bus was delivering to the centre. This is
           because the mini bus would off load into a specific room at  the
           centre to which we did not have access, nor were we  allowed  to
           go near that room. This order was made to us  in  the  induction
           session."
      The only other potentially relevant reference was at paragraph  11  of
      his supplementary statement of 16 June 2003 as follows:


           "Furthermore these organs had to be transported  to  where  they
           were needed, which was likely to be  far  away  given  that  the
           medical centre was in a remote and poor part of southern  Sudan.
           I can only assume therefore that it must have had the active co-
           operation of senior members of  the  Army.  I  knew  there  were
           regular flights from the military bases in the area to  Khartoum
           and other major centres that offered a market for such organs."

      It is difficult, therefore, to see that there is  any  other  evidence
      which might go to explaining the basic improbability in his account by
      reference to the timescale point.

10.   We acknowledge that the question of what  should  be  raised  with  an
      appellant in order to give him an opportunity to provide  explanations
      which may assist his case is not an easy one, but it seems to us  that
      the Adjudicator was perfectly  entitled,  contrary  to  Mr  Saldanha's
      submission, to apply what she refers to as common knowledge as to  the
      transplant requirements in relation to solid organs such  as  kidneys,
      livers and so on, particularly when that common knowledge on which she
      draws (and would we consider be available to any  moderately  educated
      person), is clearly confirmed by the evidence  which  the  appellant's
      representatives have subsequently filed before us.

11.   The only issue therefore is  whether  there  has  been  unfairness  in
      failing to raise it before the appellant at the hearing.  It has  been
      suggested in the past  and  forms  part  of  the  suggestions  in  the
      Surendran guidelines that it is not the function of an Adjudicator  in
      an adversarial system to raise matters which are not  adverted  to  in
      the refusal letter "unless these are matters which are apparent to him
      from a reading of the papers, in which case these  matters  should  be
      drawn to the attention of the Appellant's representatives  who  should
      then be invited to make  submissions  or  call  evidence  in  relation
      thereto (Guideline 6)". We accept that an appellant  should  not  have
      unfairly taken against him matters which he could not reasonably  have
      contemplated as  being  relevant  to  the  issues  for  determination.
      First, by that we mean not only the appellant's own knowledge but also
      that which would be expected to be  applied  by  professional  lawyers
      representing him.  Thus, if  a  discrepancy  or  difference  on  which
      reliance is placed arises from some obscure point which is not obvious
      in the preparation of an appeal this may have some  validity.   Where,
      for example, in combing through a series of statements after a hearing
      it is discovered that there are contradictions on certain points which
      have never been put to the appellant, and those points are  themselves
      of a minor or peripheral nature rather than central to the whole basis
      of his case, we would accept that  it  would  arguably  be  unsafe  to
      arrive at adverse credibility findings on such a basis alone.  That is
      not, however, the case here in  our  judgment.   The  Adjudicator  has
      identified a number of  issues,  all  of  which  in  her  view  go  to
      credibility, and all of which we  consider  to  be  points  which  are
      obvious on the face of the evidence.  As we  have  already  noted,  Mr
      Saldanha acknowledges that in the  case  of  the  first  seven  points
      taken.

12.   Secondly, It must not be forgotten that  professional  representatives
      have a discretion as to what evidence they  will  and  will  not  lead
      before an Adjudicator or indeed any other judge.  If they  choose  not
      to lead certain matters in evidence which may provide difficulties for
      the claimant's case, that is a proper matter  for  their  professional
      judgment, but it does not mean that the failure to raise such an issue
      in oral evidence will  result  in  it  being  an  issue  which  cannot
      properly be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the  credibility  of
      testimony against the totality of the evidence before the Adjudicator.
       The point is aptly illustrated in the Opinion of Lord Carloway in the
      Court of Session in Mehmet Koca v SSHD delivered on 22  November  2002
      and reported in full at Vol 7 No  4  of  the  Immigration  Law  Update
      published fortnightly by the Immigration Advisory Service.   He  deals
      with the effect of lack of cross-examination on an Adjudicator's  task
      in some detail at paragraphs 28 to 37  of  his  Opinion.  The  general
      thrust is that there is no obligation on a Respondent's representative
      to cross-examine and that this limits the  frequently  claimed  "duty"
      for all matters to be put to a claimant. Lord Carloway puts it in  the
      following terms:

           "29. ... cross-examination is normally exercised only where  the
           witness has given evidence contrary to the party's position  and
           should be directed towards the undermining  of  discrediting  of
           the witness's reliability of credibility. It is not intended  to
           provide a  bonus  to  the  party's  opponent  by  affording  the
           opponent's  witness  an  opportunity  to  clarify   or   explain
           contradictions or deficiencies left after  examination-in-chief.
           ... A witness's evidence may be so absurd or  self-contradictory
           that no cross-examination is necessary or  even  desirable.  ...
           [The cross-examiner] does not require to go through a mechanical
           process of putting each aspect  of  his  case  to  each  of  his
           opponent's witnesses for their denial and possible comment.  ...
           On the other hand, if a party intends to develop a positive case
           of his own, which differs from that of his opponent, or  intends
           to maintain that something which the witness said happened,  did
           not occur for a given reason then it will often be necessary for
           such a  case  or  reason  to  be  put  in  cross-examination  to
           witnesses ostensibly in a position to comment upon them. ...  In
           that  regard  it  is  part  of  the  process  of  ensuring  that
           proceedings are fairly  conducted  as  between  the  parties  by
           giving each an opportunity to  address  the  other's  case.  The
           requirement "to put" matters to an opponent's witness in  cross-
           examination should be seen in that limited context.  It  follows
           from this that I do not entirely agree with the views  expressed
           by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  in  Ezzi  (supra),  in  that
           these views appear to impose a greater burden  upon  the  cross-
           examiner than I consider to exist. ...


           31. Looking at the duties upon the Adjudicator to ensure a  fair
           hearing in the absence of a representative from the  Respondents
           should be done against the background that such a representative
           would not have  been  obliged  to  cross-examine  on  the  HADEP
           discrepancy and that it is accepted that the proceedings  before
           an Adjudicator are adversarial in nature. ... In the context  of
           the Adjudicator having to reach a decision on  credibility,  the
           question is to what extent must an Adjudicator search  for,  and
           if discovered, probe implausibility and discrepancy  during  the
           oral hearing.


           32. Where there is a representative from the Respondent  at  the
           hearing, who is able to cross-examine, no doubt the  Adjudicator
           will adopt the traditional passive role of the judge as  someone
           who will only intervene when he feels a passage of  a  witness's
           evidence requires "clarification". That is a very  limited  role
           and does not permit a judge to set about  "clarifying"  evidence
           by taking positive action to explore contradictions in depth  in
           the manner which a cross-examiner might choose to do. He may ask
           for explanations of any obvious  ambiguities  in  testimony  but
           should not go much beyond that. ...


           34. What seems to be being suggested is that, where there is  no
           contradictor, an Adjudicator must nevertheless  go  further  and
           scrutinise the paperwork in advance of a  hearing  in  a  manner
           which will enable him to compose a  list  of  potential  problem
           areas  which  might   influence   his   ultimate   decision   on
           credibility. There are  several  problems  with  this  approach.
           First, it would put an Adjudicator in the  position  of  looking
           for defects in a claimant's case before he has  heard  what  the
           claimant has to say about  it.  Such  an  approach  may  not  be
           conducive to arriving at a balanced decision. Secondly, it would
           thrust the Adjudicator into the role of inquisitor. Thirdly, the
           resultant "cross-examination" would  be  likely  to  be  rightly
           criticised  as  displaying  the  very  type  of  bias  that  was
           perceived by the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  in  MNM  (supra).
           Although an Adjudicator may, when reading the papers in advance,
           be concerned about a particular matter and thereafter ask  about
           it at the hearing, it is going much too far to say that he  must
           look for all matters which might later concern him and must also
           put these matters to the claimant or his representative  at  the
           hearing.  In  looking  at  the  fairness  of  the  hearing,  the
           Adjudicator took an entirely reasonable approach in  asking  the
           petitioner to address the matter of  credibility.  Having  heard
           all that was to be said, it was for her to resolve the issue  on
           all the material which had been presented to her. As Guideline 4
           itself echoes, the Adjudicator is entitled to  form  a  view  on
           credibility on the basis of that material  whether  or  not  the
           claimant  has  addressed  the  issue  and  whether  or  not  the
           Adjudicator has expressed a particular concern. ...


           37. Furthermore, in order to  succeed  on  this  ground,  it  is
           incumbent upon the petitioner to show that, had he been afforded
           an opportunity  to  explain  ...  then  his  answer  might  have
           influenced the Adjudicator's ultimate  decision  (Ahmed  v  SSHD
           (supra)).

      This applies where there is a clear  inconsistency  in  statements  at
      different times as in  the case of the HADEP  discrepancy  with  which
      Lord Carloway is dealing. But it is clearly  intended  to  go  further
      than that and to encompass other situations in which cross-examination
      would not have been appropriate or necessary had the  Respondent  been
      represented - for example, where the claim is so absurd as to preclude
      such necessity. The question of the  improbability  and  absurdity  of
      dealing with organs such as kidneys in a way which  is  irreconcilable
      with the claimant's clear evidence seems to us to be such a case.

13.    If  we  are  right  in  that  view,  then  the  only  issue  for  our
      consideration is whether  there  is  an  error  in  the  Adjudicator's
      findings which would result in the appellant having a real prospect of
      success if the appeal were  re-heard.   In  considering  that  we  are
      entitled of course to take into account the totality of  the  evidence
      before us, including the medical evidence as to storage of organs  for
      transplant now helpfully supplied on behalf of the appellant. Even  if
      we were wrong, however, in so categorising the "common  knowledge"  on
      which the Adjudicator placed reliance, the Appellant would still  have
      to show that there was an explanation which he  could  have  given  to
      explain the timescale point taken against him. That  he  has  signally
      failed to do as noted above.

15.   The Adjudicator has given clear and cogent reasons  why  she  did  not
      find the core element of the appellant's  claim  credible.   There  is
      considerable force in Ms Sigley's  submissions  that  the  reasons  at
      paragraph 19 (a)  to  (g)  of  the  determination  are  of  themselves
      sufficient to support the adverse credibility findings, but,  for  the
      reasons which we have given above, we also consider that the reasoning
      at paragraph 19  (h)  is  sustainable.  The  appellant  has  not  been
      unfairly disadvantaged in the way in which Mr Saldanha sought  to  put
      before us in his careful submissions. There is  nothing  in  our  view
      which adds to the Appellant's case in the  Adjudicator's  approach  to
      the medical evidence at paragraph 19(i). At most, the report  provided
      some corroborative evidence that the  physical  scars  could  be  from
      causes consistent with the Appellant's claims, but as the  Adjudicator
      fairly observes the report does not  say  that  they  might  not  have
      resulted from other  unconnected  causes.  Given  the  weight  of  the
      evidential basis on which the Appellant was found not to  be  credible
      in his  core  claims,  we  do  not  consider  it  arguable   that  the
      corroborative weight of the  medical  report  could  have  turned  the
      balance in the Appellant's favour even at the lower standard of  proof
      applicable.

16.   It follows  that  in  our  judgment  the  Adjudicator's  findings  are
      sustainable on the totality of the evidence and there is no basis  for
      saying that her adverse findings should be re-visited by us.

17.   For those reasons this appeal is dismissed.





                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
