
               GK (Young Female _ Risk on Return) Rwanda CG [2004] UKIAT
00054
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date of Hearing: 8th March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             25th March 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                                Miss K Eshun

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Miss A Weston, instructed by Elder Rahimi
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr N  W
     Renton, promulgated on 1st September 2003.  By that  determination  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
     of State to refuse asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

  2. The Appellant is a citizen of Rwanda, of Hutu ethnicity, who was  born
     on 19th October 1986 and entered the United Kingdom illegally on  28th
     February 2003.

  3. The core of her claim was that when she was eight in 1994, her parents
     and other family  members  had  been  murdered  during  the  genocide.
     (There appeared to be some variation in her evidence as to whether she
     had witnessed the murder or whether she had  been  at  someone  else's
     house at the time.)  After the Appellant  had  been  orphaned  in  the
     genocide, she had  been  assisted  by  Ibuka,  which  is  the  Rwandan
     Genocide Survivors Organisation.  They had placed her in the  home  of
     an elderly neighbour and had paid for her education.  She  started  in
     secondary school having attended a primary school in 2001 but left  in
     2003.

  4. One incident about which the  Adjudicator  made  no  explicit  finding
     other than, correctly, that the Appellant's evidence was confused  and
     contradictory, related to whether  she  had  been  raped  and  if  so,
     whether that had taken place in 1998 or 2002. The evidence as recorded
     by the Adjudicator from the interview, was that the Appellant had been
     attacked by three men in 1998 because she had accused their father  of
     the murder of her family.  Thereafter they had threatened her.  In her
     evidence she said that she had been raped in  1998  by  three  people,
     because she had been responsible for their parents  going  to  prison.
     They had told her they would never leave her alone;  subsequently  the
     men had been imprisoned for three years  for  the  rape.   At  another
     point in her evidence  the  Appellant  said  that  this  incident  had
     occurred on 8th November 2002 but then again said that that  had  been
     at a time when she had hidden in a loft when the men had come  looking
     for her.  The position appears to be that if the  Appellant  had  been
     raped, nonetheless the three men who had been responsible for that had
     been sent to prison for three years for that offence.

  5. The Appellant then said that the  men  had  returned,  threatening  to
     continue looking for her in November 2002 when she had been hiding  in
     the loft and had thrown her school books on  the  floor.   She  sought
     protection from the police but they had mocked her.  Then  she  stayed
     with a member of Ibuka.  In 2003 the people  whom  the  Appellant  had
     identified as the murderers of her  parents  had  been  released  from
     detention, along with many other members of the Interahamwe. They  had
     then started looking for the Appellant.

  6. The Appellant had previously said that she had been raped by the three
     people because she had been responsible for  their  parents  going  to
     prison.  It is not clear from the Appellant's evidence whether or  not
     those people were the ones who had been responsible for the deaths  of
     her parents.  Be that as it may, after the incident in November  2002,
     there may have been two occasions when men had come to the Appellant's
     home;  a senior member of Ibuka suggested that she  go  to  Butare  to
     stay with a friend.

  7. The Adjudicator records the Appellant's evidence as being that she had
     "not been allowed to register there" and so had decided to  leave  the
     country.  The people whom she had identified as  the  killers  of  her
     family had been released by  the  Government  in  January  2003.   The
     Appellant left Rwanda for Uganda and did so with the assistance of the
     son of the elderly neighbour who had been looking after her  following
     the death of her parents.  It was this son who advised her that it was
     not safe in Rwanda and helped her to leave  the  country  via  Uganda,
     where a priest paid for her journey to the United Kingdom.

  8. The Adjudicator concluded that although the evidence  about  the  rape
     was confused and contradictory, the core of the account,  namely  that
     she feared revenge from the two men and all their families,  whom  she
     identified as being responsible for  the  death  of  her  parents  and
     siblings, was consistent  and  therefore  credible.   The  Adjudicator
     however concluded that the Appellant did not fear  persecution  for  a
     Convention reason; those who had sought the Appellant  and  threatened
     her safety for identifying them as responsible for the deaths  of  her
     parents, were doing so  out  of  a  motive  of  revenge  or  to  avoid
     successful  prosecution.   He  also  concluded  that  the   fears   of
     persecution were not well founded.  The Appellant did not leave Rwanda
     for some 3-4 months after she made  the  identification  and  about  a
     month after the men she had identified had been released.  It was  not
     clear where the Appellant had lived but the Adjudicator said that  she
     came to  no  harm  at  all.   He  also  concluded  that  there  was  a
     functioning police force which had received human rights training  and
     a judicial system now being slowly rebuilt.  He had seen no  objective
     evidence to suggest that the RNP was predominantly Tutsi or that Hutus
     were denied help by the police.  He was satisfied that she would  have
     sufficient protection if returned to Rwanda;  in particular she  would
     have the help of genocide survivor groups such Ibuka.

  9. The Appellant was refused permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal  from
     that decision of the Adjudicator but statutory review was  granted  of
     the Tribunal's decision.  Mr Justice Wilson  said  that  by  a  narrow
     margin he was satisfied that the IAT may have made an  error  of  law.
     He particularly referred to the fact that it  was  arguable  that  the
     Appellant's status as a minor without parents or siblings should  have
     made the Adjudicator give independent consideration to her  Article  3
     rights in the event of a return.  The Adjudicator  considered  Article
     3, but as Mr Deller and Miss Weston agreed, he considered human rights
     in the light of the risk of harm to her and the degree  of  protection
     against that harm as a result of being a target.  He did not  consider
     any more general human rights grounds.

 10. The particular points which have been argued before us relate  to  the
     way in which Article 3  in  that  wider  sense  has  been  approached.
     Although a  number  of  other  matters  were  raised,  they  were  not
     seriously  pursued;   and  in  particular  there  was  no  significant
     challenge  to  the  conclusions  reached  in  relation   to   targeted
     persecution or risk under Article 3, as a result of the activities  of
     the men whom she  had  identified  as  responsible  for  her  parents'
     murder.

 11. There was a general challenge by Miss Weston to the competence of  the
     representative of the Appellant before the Adjudicator.  This was said
     to explain why there were deficiencies in the findings of fact by  the
     Adjudicator and areas which he ought to have considered.   It  is  not
     necessary for us to say very much about that.  We do  point  out  that
     the evidence in  support  of  the  claim  that  there  was  inadequate
     representation, is confined to the Adjudicator  pointing  out  in  his
     determination that the  adviser  had  lost  the  file  and  wanted  an
     adjournment, which the Adjudicator had rejected.  There  has  been  no
     other evidence  as  to  deficiencies  in  representation  or  failures
     impacting  on  what  the  Appellant  could  say,  and   the   previous
     representative has not been given, as ought to have happened  if  such
     allegations are to be made, the opportunity of responding to it.

 12. Miss Weston pointed out that there were a number of  areas  where  the
     Adjudicator  had  not  made  findings  of  the  requisite  degree   of
     specificity in order to enable arguments to be pursued in relation  to
     Article 3.  For example, there  was  no  finding  as  to  whether  the
     Appellant had been raped, with the implications which that might  have
     for whether her return would be safe, or as to whether  the  Appellant
     would stay on the streets if returned or what risks she would face  if
     she did so, or as to why Ibuka had suggested that she  move  away  and
     what was meant by her not being able to register at Butare.

 13. It is right that there are a number of areas of that sort in which the
     Adjudicator does not make clear  findings.   He  makes  the  point  in
     relation to the rape that her evidence was confused and contradictory.
      But the position in relation to that is that even  if  she  had  been
     raped, the Adjudicator  points  out  that  those  responsible  on  her
     evidence were punished by a three year term of imprisonment.  On  that
     basis  there  was  protection  for  her  against   that   particularly
     unpleasant crime.  The other failures in relation to  findings  relied
     on by Miss Weston do not amount to failures of such a  nature  that  a
     proper conclusion cannot be reached in relation to the position as  to
     risk on return, and it is to that issue to  which  Mr  Justice  Wilson
     referred when granting statutory review to which we now turn.

 14. The Adjudicator had before him the  CIPU  Report  of  April  2003  and
     referred to some passages from it in his conclusions  in  relation  to
     the risk of targeted persecution.  That Report contains  a  number  of
     references to the problems which are  faced  by  children  and  female
     children in particular in Rwanda.  In June  2001  there  were  400,000
     orphans,  some  60,000  children  aged  18  or  under  were  heads  of
     household, but the authorities did little  to  protect  children  from
     abuse and exploitation.  There were some 7,000 street children in  the
     country.  There had been  periodical  round  ups  with  many  forcibly
     placed in a ministry centre.  The girls in that camp  especially  were
     vulnerable.  There had been a harsh campaign in 2001 to rid  the  city
     of thousands of street children.

 15. The Appellant's representative did not refer the  Adjudicator  to  any
     other background material.  Before us Miss Weston has asked us to look
     at the Human Rights Watch Report of March  2003.   This  is  a  Report
     which could have been and should have been before the  Adjudicator  if
     reliance was to be placed on it.  It would not normally be  right  for
     the Tribunal to examine such material  in  the  light  of  the  recent
     decision of the Court of Appeal in E & R v Secretary of State for  the
     Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49.   However,  the  judgment  of  the
     Court of Appeal does not accept that  in  certain  circumstances  such
     material should be looked at.  Miss Weston says that it is appropriate
     for us to look at it exceptionally in the  interests  of  justice  and
     bearing in mind the age and potential risk to the Appellant which  she
     said that Report showed.

 16. We take the view that this is a case in which it would be  appropriate
     to look at that Report.  It is not just that the Appellant is a  minor
     and the position in the Human Rights  Watch  Report  is  relevant  and
     potentially significant, it is that the position  of  children  and  a
     female child in particular was something in the CIPU Report  to  which
     the Adjudicator made reference in other contexts and it  is  a  matter
     which we would respectfully say was something  which  the  Adjudicator
     ought  to  have  regard  to  as  an  obvious  point  relevant  to  the
     Appellant's case, even though it had not been taken in front  of  him.
     Had he looked at the position  of  children,  there  would  have  been
     matters which he would have had to consider carefully.  We have had to
     consider those carefully and  as  that  issue  is  before  us,  it  is
     appropriate for us  to  have  the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  which
     provides a greater degree of detail in relation  to  the  position  of
     children.  It does not so much contradict the CIPU material as provide
     a greater degree of detail as  to  what  the  position  is.   We  were
     referred by Miss Weston to a number of passages.

 17. The particular emphasis of the passages to which she referred us  were
     the lack of protection available to  children  who  live  with  foster
     families or who formed child-headed households, or who  lived  on  the
     streets.  Their vulnerability arose from the risk of  exploitation  in
     foster families for  their  labour  and  their  sexual  vulnerability.
     Those in child-headed households lived a precarious existence  without
     access to education or healthcare.  Households headed  by  girls  were
     most at risk.  Sexual exploitation of them was rarely  prosecuted  and
     they were at risk of ostracism if they complained.  Local  governments
     and local communities had not been able to help.   Child  exploitation
     in domestic labour was a particular problem, with  girls  particularly
     vulnerable.  Girls living on the streets were  frequently  subject  to
     sexual violence and if they were offered a place for the night it  was
     likely that that would be a precursor to unwanted sexual attentions.

 18. The submission made in the light of that material by  Miss  Weston  is
     that the matter should go back to an Adjudicator for  fuller  findings
     of fact to be made against which conclusions could be  reached  as  to
     the risk generally under Article 3 to the Appellant returning, not  as
     a target, but as a minor female.  Although there may be a Secretary of
     State policy of not normally returning someone who is a minor to their
     country or at least not doing so without making special  arrangements,
     it is necessary for us to consider the position  without  taking  that
     into account.  We have to assume for these purposes that if the appeal
     is dismissed, then the Secretary of State will, or at least will  feel
     free to, return the Appellant.  We have not been told clearly that  he
     would not and he seeks the dismissal of the appeal.

 19. There are however, some striking features about the position  of  this
     Appellant.  The Appellant on her evidence became  an  orphan  in  1994
     aged eight.  She was assisted by Ibuka, she was placed in the home  of
     an elderly neighbour  whose  son  assisted  her  eventually  to  leave
     Rwanda.  Although she says that in 1998 she was  raped,  the  judicial
     system provided some  form  of  protection  in  that  those  who  were
     responsible for that act went to prison.  She gave no evidence of  any
     difficulties which she experienced between 1994 and 1998.   After  the
     rape and the men had been sent to prison, although she said that there
     had been verbal threats from these men, nothing had  happened  to  her
     until 2002 when she had been  beaten.   This  may  or  may  not  be  a
     separate incident from the time when she was describing  the  rape  as
     having taken place in 2002.  In November 2002 people had come  looking
     for her but she had then been able to go to another  part  of  Rwanda,
     although she had not stayed there.  All the  evidence  that  she  gave
     related to whether she was targeted by persons whom she was seeking to
     identify.  There was no evidence that any of the general matters which
     were referred to in the CIPU Report in relation to children or in  the
     Human Rights Watch Report in relation to children were  matters  which
     she had ever experienced during the course of the eight or nine  years
     during which she had been in Rwanda as  an  orphan  from  the  age  of
     eight.

 20. It is for the Appellant to demonstrate that upon her return she  would
     be at risk of a breach of her rights under Article 3.  On the evidence
     which she has produced as  to  what  has  happened  to  her,  she  has
     received assistance from a number of members of Ibuka, both in telling
     her what she might do, making suggestions as to where she could go and
     offering  her  assistance  in  leaving,  police   protection   through
     prosecution of her assailants, and she has been able to go to  another
     part of Rwanda and survive there with a friend.  It is  therefore  the
     case that the material from the Appellant shows that, apart  from  the
     risk of being targeted by those whom she had  identified,  that  there
     was no additional general risk applicable to her as a returning  minor
     female.

 21. If she were returned now she would be just about seventeen and a  half
     years old and would be going back to a country where she had  survived
     as an orphan for many years without experiencing the problems to which
     HRW refer.  It was suggested that the fact that she was targeted meant
     that she could not seek the normal support which she had  had  in  the
     past from friends or from those who are members  of  Ibuka.   But  the
     evidence shows, and there was no challenge to this, that there is  for
     the purposes of Horvath  and  both  Conventions  a  proper  degree  of
     protection available.  She could seek that support again.  Indeed,  it
     would appear from the desire of the Appellant to stay  in  the  United
     Kingdom that she has no particular interest anyway in  pursuing  those
     whom she says she had identified as the killers of her parents.

 22. In those circumstances, it  is  right  for  the  Adjudicator  to  have
     focused on whether there would be risk from those groups  such  as  to
     engage the Conventions.  He concluded that they did not.  Now we  have
     examined the question of whether there is a  more  general  Article  3
     case, we conclude that there is no more general case against returning
     this minor female.  The failure of the  Adjudicator  to  address  that
     latter point  does  not  require  the  Adjudicator's  decision  to  be
     remitted for further findings of fact.

 23. For those reasons, this appeal is dismissed.

 24. On the statutory review, Mr Justice Wilson ordered that the  costs  be
     reserved to the Tribunal.  The Tribunal has a power to deal with costs
     under the provisions of Rule 25 of the 2003 Rules.  Miss  Weston  does
     not seek an order that the respondent should  pay  the  costs  of  the
     statutory  review,  but  instead  seeks  an  order  for  the  detailed
     assessment of the statutory review costs for the purposes of the  LSC.
     Whether sitting in my capacity as President or sitting by a remarkable
     transformation as a Judge of the  Administrative  Court,  I  give  the
     order which Miss  Weston  seeks,  namely  that  there  be  a  detailed
     assessment of costs.


                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


