

BR (Article 8 - Proportionality - Delay - Shala) Serbia & Montenegro  [2004]
UKIAT                                                                  00078


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                    Date heard: 6 April 2004

                              Date notified: 23 April 2004
                                   Before

                       DR H H STOREY (VICE PRESIDENT)
                              MR A J CRAGG CMG
                              MISS J BRAYBROOK



                                                               Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And


                                                                  Respondent

Representatives

Ms C Hanrahan appeared for the appellant; Mr R Harrap of Counsel  instructed
by Pearson & Winston Solicitors for the respondent.

                     DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AND REASONS

1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr S M Southgate,  allowing
on Art 8 grounds the  appeal  of  the  respondent,  a  national  of  Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia), against the  decision  to  give  directions
for removal following refusal  to  grant  asylum.  To  avoid  confusion  the
respondent is hereafter referred to as the "claimant".


2. The asylum grounds of appeal were withdrawn before  the  Adjudicator  and
the human rights grounds limited to Art 8. The Adjudicator decided that  the
decision to remove the claimant was "completely  disproportionate"  for  the
following reasons:

      "1. He has lived here since 1997. He applied for  asylum  on  arrival.
      The Respondent took almost exactly four years to reach a decision.  If
      his asylum application had been dealt with reasonably efficiency (sic)
      there is a strong argument to suggest that he would have been  granted
      asylum. At the  time  of  his  application  and  sometime  thereafter,
      Milosevic was still in power. Matters were very  different  then  from
      the position existing now. In the case of Arben Shala [2003] EWCA  Civ
      233 it was held that where  exceptional  circumstances  existed  those
      exceptional  circumstances  should  be  taken  into  account  in   the
      balancing exercise. The Appellant's father was granted refugee  status
      in January 2000. It is reasonable to assume that  if  the  Appellant's
      case had been dealt with at the same time he would have stood  a  good
      chance of success either on the initial application or on appeal.


      2. The Appellant's mother and  father  have  refugee  status.  If  the
      Appellant is returned to Serbia Montenegro now they will be unable  to
      visit him. The family's unit will be broken forever.


      3. Similarly, as his brother's case has still not been dealt  with  it
      is more than likely that when it is eventually dealt  with  his  claim
      will succeed, taking account of the Shala case mentioned above.

      4. There is no home for him to return to and he  has  a  settled  life
      here. "


3. The grounds of appeal  as  amplified  by  Miss  Hanrahan  raised  several
challenges to these findings. The principal ones were that  the  Adjudicator
had erred in assuming that the claimant's  return  would  break  his  family
ties with his family members in  the  UK  "forever",  erred  in  assuming  a
successful outcome of his  brother's  appeal  and  wrongly  considered  that
there was a special or exceptional delay of the type  dealt  with  in  Shala
and in subsequent Tribunal case law.

4. We have concluded that the Adjudicator's conclusions were erroneous.

5. In the first place, we do not think that he was  entitled  to  treat  the
anticipated outcome of the  brother's  case  as  an  additional  reason  for
allowing the appeal. We would accept that if he was  right  to  apply  Shala
principles to the claimant's case, he  was  justified  in  considering  that
Shala would also apply to his brother. But he did not have all the  relevant
evidence before him in order  to  decide  whether  the  brother's  case  was
essentially on all fours with the claimant's; and, even if  it  was  on  all
fours, the claimant was only entitled to benefit from the  Shala  point  (if
at all) once, not twice over. Certainly in the absence of  any  evidence  to
show a particularly close bond between the claimant and his brother, a  bond
over and above the ordinary ties of affection between adult  siblings,  this
factor should not have been accorded separate weight.

6. In the second place, we agree with Miss  Hanrahan  that  the  Adjudicator
was not entitled to find, as a result of the decision to  remove,  that  the
claimant`s family unit  would  be  "broken  forever".  Properly  assuming  a
complete and permanent cessation of the family  unit  presupposed  not  only
that the other members of the family could not return to  FRY  (Serbia)  and
resume living together with the claimant there; it also presupposed that  he
and the other members of the family could not live together  in  some  other
country. It is true that  the  claimant's  father  and  mother  had  refugee
status, but that was said to be on the basis of  the  father's  difficulties
at the hands of the Milosevic regime and Mr Harrap did not seek  to  contend
that the father would still be at risk in FRY (Serbia)  currently.  Nor  did
he seek to contend that there would be any  other  insurmountable  obstacles
preventing the  family  unit  resuming  their  life  together  back  in  FRY
(Serbia).

7. However, we do not consider that these  two  errors  were  sufficient  in
themselves to justify overturning the  Adjudicator`s  principal  conclusion.
We would accept that if the Adjudicator  was  right  to  consider  that  the
claimant was entitled to benefit from the Shala point, his allowance of  the
Art 8 grounds of  appeal  was  still  justified.  Miss  Hanrahan  sought  to
challenge this by reference to  the  recent  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in
[2004] UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia) starred emphasising that  an  Adjudicator  is
not entitled to treat the issue as being  whether  he  or  she  considers  a
decision disproportionate, but has rather to decide  whether  the  Secretary
of State's decision that removal would be proportionate was lawful  (in  the
sense of being within the  range  of  reasonable  responses).  However,  the
Court of Appeal in Arben Shala did not view this modality as  affecting  the
proper outcome of that appeal and, by the same token, we do not see that  it
can affect the proper outcome of this appeal.

8. Was  the  Adjudicator  right  then  to  consider  that  Shala  principles
applied? Since that Court of Appeal judgment there have  been  a  number  of
Tribunal decisions dealing with their precise scope, the main one  cited  to
us being [2004] UKIAT 00016 J. It is unfortunate that the  Adjudicator  made
no reference to any post-Shala cases and gave no reasoning of  his  own  for
why he thought the facts in Shala were on all fours with the claimant's.  He
appears to have proceeded on the basis that  Shala  extended  to  cover  all
persons who, within a reasonable period of time during  which  to  expect  a
decision, could have shown they qualified as refugees because of  the  state
of civil war  or  wide-scale  armed  conflict  in  their  country.  However,
neither Shala nor any other court or Tribunal case has gone that far.

9. In any event, since neither party sought to argue  that  the  summary  of
conclusions set out in J was wrong,  we  consider  that  our  assessment  of
whether the Adjudicator in this case properly applied Shala can be made,  in
the interests of consistency of  approach,   by  direct  reference  to  that
summary. This stated:



Summary of conclusions on the Shala "delay" point

38.
     i) In conducting the balancing exercise under Art 8 the  existence  of
        any unreasonable period of delay is ordinarily a  relevant  factor,
        although given the margin of discretion accorded to the interest of
        the Secretary of State in the maintenance of effective  immigration
        control, this will rarely be a decisive factor  unless  accompanied
        by other special circumstances which disclose particular  prejudice
        to a claimant.


    ii)  The  Shala  point  can  be  extended  to  apply  to  close  family
        relationships other than marriage relationships.


   iii) The Shala  point  only  covers  delay  underpinned  by  special  or
        exceptional circumstances and which is predicated on three things:


        a) the fact that the appellant had a legitimate claim to  enter  at
           the time when, on any reasonable basis, his  claim  should  have
           been determined;
        b) the fact that,  had  his  asylum  application  been  dealt  with
           reasonably efficiently,  he  would  have  been  likely  to  have
           obtained at least exceptional leave to remain;
        c) the fact that  his  private  or  family  life  had  only  become
           significantly established as a result of the time spent  by  him
           in the UK where he formed a relationship. Accordingly possession
           of ELR, if it had been granted when it should have  been,  would
           thereby have given him the ability to apply from within  the  UK
           for a variation of leave on the grounds of his relationship.


                Thus the Shala point depends on the existence of  all  three
preconditions and has little or no application in other contexts."


10. There is no dispute in this  case  that  the  first  two  of  the  three
preconditions set out in J applied in this case. At the  time  the  claimant
arrived in the UK he had a legitimate claim  to  enter  (by  virtue  of  the
existence of a policy in place to prevent removals to FRY) and continued  to
have such a claim at least until the fall of Milosevic on  6  October  2000.
Had his asylum application been dealt with reasonably efficiently, he  would
have been likely to have obtained  at  least  exceptional  leave  to  remain
(ELR). Mr Harrap did seek to suggest that it was likely this claimant  would
have indeed obtained refugee status and hence  indefinite  leave  to  remain
(ILR). However, he based  this  suggestion  solely  on  the  fact  that  the
claimant's father was granted  refugee  status  and  ILR  in  January  2000.
However, his father had come to the UK much earlier than  the  claimant  and
there is nothing  to  indicate  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  have
assimilated the claimant's case to that of  his  father:  by  the  time  the
claimant came to the UK in 1997 he was already in his early 20s and  so  was
not entitled to be treated as a dependant of his father. There  was  nothing
to indicate that the Secretary of State, had  he  made  a  prompt  decision,
would have taken a different view of this claimant from that which he  would
have taken in relation to other FRY claimants who stood to  be  granted  ELR
on a timeous consideration of their claim.

11. The question remains, however,  whether  this  claimant  met  the  third
precondition. We do not consider that he did.

12. As noted in J at para 38 (ii), the Shala point can be extended to  cover
close family relationships other than marriage. And we accept that  in  this
case there was evidence that for much if not most of the time since  arrival
in the UK the claimant has lived  in  the  same  household  as  his  father,
mother and brother. However, there was no satisfactory evidence  before  the
Adjudicator to show that the emotional ties that  existed  between  him  and
his parents and brother went beyond the normal  emotional  ties  between  an
adult and his parents and siblings: see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31;  [2003]
INLR 170, also [2004] UKIAT 00027 H (Somalia) para 24.  Nor  was  there  any
satisfactory evidence that  at  any  stage  since  arrival  in  the  UK  the
claimant has been economically dependent wholly or  mainly  on  his  parents
and brother; and indeed what evidence there is indicated  that  he  and  his
brother quickly obtained employment. There was no evidence either  that  the
claimant had any health difficulties. And finally,  there  was  no  evidence
that the claimant had formed any particularly  close  relationships  with  a
partner. That being the case, we agree with Miss Hanrahan that the  claimant
had failed to establish a family life such as could become  the  subject  of
interference or a disproportionate interference within the  meaning  of  Art
8.

13. It was argued by Mr Harrap that even if the claimant could not  rely  on
a family life relationship within the meaning of Art 8 he could relay  on  a
set of private life relationships or factors. We do not  consider  that  the
point has any merit. Even if his relationships with his father,  mother  and
brother are  redescribed  as  significant  private  life  relationships,  it
remains that they were relationships between an adult claimant  and  parents
and an adult sibling and are relationships which did  not  involve  ties  of
affection over and above those normally enjoyed between  an  adult  claimant
and parents and an adult sibling. If Mr Harrap`s point was  that  under  the
aegis of private life it was necessary also to  take  account  of  the  fact
that he had gainful employment and was not a burden on  the  state  and  had
formed ties with persons at work and in the community, we fail to  see  that
these features added  such  weight  as  would  make  interference  with  his
private life disproportionate.

14. Not pursued with any vigour by Mr Harrap but further  considered  by  us
was a further issue. This was whether one could say, by analogy with  Shala,
that there was an Immigration Rule category which the  claimant  as  someone
in the UK could have applied for and benefited from had a  timeous  decision
being made (resulting in exceptional leave to remain). Plainly there was  an
immigration rule the claimant could have  applied  under  on  these  assumed
circumstances: paragraph 317 of HC395. Plainly too under  this  rule  it  is
possible for a person in the UK to be considered notionally  as  if  on  the
date of decision he  had  remained  in  his  country  of  origin:  Saumtally
(3005), ex parte Gomes [1985] Imm AR 15, Uppal (11275).

15.   However, we cannot see that it  is  a  provision  of  the  Immigration
Rules that the claimant could have benefited from. For one thing we  do  not
consider that the claimant could notionally  have  been  treated  as  living
alone in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.  By  6  October
2000 the Milosevic regime had fallen and thereafter the claimant  could  not
have shown there were any  political  reasons  giving  rise  to  exceptional
compassionate circumstances. He might have been able to show he  would  have
had to live alone, but not that he would have had to live alone in the  most
exceptional compassionate circumstances. He was, after all,  a  single  male
in good health.

16. It might  be  argued  that  the  relevant  date  to  make  the  notional
assessment under paragraph 317 was  prior  to  the  fall  of  Milosevic.  We
rejected that approach. The claimant's father only obtained ILR  in  January
2001 and there would have been  nothing  unreasonable  or  unduly  excessive
about a period of delay of less than one  year  in  the  processing  of  any
subsequent after-entry dependent relative application.

17. Another difficulty in  the  way  of  Mr  Harrap`s  contention  based  on
paragraph 317 is that, even if the claimant could notionally  be  considered
at  the  date  of  decision  as  living  alone  in  the   most   exceptional
compassionate circumstances as well as able  to  meet  other  subparagraphs,
there remains the fact that paragraph 317 (1)  (f)  also  requires  evidence
that the claimant at the date of  decision  was  (would  have  been)  mainly
dependent financially on relatives settled in the UK.    Such  evidence  was
(or would have been) wholly lacking in this case.

18. We do not consider, therefore, that  the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
allow the appeal on Art 8 grounds. The only tenable basis on which he  could
have allowed it was  if  the  Shala  principle  applied  to  the  claimant's
situation. For reasons we have given, we  are  satisfied  he  was  wrong  to
consider that the Shala principle applied in this  case.  Accordingly  there
was no basis for concluding that the decision of the Secretary of State  was
unlawful or disproportionate.

19. For the above reasons the appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.









                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT




