
ar

RH (Human Rights Appeal - Risk of Removal - Variation of  Leave)  Serbia  &
Montenegro [2004] UKIAT 00084



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of hearing: 23 March 2004
                                                 Date Determination notified
                                                               26 April 2004

                                   Before:

                         Mr M W Rapinet  (Chairman)
                                Mrs J Harris



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Miss K. Evans, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent : Mr J. Patel, counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The Secretary of State appeals by leave of the  Tribunal  against  the
      determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M.B.  Hussain,  allowing  the
      respondent's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain. The  grounds  of  appeal  are  in  the
      bundle before us.

   2. The respondent and his family (who are from the  Federal  Republic  of
      Yugoslavia) arrived in this country in 1998 and claimed  asylum.   The
      respondent was granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  18  August
      2000, in line with the then current Home  Office  policy  relating  to
      those from Kosovo.  His application  for  asylum  was  refused  and  a
      refusal to vary leave to remain was served on the 16  September  2002.
      The respondent appealed the decision to refuse asylum and the decision
      to refuse to vary leave. The  Adjudicator  has  dismissed  the  asylum
      appeal but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds for the  reasons
      which are set out in paragraph 16.

   3. The Secretary of State in his grounds of appeal points out that  under
      Section 69(2) of the  Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 it is  necessary
      for the respondent to show that  not varying his  leave  would  be  in
      breach of his human rights. The Secretary of State by reference to the
      case of Mehmetaj (01/TH/0109) maintains that the Adjudicator has erred
      by considering that removal would be in  breach  of  the  respondent's
      human rights.  There are  no  removal  directions  in  force  and  the
      Adjudicator states 'I presume that if the appellant's appeal fails the
      Secretary of State will seek to remove him  as  an  overstayer'.   The
      Secretary of State maintains that this is pure  speculation  as  there
      are no removal directions currently outstanding.  There  is  no  cross
      appeal by the respondent in respect of the  dismissal  of  the  asylum
      appeal.

   4. It should be noted that the respondent's  wife  has  made  a  separate
      application to remain under the Refugee Convention in her own name and
      that that application has not yet  been  determined.   There  are  two
      children of the marriage and it would appear that due to the state  of
      the wife's health the respondent  has  undertaken  responsibility  for
      caring for the children. This is apparent from  paragraph  14  of  the
      determination.

   5. The Adjudicator, although it is not clear from the  determination,  in
      paragraphs 16 and 20 would appear to have found that there is a breach
      of  Article 8 if the respondent were to be returned to Kosovo.

   6. Miss Evans in  her  submission  indicates  there  is  nothing  in  the
      evidence before the Adjudicator or before  us  to  indicate  that  the
      respondent would be required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   He  was
      entitled to remain until he had gone through the appeal  process.  His
      wife has an outstanding  claim and the Secretary of  State  would  not
      remove the respondent whilst the wife's application was  pending.   If
      the appellant were to be returned to Kosovo it would be as head of the
      whole family who would also be required to return. She  refers  us  to
      the case of Mehmetaj to which reference is  made  in  her  grounds  of
      appeal.

   7. In the alternative she submits  that  the  Adjudicator's  decision  is
      unsatisfactory as he has not referred to any of  the  authorities  and
      has not made it clear whether or not he has considered the application
      under Article 3 or Article 8 or under both Articles.  He seems to have
      adopted Article 8 on the basis that it would  be  disproportionate  to
      remove the respondent whilst his  wife  and  family   remain  in  this
      country but there is no  question  of  the  respondent  being  removed
      whilst the wife's application for asylum is being considered.

8.    Mr Patel points out that under Section 69(2) of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999 and also under Section 61 of that Act  the  respondent
      has a right of appeal because, as a result of  refusing  to  vary  his
      leave to remain, he may be required to leave the United Kingdom within
      twenty-eight days of being notified of the decision. If  he  does  not
      leave he becomes an overstayer and could be arrested at  any  time  by
      the police and would then only have the right to appeal to  the  Chief
      Immigration Officer for leave to remain. If  he  is  removed  he  will
      leave behind his wife and children in circumstances which  would  make
      it disproportionate to remove him because of the reasons  set  out  by
      the Adjudicator  in paragraphs 14 and 16 of  her  determination.   The
      wife's medical condition  is  clearly  serious  and  necessitates  the
      respondent remaining at home to look after the children.   He  submits
      that there is adequate supporting evidence in this case to  show  that
      removal of the respondent would be in breach of Article 8 and possibly
      also of Article 3.

9.    In our view the Adjudicator has  not  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
      under the Human Rights Act.  The Court of Appeal in the case  of  Saad
      Diriye and Osorio [2002] INLR 34, made it clear that asylum grounds of
      appeal have to be determined on the hypothetical basis of  whether  or
      not an appellant would face a real risk of persecution as at the  date
      of hearing, even though he may not be required to  leave  the  country
      because of a current leave to remain but the same  considerations   do
      not apply to an appeal based on human rights grounds.  As the Tribunal
      stated in the case of P [2003] UKIAT     00017:


             'Whilst Strasbourg has identified the proper  test  as  being,
             like that under the Refugee Convention, one of current risk to
             be assessed as at the date of hearing,  the  obverse  side  of
             this  recognition is that the risk has to be shown  to  be  an
             imminent one.'

    10. Section 69(2) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 states:


             'If as a result of a decision to vary, or to refuse to vary, a
             person's limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom, he may be  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
             within twenty-eight days of being notified of a  decision,  he
             may appeal against the  decision  to  an  Adjudicator  on  the
             grounds that such a  requirement  would  be  contrary  to  the
             Convention.'


11.   Section 61 states:


             'A person may appeal against  the  decision  to  vary,  or  to
             refuse to vary, any limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom which he has if, as a result of that  decision,
             he may be required to leave the United Kingdom within  twenty-
             eight days of being notified of the decision.'


12.   In this case the respondent was granted exceptional  leave  to  remain
      until 18 August 2000.  The respondent applied for an extension of that
      leave upon its expiry and on 16 September 2000 the Secretary of  State
      decided to refuse to vary leave  by  extending  as  requested  by  the
      respondent.   From  that  date  on  the  respondent  came  within  the
      provisions of paragraph 69(2) of the 1999 Act and of paragraph  61  of
      that Act.  He could be required to leave the  United  Kingdom  at  any
      time and his status now is therefore totally uncertain.


13.   It is correct, as Miss Evans argues, that in the case of Mehmetaj  the
      Tribunal decided that the Adjudicator was wrong  in  finding  that  it
      would be contrary to the respondent's rights under  Article  3  to  do
      other than to guarantee him a right to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
      But in that case there was no risk of  the  respondent  being  removed
      because he had an exceptional leave to remain until 9 July  2004  when
      the case came before the  Adjudicator  in  June  2001.   The  Tribunal
      states:


             'The question is whether there is any real risk that  anything
             in his case might make his getting no more  than  three  years
             assured protection from this country  amount  to  "inhuman  or
             degrading treatment".   We can see  nothing  in  the  evidence
             here  to  show  that  the  fact  that  he  may  have  to  make
             provisional, rather than absolutely firm plans for his  future
             to do so. If there are any cases  where  he  could,  which  we
             cannot  presently   imagine,  then   they   must   be   wholly
             exceptional.'

14.   In the case of P the Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  but  not  on  the
      basis that the issue before it was not judiciable  but  on  the  basis
      that the appellant had limited leave to remain which  had  expired  by
      the time the case came before the Adjudicator, and therefore he was at
      imminent risk of removal,  and  removal  would,  in  that  case,  have
      amounted to a breach of his human rights.  In the  case  of  A  [2003]
      UKIAT 00063, the Secretary of State's appeal was allowed  on the basis
      that  breaches  of  human  rights  were  not  judiciable  before   the
      Adjudicator because at the date of  the  hearing  the  respondent  had
      exceptional leave to remain.    In paragraph 9 of  that  determination
      the Tribunal states:

              'It does not seem to us therefore that the submission made by
             Mrs Fama in this respect is sustainable. It may  be  that,  in
             considering whether the risk of removal is  an  imminent  one,
             nothing les than  the  issue  of  removal  directions  by  the
             Secretary of State would suffice.  That is not a matter  which
             it is necessary for us to come to any  concluded  view  on  in
             having regard to the particular facts of this case where it is
             clear that on any basis there  is  no  question  of   imminent
             removal, Mr Hutton  having  made  it  clear  to  us  that  the
             question of extension of exceptional leave to remain by reason
             of the factual finding as to the age of the respondent has not
             yet been considered by the Secretary of State  simply  because
             these proceedings were pending and remain to be resolved.'

15.   It is quite clear from the three cases to which we have  referred  and
      in particular the case of Mehmetaj on which Miss Evans relies, that if
      there is no question of the respondent being  in  danger  of  imminent
      removal, the claim under the Human Rights Act is not judiciable before
      us or before the Adjudicator.


16.   In this case, however, the respondent at present has  no  status.  The
      Secretary of State has refused to vary his  leave  to  enable  him  to
      remain in this country during the period until  a  decision  has  been
      taken with regard to his  wife's  claim  for  asylum  and  any  appeal
      process that may arise out of that decision.  As Mr Patel points  out,
      he could at any time be picked up by the police and deported.  It  may
      well be that there are no removal directions but with respect to  Miss
      Evans, we do not think that that is relevant. The point is that as  at
      now the respondent has no right to remain in this country.  Miss Evans
      has argued that he would not be returned pending the  outcome  of  his
      wife's application for asylum but she has not given us an  undertaking
      that he would not be returned, and if the position is that he will not
      be returned pending his wife's application we can see  no  reason  why
      his leave to remain cannot be extended until that application has been
      finally determined. So far as he is concerned, in lodging this  appeal
      he has used up the totality of his right of appeal and in the event of
      an adverse decision to him by this Tribunal, and possibly by the Court
      of Appeal if the matter goes further, then he has no further right  to
      remain in this country.  He is at imminent risk of removal.

17.   In our  view, therefore,  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  the
      matter is judiciable.  We would therefore not uphold the Secretary  of
      State's grounds of appeal on this point.

  18. So far as the Adjudicator's decision under the  Human  Rights  Act  is
      concerned, we accept that it is not clear whether he has  reached  his
      decision under Article  3 or under Article 8, though reading paragraph
      16 it would appear to us to be under Article 8.   It is apparent  that
      he has not fully considered the provisions of  that  Article  and  the
      guidelines set out in Mahmood.  That is a matter  which  we  ourselves
      can rectify. He comes to the conclusion that there is a family life in
      this country and with that we concur.  He also comes to the conclusion
      that to return the respondent would be an interference with his family
      life and with that conclusion we would also concur.   He  goes  on  to
      state at paragraph 16


             'Given the serious condition  of  the  appellant's  wife  (the
             medical report says that she would have been hospitalised  had
             it not been for Mr Hupi's case) and the very significant  role
             he plays in his family's life, I am inclined to the view  that
             any   removal   in   those   circumstances   would   not    be
             proportionate.'

19.    In his concluding sentence at paragraph 6 he states:

             'In view of the uncertainty over whether  the  whole  of  Hupi
             family are likely to be removed or whether it is just Mr  Hupi
             that is likely to face removal, the only finding I could  make
             is that if whilst Mrs Hupi and the children remain in  the  UK
             he is removed from here, then there will be a disproportionate
             interference with their family life.'

20.   The  question  of  the  removal  of  Mrs  Hupi  and  her  children  in
      conjunction with the respondent does not come into the equation at the
      moment as their position is still under consideration by the Secretary
      of State.  The matter to be considered is whether or not  the  removal
      of Mr Hupi would be an interference with a family life established  in
      this country and whether or not it would be proportionate.

21.   Paragraph 14 refers to a medical report from which it  is  clear  that
      Hupi's state of health is such that her husband has 'taken on the role
      of the main care of his wife and his two children, a boy of six and  a
      baby girl of seven months.  Mrs Hupi has not  been  able  to  do  many
      household tasks due to her symptoms of depression and anxiety. If  not
      for Mr Hupi, Mrs Hupi would probably require a hospital  admission  in
      my opinion.'

22.   That medical evidence  has  not  been  challenged  either  before  the
      Adjudicator or before us and on the basis of that  evidence  we  would
      entirely concur with the Adjudicator's decision that to remove Mr Hupi
      would be disproportionate and would be in breach of his  rights  under
      Article 8.  He has commitments by  reason  of  his  marriage  and  his
      parenthood and his wife's health from which  he  cannot  derogate  and
      which make it essential that he remains with them.

23.   The Adjudicator was therefore correct, in our view, in  upholding  the
      respondent's appeal against the refusal to vary leave to remain on the
      basis that such refusal would be in breach  of  Article  8.   For  the
      reasons which we have indicated we would  entirely  concur  with  that
      decision.

24.   The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.








                                M.W. RAPINET
                            ACTING VICE PRESIDENT





-----------------------
      1


