
CC
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 5 October 2004          |        |KM (Opposition              |
|Prepared 7 October 2004    |        |activities-UFIN) Iran [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00329                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|31st December 2004                                                |
|.................................................                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                  |
|Ms C Jarvis - Vice President                                      |
|Mr K Kimnell                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M  Sowerby,  of  Counsel  instructed  by  YVA
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Parker, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals against the determination of
      an Adjudicator, Ms Ruth Sullivan, who dismissed  his  appeal  on  both
      asylum and human rights grounds against the decision made on 18 August
      2003 to refuse him leave to enter following the refusal of  his  claim
      for asylum.

Background


   2. The appellant travelled from Iran to Turkey on 20 May 2003 and then by
      air to the United Kingdom on  20  June  2003  and  claimed  asylum  on
      arrival. His journey was arranged by  an  agent.  On  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom he did not have a passport.



   3. The appellant based his claim for asylum on the fact that  members  of
      his family had faced persecution in the past in Iran because of  their
      political opinions. His father had been killed  because  he  supported
      the Shah's regime and his brother was  expelled  from  university  for
      speaking out against the government. The appellant said that he was  a
      professional wrestler. As a result of his family's political  history,
      he was prevented from competing abroard. Because of his background  he
      became a member of the United Front of Iranian Nationalists (UFIN). He
      was arrested on 13 February 2001 on suspicion of being  involved  with
      anti-government bodies. He claimed that he had been tortured  for  six
      days and then released because there was no evidence against him.


   4. The appellant attended a UFIN meeting on 9 April 2003 which was raided
      by  the  authorities  but  he  managed  to  escape.  He  claimed  that
      incriminating evidence was found in his car by the authorities linking
      him to UFIN. The Secretary of State did not  find  this  claim  to  be
      credible for the reasons which are set out in the reasons for  refusal
      letter dated 15 August 2003. The  appeal  against  this  decision  was
      heard by the Adjudicator on 5 November 2003. The appellant  gave  oral
      evidence and the Adjudicator had documentary evidence as  itemised  in
      paragraph 8 of his determination. This included an  extract  from  the
      UFIN website and a magazine article which had not at the date  of  the
      hearing been published.


   5. The Adjudicator found  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  consistent
      account of his arrest in November 2000 and of being detained and  ill-
      treated in custody. He had scarring which was consistent  with  trauma
      from sharp objects such as beating with an iron bar. She accepted that
      the appellant had been in custody and had suffered blows to  the  head
      but she was not satisfied that he had been a UFIN activist or that  he
      was being sought by the authorities.  She  did  not  accept  that  his
      detention in 2000 was connected with  his  political  activities.  She
      went on to  assess  the  impact  of  the  UFIN  website  article.  She
      commented that she would not recognise him from  the  photographs  and
      found that this article  even  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
      November 2000 arrest was not sufficient to put the appellant  at  real
      risk of  persecution  on  return.  She  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      authorities now had any interest in him.  She  did  not  consider  the
      impact of  the  anticipated  magazine  article  as  it  had  not  been
      published at the time of the hearing. For these reasons the appeal was
      dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.


The grounds of appeal


   6. In substance the grounds of appeal raise one issue. It is argued  that
      although the Adjudicator has clearly looked at the materials from  the
      UFIN website, she has not  given  any  consideration  or  reached  any
      conclusion in relation to the submission that the claimant would be at
      risk of persecution due to the contents of the website. This  argument
      is developed in ground 3 which recites the submissions made on  behalf
      of the appellant. It is argued that the images show two photographs of
      the  appellant  in  his  boxing  clothes  and  that  he   is   clearly
      identifiable  as  his  name  appears  above  them.  The  appellant  is
      identified as someone who fled the Iranian regime as his life  was  in
      danger. The image must be considered within the context of the rest of
      the website which is intensely critical of  the  Iranian  regime.  The
      other texts and images include a record  of  two  people  shot  whilst
      escaping from  the  authorities.  The  Iranian  authorities  are  very
      sensitive to any kind of criticism of  the  regime.  This  sensitivity
      extends to those who criticise Iran from abroad.  The  authorities  in
      Iran censor the media and  put  on  trial  and  imprison  writers  who
      criticise the regime. Although the internet is not officially censored
      the Iranian state is attempting to control internet use. It is  likely
      that the UFIN website would be monitored by the regime and they  would
      be aware of its  contents.  In  summary  it  is  argued  that  if  the
      appellant is returned to Iran there would be a real risk that he would
      be identified from his appearance on the  website  as  someone  allied
      with opponents eHe Heof the regime.  In conjunction with the  fact  he
      had been arrested and tortured in detention in 2000 his would lead  to
      a real risk of persecution.


   7. When granting permission to appeal,  the  Vice  President  His  Honour
      Judge Ainley, commented that the Adjudicator's findings on credibility
      were well reasoned and not susceptible to serious challenge but it did
      appear to be arguable that materials available to the  authorities  in
      Tehran may place the appellant at risk on  return.  Subsequently,  the
      Tribunal gave permission for  oral  evidence  to  be  adduced  from  (
                )  the  President  of  UFIN,  and  expert  evidence  from  (
            ).

The evidence before the Tribunal.

   8. In addition to hearing oral evidence the Tribunal received documentary
      evidence on behalf of the appellant in three bundles, the  appellant's
      personal bundle (AP), his objective bundle (AO)  and  a  supplementary
      bundle (AS). The respondent put in evidence the CIPU report  for  Iran
      April 2004 which also appears in bundle AO from page  27.  Mr  Sowerby
      produced  the  following  authorities  Bahramina   (01/TH/00392)   and
      Joharian [2002] UKIAT 005040 and the Court  of  Appeals  judgments  in
      Danian [1999] (INLR533) Mr  Parker  produced  Nasarinia  [2002]  UKIAT
      05438, Pour  (01/TH/0176),  Sultani  [2002]  UKIAT  00654  and  Moradi
      (01/TH/1313). (                 ) produced  a  copy  of  the  document
      referred to in her  expert  report,  Reporters  without  Borders  2004
      Internet Surveillance Report.



The evidence of (                 )

   9. (                 ) confirmed the contents of his witness statement at
      AS1-20. This can be briefly summarised as follows. He arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom in August 1990 and was granted refugee status in  1992.
      He is the founder and President of UFIN. This organisation was founded
      in Cyprus in December 1997 at  a  meeting  attended  by  approximately
      sixty people. There are in excess of one hundred thousand  members  of
      UFIN in  Iran,  of  which  approximately  five  thousand  are  active.
      Suitable candidates for membership are normally approached directly by
      existing members but  an  approach  should  only  be  made  after  the
      existing member is entirely satisfied that the prospective member  has
      already demonstrated that he or she possesses  anti-government  views.
      If a prospective member wishes to become  a  member  her  details  are
      passed to the UFIN headquarters in Tehran and the application will  be
      scrutinised. New members are allocated an identity code.  Their  names
      are never used in Iran. The codes are stored manually in files  in  an
      undisclosed location.


  10.  There are UFIN members in the United Kingdom and in a number of other
      countries including Spain, Germany,  Cyprus,  Turkey  and  the  United
      States. When UFIN  was  established  it  would  communicate  with  its
      members  in  Iran  by  telephone,  fax  and  email,  but   it   became
      increasingly apparent that the  Iranian  authorities  were  monitoring
      their activities. Messages on cassette tape are smuggled into Iran and
      distributed to their intended recipients. UFIN  also  makes  extensive
      use of the internet in order to exchange views and articles. This site
      is based in London. It receives approximately 200 to 300 hits  a  day.
      There are also websites in Germany, Cyprus, Scotland and  France.  The
      Iranian authorities prevent access to the UFIN website by the  general
      public. The activities of UFIN members are monitored and there is also
      evidence that the authorities monitor their website. UFIN publishes  a
      magazine called "Bamdad" which means Iranian Dawn. About 50,000 copies
      of the magazine are published  each  year.  The  articles  are  highly
      critical of the Iranian government. The magazine is available in  most
      European countries and is smuggled into Iran from Turkey. The  Iranian
      authorities are careful to ensure that opposition groups in  Iran  are
      not given  any  publicity.  The  media  do  not  refer  to  individual
      opposition groups by name, but collectively  as  "Monoaeighhan"  which
      means "those people who fight against Islam".


  11. In respect of the appellant, it is said that he is a high  level  UFIN
      activist introduced to the organisation in March 2000. He subsequently
      became a member. He had been detained by the  Iranian  authorities  on
      suspicion of anti-government activities  and  when  in  detention  was
      badly treated. This information was passed on by a  representative  of
      UFIN headquarters in Iran who was visiting the United  Kingdom.  After
      the appellant arrived  in the United Kingdom, the appellant's identity
      was established and details were put on the UFIN website to bring  his
      plight to the attention of the world.

  12. In his oral evidence (                 ) confirmed that the article at
      AS21-23 was from  the  Bamdad  magazine.  Later  in  evidence  it  was
      confirmed that this was published in January  2004.  The  magazine  is
      published in London, Cyprus and Turkey and sent into Iran. He referred
      to a cartoon at AS26 which is critical of both the Iranian regime  and
      the European Union's dialogue with Iran. He  also  referred  to  other
      publications such as AS27 which were smuggled into Iran. He  confirmed
      that UFIN worked closely with the  monarchists  and  indeed  with  any
      organisation prepared to struggle against the Islamic republic.

  13.  In  cross-examination  he  confirmed  his  view  that   the   Iranian
      authorities persecuted UFIN members. He referred to the  copy  of  the
      UFIN website at AP82. There were 5000 active members in Iran.  He  was
      asked why UFIN was not referred to in any of the background  evidence.
      He explained that this is because it was  a  young  organisation.  The
      Iranian interior ministry had issued a directive that there should  be
      no mention of political organisations when there were arrests. Amnesty
      International would not report  such  arrests  as  UFIN  were  against
      Amnesty as they did nothing. He was asked why people were named on the
      website. He said that those in Iran  were  given  pseudonyms  but  the
      appellant had been named because he was living  outside  Iran  but  he
      also had been  given  a  pseudonym.  He  explained  that  the  website
      referred to Karen Nazari when he was known as Saed Nazari.

The evidence of (                 )

  14. (                 ) gave evidence. She confirmed the contents  of  her
      report dated 2 August 2004. This was in  response  to  a  request  for
      comments on the monitoring  by  the  Iranian  authorities  of  Iranian
      dissidents abroad and of opposition websites. She said that  for  many
      years it has been known that the  Iranian  authorities  take  a  close
      interest in the Iranian opposition in exile, including the  activities
      of Iranians resident in European countries. Up to the mid 1990's there
      had been  a  serious  of  assassinations  of  opposition  figures  and
      evidence of the involvement of the Iranian Ministry of Information had
      emerged during the course of a trial in Germany of  those  responsible
      for the 1992 murder of  Kurdish  opposition  leaders  in  the  Mykonos
      Restaurant in Berlin. Her report cites from annual reports of both the
      German and Dutch services referring to the activities of  the  Iranian
      intelligence service. There continue to be intermittent press  reports
      of trials, convictions and expulsions  of  Iranian  agents  spying  on
      exiles. The Mojahedin-e-Khalq is the most frequently mentioned  target
      but other groups include Monicus, KDPI members and  Balochi  activists
      and using a phrase from a German intelligence report, "the entire anti-
      regime spectrum".

  15. The report goes on to comment on the intensive use of the internet  by
      Iranian opposition organisations which has been a  phenomenon  of  the
      last five or six years. She commented that it was  inconceivable  that
      the Iranian authorities would not engage in the  regular  surveillance
      of exile websites. This will obviously not be a matter  advertised  by
      the authorities and it would be impossible to  assemble  documentation
      on it. Her report refers to the Reporters Without Borders 2004 report,
      which records that censorship  in  Iran,  officially  to  protect  the
      public from immorality, has quickly spread to  political  content  and
      that it is easier to access pornographic sites  than  reformist  ones.
      Nearly ten thousand sites are thought to be blocked  from  inside  the
      country.


  16. In cross-examination (                 ) confirmed that  parties  such
      as the MEK, MKO, and NCRI were organisations which had  been  involved
      in fighting in Iran. The KDPI also operated  illegally  in  Iran.  She
      accepted that the sources she referred to were not from any UK reports
      but the British security services did not provide an annual report  in
      the way the Dutch service did. She accepted that there was  no  direct
      evidence that the Iranian authorities monitored websites, but  it  was
      inconceivable that they would  not  do  so.  It  was  known  that  the
      authorities kept a close check on political websites. It  would  be  a
      limited number of websites probably about thirty opposition sites that
      the Iranian authorities would be  interested  in.  In  response  to  a
      question from the Tribunal about how  the  Iranian  authorities  might
      deal with information on websites and articles it was  her  view  that
      the evidence would be put on a file until the person involved came  to
      the attention of the authorities. The person would not be pursued  but
      if someone came to the attention of the authorities,  the  information
      might then come out and they would investigate and  might  punish  the
      person involved.


The submissions


  17. Mr Parker submitted that there was inadequate evidence  to  show  that
      the appellant would be at risk on return. There was  no  reference  to
      UFIN in any of the objective evidence save for a reference in the CIPU
      report  as  to  its  existence.  The  evidence  about  its  activities
      presented  a  very  blurred  picture  of  working  with   monarchists,
      communists, and any organisation opposed to the  current  regime.  The
      reality of the position was that UFIN did  not  have  any  profile  in
      Iran. The evidence about the names or pseudonyms used on  the  website
      was unsatisfactory.  In  Joharanian  there  was  a  concession  as  to
      credibility. The facts were very different in Bahramian. The  Tribunal
      should follow Moradi in holding that authorities in Iran would have no
      particular interest in UFIN publications. It was clear from the expert
      report that the authorities were primarily interested in active bodies
      such as MEK and NCRI. The nature of these organisations was clear from
      the CIPU report. There was  no  proper  basis  for  finding  that  the
      Adjudicator's determination erred in law.

  18. Mr Sowerby submitted that the Adjudicator had erred in  law.  She  had
      failed to consider any of the objective  evidence.  She  had  made  no
      finding as to why the appellant had been detained and  had  failed  to
      make a finding about whether he was a member of UFIN in this  country.
      She had erred in her assessment of the consequences of  the  appellant
      being mentioned on  the  website  and  in  the  magazine  article.  He
      submitted that as a member of UFIN the appellant  would  be  at  risk.
      UFIN had clearly adopted an anti-government stance and  it  was  clear
      from the background evidence  that  the  Iranian  government  did  not
      tolerate political opposition: CIPU report para 6.196 and 6.228. There
      was evidence that the  authorities  monitored  organisations  such  as
      UFIN. A person appearing on an anti-government website would be a risk
      on return. The risk to the appellant arose from the fact that  he  had
      been detained and ill-treated in custody. He was a  UFIN  activist  in
      Iran. He was a member of UFIN in the United Kingdom.  He  appeared  on
      the website. He had been interviewed in the Bamdad  magazine.  In  all
      these circumstances he would be at real risk on return.


The jurisdiction of the Tribunal


  19. This appeal is brought under the provisions of section 101 (1) of  the
      2002 Act. In CA v Secretary of State (2004) EWCA Civ 1165 the Court of
      Appeal held that under section 101 the Tribunal's function was plainly
      confined to appeals on law only. An appeal could not be allowed unless
      the Tribunal held that the Adjudicator had perpetrated  a  mistake  of
      law which must be a material error of law. Once a  material  error  of
      law was shown the Tribunal must then decide  what  if  any  relief  to
      grant in the light of the facts arising at the time it is  considering
      the case. A submission that the Tribunal may look  at  the  up-to-date
      merits of the case provided only that permission to  appeal  had  been
      granted on a point of law was rejected. The jurisdiction under section
      101 prevented the Tribunal from deciding the merits itself  unless  at
      least it first concluded that the  Adjudicator's  decision  could  not
      stand because it was marred by error of law.

  20. In the present appeal, the Tribunal has given permission  for  further
      oral evidence to be called. The Tribunal  is  entitled  to  take  this
      evidence into account in considering whether there has been  an  error
      of law, but in so far as the further evidence relates to the merits of
      the claim it only becomes relevant if the Tribunal find that there  is
      an error of law and then goes on to consider for itself the merits  of
      the appeal.




Consideration of whether the Adjudicator erred in law

  21. The Tribunal will now turn to consider whether there is  an  error  of
      law in the Adjudicator's determination. The grounds of appeal are very
      specific. The error asserted in ground 2 is that the  Adjudicator  has
      not given any consideration or reached any conclusion in  relation  to
      the submission that the appellant is at risk of persecution due to the
      contents of the UFIN website. Ground 3 identifies the submissions made
      in support of the contention that the website gives rise  to  a  risk.
      Ground 2 is clearly inaccurate as the  Adjudicator  did  consider  the
      website and did reach a finding. She commented in paragraph 26 of  her
      determination that she would not have recognised  the  appellant  from
      the photographs on the website.  In  paragraph  35  she  assessed  the
      impact of the website. She noted that the appellant was not  described
      in the caption above  the  photographs  as  a  UFIN  member.  This  is
      correct. The text above the photographs of the appellant  and  another
      person, is: "Mr H. M., member of UFIN and Mr Karen  Nesiri  member  of
      Wrestle Iran, he escaped from Iran. Their life was in danger." It  was
      the Adjudicator's view that the UFIN website feature  identifying  the
      appellant by name and sport even when taken in  conjunction  with  the
      November 2000 arrest was not sufficient to put the appellant  at  real
      risk of persecution on return.


  22. Although, ground 3 is not phrased in this way, it  could  be  read  as
      arguing that the Adjudicator failed to take the factors identified  in
      that ground into account when assessing risk. In summary  the  factors
      are the presence of the photographs on the website, the identification
      of the appellant, the fact that the website is clearly critical of the
      authorities and contains allegations of torture in relation  to  other
      members of UFIN. The regime is sensitive to any kind of criticism  and
      is known to censor the media and put on trial those who criticise  the
      regime. By implication it  is  argued  that  the  appellant  would  be
      identified from his images on  the  website  as  someone  allied  with
      opponents of the regime and taken with  the  fact  that  he  had  been
      previously arrested and tortured he would be at risk on return.

  23. It is clear from reading the determination that none of these  factors
      have been left out of account by the Adjudicator. She was fully  aware
      of the contents of the  website,  the  Iranian  government's  attitude
      towards political opponents and the fact that the appellant  had  been
      previously detained. The Tribunal is not satisfied that it is arguable
      that the Adjudicator erred in law by leaving relevant matters  out  of
      account nor that it is arguable that the Adjudicator's  findings  were
      perverse in the sense of being irrational or unreasonable.


  24.  Although  the  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
      detained, she found that this was not in  relation  to  his  political
      activities. She made a finding of fact that the appellant had not told
      the truth about his involvement with UFIN. She was not satisfied  that
      he had been politically active in Iran  nor  that  his  car  had  been
      searched and UFIN material found. The Adjudicator has  given  adequate
      reasons for her finding in paragraph 28 of her  determination  and  in
      any event they have not been challenged in  the  grounds.  Taking  all
      these factors  into  account,  the  Adjudicator's  findings  that  the
      authorities would not have any interest in the appellant on return are
      properly sustainable on the evidence and do not disclose any error  of
      law.


  25. In his submissions Mr  Sowerby  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to  consider  any  of  the  objective  evidence.  There  is  no
      substance in this ground. The Adjudicator has  set  out  the  evidence
      before her in paragraph 8. She has dealt with the background  material
      in paragraphs 23 and 24 of her determination. She accepted  that  this
      material showed that the Iranian regime was intolerant  of  opposition
      and dissent noting that the current regime was more liberal than  some
      of its predecessors but  reforms  had  been  inhibited  by  continuing
      tensions between liberal and conservative factions and between secular
      and religious views. She noted the concession made by the respondent's
      representative at the hearing that, if the  appellant's  evidence  was
      true, then he would be at risk in Iran.

  26. Mr Sowerby also sought to argue that the Adjudicator had  not  made  a
      finding as to why the appellant was detained. There was  no  need  for
      her to do so. The fact is that she was  not  satisfied  to  the  lower
      standard of proof that the detention was for the reasons he  gave.  He
      also argued that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  make  a  finding  about
      whether the appellant was now a UFIN member  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      That finding was not necessary but in any event would not be  material
      to the Adjudicator's determination as the crux of the case before  the
      Adjudicator was whether a risk arose from the  appellant's  photograph
      being on the website.

  27. Although the point was not raised in submissions,  the  Tribunal  have
      considered  whether  the  Adjudicator  erred  by  excluding   in   her
      assessment of risk the impact  of  the  anticipated  magazine  article
      which had not been published at the time of the  hearing.  Looking  at
      the record of proceedings, the evidence before her from the  appellant
      was that he had been interviewed for a magazine. He had not  seen  the
      article and indeed there was no article before the Adjudicator. We are
      satisfied that the Adjudicator was entitled to leave  the  publication
      of an article out of account when its  contents  were  unknown  and  a
      matter of speculation.


  28. The Tribunal has considered the oral evidence to see whether there  is
      anything in that evidence which indicates  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      law. (                 ) has given evidence about the  foundation  and
      background of UFIN and how its members are recruited. He said  in  his
      statement that the appellant is  a  high  level  UFIN  activist.  This
      evidence goes to the merits of the claim and if it was to be relied on
      should have been in evidence before the  Adjudicator.  The  fact  that
      there is further evidence about the merits does not by  itself  amount
      to an error of law. There was an issue before the  Adjudicator  as  to
      whether the appellant was active  on  behalf  of  UFIN  in  Iran.  She
      rejected  that  evidence  for  the   reasons   which   she   gave.   (
        )'s evidence confirmed, as the Adjudicator accepted  in  any  event,
      that the Iranian authorities take an active interest  in  the  Iranian
      opposition in exile. It also confirmed the likelihood that the Iranian
      Security Services would take an interest in opposition  websites.  The
      Tribunal accept both propositions. The Adjudicator expressly  accepted
      the first and by implication accepted the second. The further evidence
      does not satisfy the Tribunal that the Adjudicator erred in law in her
      assessment of the evidence or of the risk on return. For  this  reason
      this appeal cannot succeed.

Our conclusions on the evidence about UFIN


  29. However, the Tribunal will set out its views on the oral  evidence  we
      have heard about UFIN. We accept (                 )'s evidence  about
      the formation and purposes of UFIN. The strength of his feeling  about
      the current Iranian regime  is  clear  from  his  message  at  AS17-19
      following the constitution of  UFIN.  However,  the  Tribunal  do  not
      accept that UFIN is active in Iran. The only mention of  UFIN  in  the
      background evidence is in the April 2004 CIPU report in  annex  B  (b)
      where it is described "as  a  European  based  political  organisation
      established December 1997 which is believed to  be  a  result  of  the
      National Front Party and the National Unity Party joining forces after
      the revolution. It purports to have an active presence in Iran but  to
      date it has proved extremely difficult  to  obtain  any  corroborative
      evidence. It has a UK office  and  supports  a  website  which  claims
      membership both within  in  Iran  and  in  some  other  countries.  It
      produces a magazine called Bamdad".


  30. The explanation for there being no such corroborative evidence is said
      to be firstly the fact that UFIN is a  relatively  young  organisation
      only established in 1997 and that the Iranian authorities prevent  the
      naming of opposition political organisations. (                 ) also
      made it clear that his organisation was out of sympathy with  Amnesty.
      However these factors do not satisfactorily explain the  lack  of  any
      objective evidence about the activities of UFIN in Iran. In  Nasarinia
      the Tribunal commented on  the  absence  of  evidence  to  demonstrate
      UFIN's existence within Iran on the scale argued by  the  claimant  in
      that case. The argument that the absence of  evidence  should  not  be
      treated as conclusive as observers have found it difficult  to  pierce
      the veil of secrecy cast by the  regime  in  Iran  over  its  internal
      affairs, overlooks the fact that there are a number of experts on Iran
      who have been able to assist the Tribunal with very detailed  evidence
      about such matters.

  31. The Tribunal notes the conflict between the Tribunal determinations in
      Bahrmian where it was accepted that the claimant had  been  active  on
      behalf of UFIN in Iran, with the comments of the  Tribunal  in  Boradi
      that it was reasonable to conclude that the authorities in Iran  would
      have no particular interest in UFIN publications and  that  UFIN  were
      not listed in the  background  evidence  as  an  opposition  party  of
      interest to the Iranian authorities. In that  case  the  claimant  had
      neither been a prominent activist nor  of  high  profile.  This  would
      distinguish the position from the facts in Bahrmian where in paragraph
      8 the Tribunal noted that the claimant had been arrested, detained and
      tortured and that his subsequent complaint to the Ministry of  Justice
      and participation in a strike would cause the authorities  to  suspect
      that he was engaged in anti-government activities. It was  found  that
      his house had been searched on number of occasions  and  that  he  had
      been involved in activities for UFIN  including  the  distribution  of
      leaflets, the removal of office furniture and publicity material.


  32. The evidence in that case was that UFIN was a non-violent  underground
      political movement. Its members received orders through a  network  of
      members identified only by codenames. (                 ) gave similar
      oral evidence but the Tribunal find this hard to  reconcile  with  the
      evidence from the website at AP 82-95, where names were given of  UFIN
      members holding positions in Iran. The explanation is that  these  are
      pseudonyms but (                 ) also referred to the  name  of  the
      appellant as a pseudonym even  though  the  name  given  is  virtually
      identical to  the  appellant's  own  name  and  in  any  event  he  is
      identifiable from a photograph and as a wrestler.




  33. Nonetheless it is clear that UFIN  does  oppose  the  current  Iranian
      government and does publish  and  endeavour  to  circulate  literature
      extremely critical of that government. Some of the literature  may  be
      smuggled into Iran and there is a possibility that it may come to  the
      attention of the  Security  Services  there.  The  Tribunal  accept  (
               )'s evidence. It confirms as  is  clear  from  the  objective
      evidence that  the  Iranian  authorities  take  a  close  interest  in
      opposition activities. In her report she cites  from  the  German  and
      Dutch authorities. This confirms that the authorities'  main  interest
      is  in  active  political  groups  such  as  the  MEK  and   NCRI.   (
         ) says that it is inconceivable that the Iranian security  services
      would not engage in regular surveillance  of  websites  of  groups  in
      exile.  We  agree.  This  seems  to  us  to  be   an   uncontroversial
      proposition.




  34. However, the fact that surveillance takes place and  that  the  regime
      targets opposition activists does not provide an  adequate  evidential
      basis for an assertion that anyone who is mentioned in  a  website  or
      literature produced by an opposition party would be at  real  risk  of
      persecution in Iran. The Tribunal is not satisfied that membership  of
      UFIN would put a claimant at risk in Iran. However, if on the facts of
      a particular case it is shown that there is  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that an applicant has engaged in opposition  activities  in
      Iran whether on behalf of UFIN or any  other  party,  we  accept  that
      those activities are capable of giving rise to a well-founded fear  of
      persecution.



  35. In the  present  appeal  a  critical  finding  of  fact  made  by  the
      Adjudicator is that the appellant had not been involved in  activities
      on behalf of UFIN when in Iran and that  his  detention  in  2000  had
      nothing to do with any political activities or opinions. The  Tribunal
      accept that evidence on a website or in a newspaper article  might  in
      the particular circumstances of an appeal lead to  a  finding  that  a
      claimant was of interest to the authorities in Iran and lead  them  to
      the view that he  was  associated  with  opposition  activities.  This
      brings us back to the issue at the centre of the present appeal. Would
      the authorities take such a view of the appellant in the light of  the
      fact that he appears on the  UFIN  website  and  the  account  of  his
      departure from Iran appears  in  the  Bamdad  magazine?  The  Tribunal
      cannot accept that the fact alone of being on the website or being the
      subject of an article in a magazine published by an  opposition  group
      would lead to a real risk on return. This is a question  of  fact  for
      the Secretary of State and for the Adjudicator to assess and determine
      on the basis of the available evidence. As the Tribunal  have  already
      indicated we  are  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  were
      properly sustainable on the evidence and do not disclose any error  of
      law.




   Decision


   36. For these reasons this appeal is dismissed.






                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President












   Approved for electronic transmission
