

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


MW (Deportation - Jamaica -conducive to the public good) Jamaica [2004]
UKIAT 00171

                                               Date of Hearing : 9 June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                23 June 2004

                                   Before:


                     Mr Richard Chalkley, Vice President
                               Mrs E Hurst, JP
                               Mr F T Jamieson




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


      Miss A. Holmes, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  appeared  on
behalf of  the
      appellant and Mr O. Olasoju, a clerk with Doves, Solicitors,  appeared
      on behalf of the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.  The
      respondent is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 20 August 1953  and
      who has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  1988.   She  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain on the basis of her marriage to  a  British
      citizen, in August 1991.

2.    The appellant  appeals,  with  leave  of  the  Tribunal,  against  the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Miss Judith Beale, who in a  determination
      promulgated on 9 September 2003, following a hearing at  Taylor  House
      on 12 August 2003, allowed an appeal by  the  respondent  against  the
      decision of the appellant, taken on 20 May 2002, to make a deportation
      order against her, under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act, 1971,
      as amended by the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  1999  and  to  give
      directions for her removal to Jamaica.

3.    The respondent was sentenced to three months imprisonment on 14  April
      2003, following her conviction on 17 February 2003, of  having  on  22
      March 20o1, assaulted a police constable in the execution of her duty.
       On 28 May 2003, the respondent was served  with  the  notice  of  the
      appellant's decision, that it would be conducive to the public good to
      deport the respondent.

3.     The  respondent  appealed.  The  Adjudicator   concluded   that   the
      respondent was most unlikely to re-offend.  The Adjudicator  said,  in
      paragraph 6.2 of the determination :

             'I find that the effect upon her of knowing  that  she  has  a
             life threatening illness and  of  consequent  regular  contact
             with the medical  establishment  makes  it  unlikely,  in  the
             particular circumstances of this case, that  the  [respondent]
             will continue to offend.'

4.    The Adjudicator went on to find that,  if  returned  to  Jamaica,  the
      respondent would  become  vulnerable  to  life  threatening  AIDS-type
      illness within a year and that deficiencies in treatment  in  Jamaica,
      meant that she was likely to die within two  years.  She  allowed  the
      respondent's appeal under Article 3.  She went on to say that, were it
      not for the respondent's  medical  condition,  she  would  uphold  the
      appellant's decision but, given the medical evidence, and without  the
      drug therapy she was currently receiving, she would quickly revert  to
      having full blown AIDS.   The  Adjudicator  allowed  the  respondent's
      appeal under both Article 8 and under paragraph 364  of  Statement  of
      Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395.

5.    The grounds of appeal assert that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  law  by
      failing to apply the Court of Appeal judgment in  K  [2001]  ImmAR  11
      and, as a result, Article 3 could not be breached by the  respondent's
      removal and, for the same reason, the Adjudicator  erred  in  allowing
      the appeal under Article 8 and under paragraph 364 of HC 395.

6.    In answer to preliminary  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Olasoju
      confirmed that the respondent first became aware of her HIV illness in
      September 2002.  He confirmed that she was subsequently  convicted  on
      14 January 2003, of prostitute loitering.  He made it clear  that  the
      respondent had denied the charge and did not accept that she had  been
      prostitute loitering.  He confirmed that, in relation to the Article 3
      claim, he was maintaining that the objective evidence showed  that  as
      someone suffering from HIV,  the  respondent  would  be  subjected  to
      violence on her return to Jamaica.

   7. Miss Holmes told us that she relied on the grounds of appeal, save for
      paragraph 2, which was withdrawn. That suggested that the  Adjudicator
      had erred in failing to consider the relevant  objective  material  in
      her determination.  Miss Holmes conceded that  no  objective  material
      had been served on the Adjudicator by the Secretary  of  State.   Miss
      Holmes submitted that the Adjudicator should have been  familiar  with
      and applied the decision of the Court of Appeal in K [2001] ImmAR  11,
      which made it  clear  that,  simply  because  the  medical  facilities
      available for the respondent in her  home  country  were  inferior  to
      those in the United Kingdom, did not mean that there would be a breach
      of Article 3 on the respondent's return. The fact  of  the  matter  is
      that there are medical facilities available in Jamaica  to  treat  the
      respondent's condition. Miss Holmes drew the attention of the Tribunal
      to the decision of the Court of Appeal in N, where the  Court  decided
      that an Article 3 case, of the kind claimed by the respondent, must be
      based on facts,


                       "which  are  not  only  exceptional,   but   extreme;
                       extreme, that is, judged in the context of cases  all
                       or many  of  which  (like  this  one)  command  one's
                       sympathy on pressing grounds."

8.    So far as what might face the respondent on  her  return  to  Jamaica,
      paragraph 5.89 of the CIPU Report quotes Jamaica's Health Minister  as
      stating  in  public  that,  'discrimination  and  stigmatisation'  has
      resulted in job losses and violence against people battling with AIDS.
       The island's Chief Medical  Officer  has  admitted  that  stigma  and
      discrimination drive people under ground. Paragraph 5.90 reported that
      violence against individuals suspected, or known  to  be  homosexuals,
      occurred as,  apparently,  did  violence  and  discrimination  against
      persons  living  with  HIV/AIDS.    However,  paragraph  5.90  is  not
      helpful, because it does not  describe  the  extent  of  the  violence
      against those  suffering  with  HIV/AIDS.   Paragraph  5.91,  however,
      suggests that  the  Ministry  of  Health's  National  HIV/STI  Control
      Programme formally forged a media alliance and launched a campaign  to
      remove a stigma associated with HIV/AIDS virus. Paragraph  5.92  shows
      that a private NGO established in 1998 by the Ministry  of  Health  to
      coordinate the national "multisectural response" to the AIDS  epidemic
      in Jamaica,  has  strong  links  with  the  national  HIV/STI  Control
      Programme and with representatives from both private and public sector
      organisations, NGOs and community  based  organisations.  To  maintain
      that the respondent would be the  subject  of  violence,  such  as  to
      expose her to a risk  of  Article  3  would,  submitted  Miss  Holmes,
      require clear objective evidence, which was absent.

9.     In  relation  to  the  respondent's  Article  8  claim,  Miss  Holmes
      submitted that the respondent has family members in  Jamaica  and  any
      breach of the respondent's family life would be proportionate. She has
      extensive criminal  convictions  gong  back  over  several  years  and
      although her last one was, in fact, for prostitution loitering, it was
      after she had diagnosed as suffering with HIV. The  Adjudicator  could
      not have had this in mind when  she  decided  that  the  risk  of  the
      respondent re-offending was unlikely; the respondent had  already  re-
      offended.  Miss  Holmes  relied  on  the  Tribunal's  decision  in   M
      (Croatia)* [2004] UKIAT 00024.  She also asked  us  to  note  that  in
      paragraph 6.10, the Adjudicator had prefaced her comments by the words
      'Were  it  not  for  her  medical  condition,  I  would   uphold   the
      [appellant's] decision'. She invited the Tribunal to allow the appeal.

10.   We granted Mr Olasoju a brief adjournment, after having  given  him  a
      copy of the Tribunal's decision in M (Croatia), in order that he might
      have time to read it.   On resuming the hearing  he  confirmed  to  us
      that he had read the decision.

11.   He submitted that Article 3  would  be  engaged  by  the  respondent's
      removal. If she is  returned  to  Jamaica,  she  will  be  faced  with
      discrimination and  stigmatisation  and  violence.   That  is  clearly
      demonstrated, he submitted, by paragraphs 5.89 and 5.90  of  the  CIPU
      Report.  It has to be borne in mind that the respondent  is  receiving
      support in the United Kingdom  and  that  she  will  need  support  in
      Jamaica.  It will become known on her  return  to  Jamaica,  that  the
      respondent is suffering from HIV, because she  will  need  to  receive
      medical treatment.  He submitted that the respondent is in exceptional
      circumstances.  She requires support  to  take  her  medicine  in  the
      United Kingdom and will continue to do so in Jamaica.  Her family  are
      helping her to face her illness in the United Kingdom and  she  has  a
      child, grandchild and siblings  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She
      looked after her grandchild while her daughter is currently  receiving
      therapy.  As to the respondent's  conviction,  the  last  one  was  in
      January 2003. The hearing before the Adjudicator was  in  August  2003
      and when the Adjudicator held that it was unlikely that the respondent
      would continue to offend, she had looked at the situation  as  it  was
      following 14 January 2003.

12.   He submitted that there was a risk of her being subjected to  violence
      on her return and that the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  was
      wrong. He invited us to uphold the Adjudicator's determination.

13.   We reserved our determination.

14.   We have very considerable sympathy for the respondent.   In  September
      2002, the respondent was  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  chronic  HIV
      disease and has  subsequently  been  diagnosed  as  having  AIDS.  The
      appellant's decision to make deportation order was  taken  on  28  May
      2003. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that there existed  any
      compassionate, or  compelling  factors,  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
      serious nature of the respondent's convictions.  The  evidence  before
      the Secretary of  State  and  before  the  Adjudicator  was  that  the
      respondent was convicted on 14  April  2003,  of  having  assaulted  a
      police constable on 22 March 2001, in the execution of her  duty.  The
      respondent was sentenced to  be  imprisoned  for  three  months.   The
      respondent's list of previous convictions are numerous and start  with
      a conviction on 26 February 1991, of possession of  controlled  drugs.
      Other than six failures to surrender to  her  bail,  four  charges  of
      possession of an offensive weapon, one charge of theft (for which  she
      received a prison sentence of six months) and one  charge  of  causing
      actual bodily harm, the respondent's other thirty  or  so  convictions
      are for prostitute loitering. The most recent was on 14 January  2003.



15.   The  Tribunal  were  very  disturbed  to  observe  that,  having  been
      diagnosed as suffering with chronic HIV  on  10  September  2002,  the
      respondent should be subsequently convicted of  prostitute  loitering.
      She could not have  been  unaware  of  the  risk  she  was  taking  in
      infecting others.

16.   We  have  very  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence  before  the
      Adjudicator and carefully read the Adjudicator's  determination.    We
      have also read and considered the April 2004 Jamaica  Country  Report.
      We have concluded that we must allow the Secretary of State's  appeal.



17.   Dealing first with the respondent's Article 3 claim,  the  Adjudicator
      said at paragraphs 6.5 and 6.6 the following:

             '6.5 There is no reliable evidence about the  availability  of
                 the treatment the [respondent] requires in Jamaica.   I  am
                 aware that anti-retroviral drug therapy is very  expensive.
                 I  consider  it  highly  probable,  as  is  said,  for  the
                 [respondent] that while the drugs may be  available  there,
                 they can be accessed only by those who can  pay  for  them,
                 which does not include the appellant. Moreover, I  consider
                 it very unlikely indeed that anything  like  the  level  of
                 monitoring available to the [respondent] in the UK would be
                 available to a person with her limited means in Jamaica.


             6.6  The result of this, I find, is that the  alternatives for
                 this  [respondent]  are  stark,  and  are  set  out  in  Dr
                 Hutchinson's letter. If she remains in the UK,  she  has  a
                 real likelihood of remaining well under the therapy she  is
                 receiving for the foreseeable future. If she is deported to
                 Jamaica, the only treatment she has any real likelihood  of
                 being  able  to  access  is  treatment  for   opportunistic
                 infections. Dr Hutchinson's expectation is that  she  would
                 return to her lowest CD4  count  within  a  few  months  of
                 stopping anti-retroviral treatment, and would be vulnerable
                 to life-threatening AIDS-type illnesses within a year. This
                 is not a case where deficiencies in treatment would mean an
                 uncertain future in Jamaica or a possible reduction in life-
                 expectancy of some unquantifiable amount. If she remains in
                 the UK she will probably live, despite her HIV  status;  if
                 she is returned to Jamaica she is in  fact  likely  to  die
                 within two years. As is  well-known,  death  from  AIDS  is
                 particularly  traumatic.   I  find  that  to  subject   the
                 [respondent] to this high likelihood of  deporting  her  to
                 Jamaica and so separating her from her  family  does  reach
                 the high threshold of inhumane treatment  under  Article  3
                 ECHR, and would therefore constitute a breach.'

18.   It appears that the Adjudicator  may  well  have  confused  Article  8
      issues with Article 3, but, nonetheless, we are  satisfied  that,  had
      the Adjudicator properly had regard to the Court of Appeal decision in
      K, she could not have found a breach of Article 3 for the reasons  she
      did.  The Court of Appeal have since given their decision in N.  It is
      clear that the Adjudicator was wrong to allow the Article 3 claim  for
      the reasons she did.

19.   However, it is now being maintained on behalf of the  respondent  that
      if she is returned to Jamaica there is a strong  likelihood  that  she
      will be subjected to discrimination and stigmatism and also a risk  of
      violence. It is deplorable in this day and age that  people  suffering
      with AIDS should face discrimination. However, we noted from paragraph
      5.89 that in  2001,  the  Jamaica  National  AIDS  Committee  proposed
      changing some twenty laws that, activists said, discriminated  against
      people affected by HIV/AIDS.  The head of Jamaica  AID  Support  said,
      'The proposals are about the sanction of  the  Public  Health  Act  to
      cover care, support and prevention of HIV AIDS. It is about  care  and
      support for those with the disease and prevention for those  without.'
      It is clear that the government are aware of  the  discrimination  and
      stigmatisation suffered by people with  AIDS  and  it  is  clear  from
      paragraphs 5.91 and 5.92, that the government are trying to take steps
      to remove the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS virus. There clearly has
      been violence directed against individuals suspected, or known  to  be
      homosexuals and violence and discrimination against people living with
      HIV/AIDS. However, on return to Jamaica, there is no reason why anyone
      should become aware of the respondent's illness. She will need to seek
      medical assistance, but there is no credible evidence before  us  that
      having done so, it is likely to become public knowledge  that  she  is
      suffering from HIV.   We do not accept that the  respondent's  removal
      from the United Kingdom will therefore breach her rights under Article
      3.

21.   So far as her rights under Article 8 are  concerned.  The  Adjudicator
      really should have dealt with the respondent's claim using the step-by-
      step approach recommended  by  the  Tribunal  in  Nhundu  and  Chiwera
      (01/TH/00613).  Had she done so, she might well have  concluded  that,
      given that her siblings and her daughter were  all  over  the  age  of
      twenty-one, in the absence of any other evidence, it could not be said
      that she enjoys any family life (Kugathas v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2003] INLR 170).   However,  the  respondent  clearly
      does enjoy a private life in the United Kingdom.  It is clear that  on
      the respondent's removal there will be an interference with her family
      life.  Such  interference  pursues  the  legitimate  aim  and  is   in
      accordance with the law.  The question is whether such interference is
      proportionate.

22.   The Adjudicator was clearly of the view that had it not been  for  the
      respondent's  medical  condition  she  would  have  found   that   the
      respondent's removal would be proportionate.  At  paragraph  6.10  she
      said:

             'Against this, I accept that  her  criminal  offences,  though
             each one may  be  relatively  minor,  cannot  cumulatively  be
             dismissed as of little weight. It appears from her record that
             she has been  offending  persistently  since  before  she  was
             granted indefinite leave to remain and her  evidence  suggests
             that, although she has only one conviction for  possession  of
             drugs, she has in fact been using them regularly. Were it  not
             for her medical condition, I would  uphold  the  [appellant's]
             decision, but the fact, now  confirmed  by  medical  evidence,
             that she  has  HIV   and  without  the  drug  therapy  she  is
             receiving would quickly revert to having full blown AIDS, does
             in my  judgment  require  a  complete  re-assessment   of  the
             balance between what, for shorthand, I will  call  the  public
             and the private interest.   This exercise the [appellant]  did
             not carry out.  I find that the combination of her illness and
             its needs, the length of time she has been in the UK, and  the
             presence of her family  here,  together  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deporting her, both under  the  Immigration  Rules
             and under Article 3 ECHR'.

23.   At paragraph 28, of M (Croatia) * [2004]  UKIAT  00024,  the  Tribunal
      said:


             'The  starting  point  should  be  that   even   if   in   the
             circumstances the removal  could  reasonably  be  regarded  as
             proportionate, whether or  not  the  Secretary  of  State  has
             actually said so or applied his  mind  to  the  issue,  it  is
             lawful.  The Tribunal and the Adjudicator should regard Shala,
             Edore and Djali as  providing  clear  exemplification  of  the
             limits of  what  is  lawful  and  proportionate.  They  should
             normally hold that a decision to remove is unlawful only  when
             the disproportion is so great that no reasonable Secretary  of
             State could remove in those circumstances. However, where  the
             Secretary of State, e.g. through a consistent  decision-making
             pattern or through decisions in relation to the  same  family,
             has  clearly  shown  where,  within  the  range  of   sensible
             responses  his  own  assessment  would  lie,   it   would   be
             inappropriate to assess  proportionality  by  reference  to  a
             wider range of possible responses than he in  fact  uses.   It
             would  otherwise  have  to  be  a  truly   exceptional   case,
             identified and reasoned, which would  justify  the  conclusion
             that  the  removal  decision  was  unlawful  by  reference  to
             assessment  that  removals  in   the   range   of   reasonable
             assessments are proportionality. We cannot  think  of  one  at
             present; it is  simply  that  we  cannot  rule  it  out.  This
             decision is starred for what we  say  about  proportionality.'
             (Our emphasis)

24.   We find, so far as the respondent's  Article  8  claim  is  concerned,
      that the decision to remove  the  respondent  is  lawful,  because  it
      cannot be said that the disproportion is so great that  no  reasonable
      Secretary of State could remove the respondent in the circumstances.

25.   So far as her appeal under paragraph 364 is concerned,  we  note  what
      the Adjudicator said in  paragraph  6.2.   Towards  the  end  of  that
      paragraph she said:

             "She is subject to regular weekly medical  monitoring  and  as
             long as that continues (which  it  will  for  the  foreseeable
             future if she remains in the UK)  I  find  that  she  is  most
             unlikely to re-offend.  She also says that  she  is  receiving
             counselling and is due  to  receive  treatment  for  her  drug
             addiction. I find that the effect upon her of knowing that she
             has a life threatening illness and of regular contact with the
             medical establishment, makes it unlikely,  in  the  particular
             circumstances of this case that the [respondent] will continue
             to offend."

26.   Neither we, nor the Adjudicator, have been supplied  with  a  copy  of
      the pre-sentence report that would have been prepared  in  respect  of
      the respondent before she was sentenced on 14 April 2003, to a term of
      six months imprisonment. In paragraph 6.1 of  the  determination,  the
      Adjudicator had noted the respondent's previous convictions and  noted
      that the offence of assaulting a police constable in the execution  of
      her duty, was far from being the most serious kind of  violence.   She
      noted that the only other offence  of  violence  in  the  respondent's
      record, was a charge of occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  which  was
      ordered to lie on the file in June 2001.  The  only  drugs  conviction
      against the respondent was in February  1991.  The  Adjudicator  noted
      that the respondent had been fined on two occasions for possession  of
      an offensive weapon, cautioned once and on one occasion  sentenced  to
      six months imprisonment when, at the same time, she was also  given  a
      six months sentence for theft.  She noted that the  vast  majority  of
      her convictions were for prostitution and  loitering  and,  noted  the
      Adjudicator, were very  much  of  the  end  of  the  scale  of  sexual
      offences, as is demonstrated by the  sentences  imposed  which,  apart
      from two cases, were all  fines.   While  individually,  none  of  the
      offences would justify the making of a deportation order, when  viewed
      cumulatively, they may very well do.

27.   However, the Tribunal notes with some alarm that,  since  having  been
      diagnosed as suffering from chronic HIV disease,  the  respondent  has
      again been convicted of prostitute loitering, this time on 14  January
      2003.  Her representative agreed that this was an offence committed by
      the respondent after she had been advised of her illness.  It  appears
      to the Tribunal, therefore, that, contrary to the view  taken  by  the
      Adjudicator  in  paragraph  6.2  of  the  determination,  given   that
      subsequent conviction, it cannot be said that the respondent 'is  most
      unlikely to re-offend'.  The Adjudicator was clearly wrong in reaching
      that assessment, because she had  failed  to  take  into  account  the
      respondent's conviction after  her  illness  was  diagnosed:  she  had
      already re-offended.

28.   Paragraph 364 of HC 395 says:

            '364  [subject  to  paragraph  380]  In   considering   whether
                 deportation is the  right  course  on  the  merits,  public
                 interest  will  be  balanced  against   any   compassionate
                 circumstances  of  the  case.   While  each  case  will  be
                 considered in the light of  the  particular  circumstances,
                 the aim is an exercise of the power of deportation which is
                 consistent and fair as  between  one  person  and  another,
                 although one case will rarely be identical with another  in
                 all material respects.  [In the cases detailed in paragraph
                 363A] Deportation will normally be the proper course  where
                 a person has failed to comply with  or  has  contravened  a
                 condition or remained without authority.  Before a decision
                 to deport is reached, the Secretary of State will take into
                 account all relevant factors known to him including:


                 (1)(a)(ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;


                 (iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom


                 (iv) personal history, including  character,  conduct  and
                 employment records


                 (v) domestic circumstances;


                 (vi) previous criminal record and the major of any offence
                 for which the person has been convicted;


                 (vii) compassionate circumstances


                 (viii) any representations received on a person's behalf.'


29.    The  respondent's  propensity  to  re-offend  is  a  matter  that  is
      relevant,  but  of  course,  it  is  only  one  matter  that  must  be
      considered.  We take into account the fact  that  the  respondent  has
      been in the United Kingdom since 1988 and that her son, Ray,  who  was
      born in 1976, is in the United Kingdom.  We  bear  in  mind  that  the
      respondent's granddaughter, Menisha live in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      that the respondent cares for her while her father is  at  work  while
      her own mother is undergoing therapy.  We note also that three of  the
      respondent's sisters live in the United Kingdom,  as  do  two  of  her
      brothers and that she has no close family members living  in  Jamaica.
      However, looking at all the evidence in the round, we  have  concluded
      that  the  interests  of  the  public   outweigh   the   compassionate
      circumstances of the case and that deportation is the right course  on
      the merits. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.




                                                            RICHARD CHALKLEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT





Approved for electronic distribution
-----------------------
      1


