
H-AB-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 20 October 2004         |        |VH (Call Witnesses) Moldova |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00325          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|22 December 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)                                 |
|Mr J Perkins (Vice President)                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Mr I Lewis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Moldova, has been granted  permission  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr J F Pullig) promulgated on 26 January 2004 when he dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

   2. The Adjudicator summarised the Appellant's account at  paragraphs  14
      to 19 of his determination as follows:

  "14.      The  Appellant's  father  died  in  1992  he  was  shot  whilst
  attending a rally in Tiraspol.  He himself  had  been  the  leader  of  a
  pacifist group which had been a  secret  organisation  until  1992.   The
  Appellant was about 14 years old at the time.  He went into detail, quite
  unnecessary to repeat here, about the history of those  who  had  opposed
  fighting and about his father's involvement in helping soldiers deserting
  from the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh.  He referred to the civil  war  in
  Moldova and the issues that remain unresolved after twelve years.  These,
  he said, often lead to human  rights  abuses  by  the  authorities.   The
  Appellant then elaborated upon  his  uncle's  position  and  how  he  was
  assassinated in 1994 by a sniper "probably with  the  connivance  of  the
  authorities."

  15.       The Appellant mentions his brother, [       ], two years  older
  than the Appellant, who  he  said  was  not  mentioned  in  his  original
  statement.  That statement was  incorrect  in  showing  that  he  had  no
  brothers or sisters.  His brother was called up in  1995  and  was  never
  seen again  much  to  his  mother's  considerable  distress.   Exhaustive
  enquiries yielded nothing.  Many conscripts from  Moldova  were  sent  to
  Chechnya.

  16        The Appellant said that by the time he was  16  or  17  he  was
  attending pacifist rallies and political meetings supporting the cause of
  independence and autonomy for Moldova.  He said his father and uncle  had
  both died for their beliefs and his mother was  anxious  that  he  should
  stay clear  of  political  action.   She  thought  that  the  Appellant's
  brother's disappearance was engineered by the authorities although  there
  is no direct  evidence  of  this.   Contrary  to  her  instructions,  the
  Appellant did get involved participating  in  meetings  of  the  pacifist
  organisation and obtaining his membership  card  on  his  18th  birthday.
  This, he says, he exhibits to the appeal bundle and a photocopy of a card
  in four languages, appears there.   The  title  of  the  organisation  is
  "Pacifism Without Borders" and is stated as being issued  on  21  January
  1996.

  17        Perhaps most significantly, the Appellant  says  that  he  said
  that he received his first army call-up papers in autumn of 1996.  He was
  determined to stick to his principles and refuse to  serve.   His  mother
  was against his stand; she did not know where  it  would  all  end.   She
  wanted the Appellant to study at the  university  but  unless  he  had  a
  military identification  document  showing  that  he  had  done  military
  service he could not obtain an identification card and thus could not get
  into university.

  18        At the beginning of 1997 the number of rallies  was  fewer  but
  the Appellant  still  attended  meetings  organised  by  pacifists.   The
  Appellant continued to get call-up  papers  twice  a  year  but  did  not
  respond.  Everyone knew that if he went to the military office they would
  pay no attention to his pacifist views and if he asked to do  alternative
  military service he would have to pay a huge  bribe  to  even  have  them
  consider it.  The Appellant said that he had never heard  of  anyone  who
  had  managed  to  do  alternative  service  simply  on  the  grounds   of
  conscience.  In other words everyone who did had to pay a  large  sum  by
  way of a bribe to the recruiting officer.

  19  At the time the Appellant was living away from home moving from place
  to place so the authorities could not catch  up  with  him.   His  mother
  would tell him to stay away when he telephoned because  the  military  or
  the police or sometimes both together frequently came to  look  for  him.
  He then referred to the summonses which showed that he had  not  complied
  with his  call-up  and  the  prosecutor's  summons  showed  that  he  had
  committed an offence.  If he had answered  the  prosecutor's  summons  he
  would end up in prison on remand and he feared what would happen  to  him
  if he were to return to Moldova.  It would be unlikely he  would  survive
  prison as conditions are notoriously bad.  The judges are very corrupt so
  even if he were to plead not guilty because of his  conscience  he  would
  not be successful in defending his position unless he bribed the judge as
  well.  There is no real right to alternative service on  the  grounds  of
  personal convictions and  any  such  right  is  purely  illusory."   (Our
  emphasis).




   3. At the outset of the hearing Mr Blundell raised a preliminary matter.
       He was mindful that the Vice President, Mr S L Batiste  had  granted
      permission to appeal  in  the  light  of  the  report  of  Dr  Robert
      Chenciner.  The Vice President's grant of  permission  was  dated  15
      April 2004 and therefore predated the promulgation of the decision of
      the Tribunal (20 July 2004) in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.   Further  Dr
      Chenciner's report post dated the hearing before the Adjudicator  and
      the promulgation of his decision.

   4.  We  observed  that  in  CA,  it  was  held  that  any  Adjudicator's
      determination promulgated after 9 June 2003 may be  appealed  to  the
      Tribunal  only  pursuant  to  Section  101(1)  of   the   Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on a point of law.

   5. Section 101(1) states:

  "A party to an appeal to an Adjudicator under Section 82 or 83, may  with
  the permission of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, appeal to the Tribunal
  against  the  Adjudicator's  determination  on  a  point  of  law.    The
  Tribunal's functions plainly confined to appeals on law only.

   6. Lord Justice Laws who gave the leading judgment observed:

  "An appeal cannot be allowed unless the  IAT  distinctly  hold  that  the
  Adjudicator has perpetrated a mistake of law.  No  doubt  it  must  be  a
  material error of law...once a material error of law is shown, I  for  my
  part would accept that the IAT must then decide what, if  any  relief  to
  grant in the light of the facts arising at the time it is considering the
  case..."

   7. Laws LJ later in his judgment continued as follows:

  "I add  this.   It  may  be  perfectly  possible  to  conclude  that  the
  Adjudicator was wrong on  the  merits.   Such  a  conclusion  might  have
  justified overturning his decision  under  the  earlier  wider  Appellate
  jurisdiction.  But the jurisdiction under Section 101 forbids in  effect,
  the IAT deciding the merits itself unless it  first  concludes  that  the
  Adjudicator's decision cannot stand because it is marred by an  error  of
  law".

   8. Mr Lewis referred us to Section 102(2) namely:

  "In reaching their decision on an appeal under Section 101, the  Tribunal
  may consider evidence about any matter which they think relevant  to  the
  Adjudicator's  decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a  matter
  arising after the Adjudicator's decision".

   9. On that basis, Mr Lewis argued the Tribunal were entitled to consider
      the report.

  10.  We  did  not  share  his  view  and  pointed  out  that   upon   our
      interpretation of the judgment, it was apparent that the  application
      of Section 102(2) only applied in circumstances  where  the  Tribunal
      indeed had first concluded that the Adjudicator's decision was marred
      by an error of law.

  11. Mr Blundell most fairly clarified that he had been given a copy of Dr
      Chenciner's report and had taken  the  opportunity  to  consider  it.
      Notwithstanding his reservations he did not in  principle  object  to
      its introduction.  We therefore gave permission  for  Dr  Chenciner's
      report to be tendered in evidence.

  12. However in so doing, we made it clear to the parties that in deciding
      to hear Mr Lewis' submissions in relation to Dr  Chenciner's  report,
      it was not to be taken that we had necessarily decided that there was
      a material error of law by the Adjudicator.  It was simply  the  case
      that we were mindful of Mr Lewis' wish to raise submissions to us  to
      demonstrate that the Adjudicator had failed to  appreciate  that  the
      summons to the prosecutor's office (to which the Adjudicator had made
      reference  at  paragraph  19  of  his  determination)  may  have  had
      materially different consequences to the general call-up papers.

  13. It had occurred to us that the summons  to  the  prosecutor's  office
      showed the start of a criminal process and that the Appellant was  no
      longer  simply  a  draft  evader  but  an  absconder   for   criminal
      investigation.

  14. We were further mindful that it was Mr Lewis' preliminary  submission
      that in order for us to determine whether the Adjudicator had made  a
      material error of law the report of Dr Chenciner, in his  view  would
      reinforce Mr Lewis' submissions that the Adjudicator did indeed err.

  15. The Tribunal, having considered all of  the  arguments  and  material
      before us  find  that  the  Adjudicator  did  appreciate  that  these
      documents were profoundly different  in  character  but  nevertheless
      concluded on the evidence before him that the Appellant  was  not  at
      risk.

  16. The Adjudicator did not have clear and persuasive evidence about  the
      importance of the summons to the prosecutor's office.

  17. We repeat the observation that Dr Chenciner's report was  not  before
      the Adjudicator.

  18. Ground 9 seeks to support its  introduction  now,  on  the  basis  of
      Section 102(2) of the 2002 Act but we reject that submission for  the
      reasons above stated.

  19. Ground 9 fails to accept that the report could have been commissioned
      at an earlier stage but submits inter alia that "such evidence should
      be admitted in the wider interests of justice."

  20. In that regard Mr Blundell rightly submitted that in CA the issue was
      that of perversity whereas in E and R the issue  related  to  further
      material showing that there had been an error.

  21. As we made clear to the parties,  a  failure  to  anticipate  further
      evidence could never be an error of law.

  22. It seemed to us, that the starting point  was  whether  there  was  a
      material error of law in terms of whether  the  Adjudicator  was  not
      entitled to reach the decision that he did.  Was there  any  evidence
      which would have led the Adjudicator to a different conclusion?

  23. As is apparent from his determination, there was no such evidence.

  24.  As  the  Adjudicator  rightly  observed  at  paragraph  40  of   his
      determination:

  "I can only determine this appeal on the basis of the evidence before me.
   I note what the Appellant says about the situation in Moldova but  I  do
  not find that this is supported by the objective evidence."

  25. Later at paragraph 43 of his determination, described by Mr Lewis  as
      the "key determining paragraph", the Adjudicator continued:

  "Therefore whilst I accept that the Appellant will have to answer to  his
  call-up and to the summons of failing to do so in the past, there  is  no
  evidence that a result of that  might  not  be  that  he  simply  has  to
  undertake alternative service.  There is no  indication  in  any  of  the
  objective evidence to any  punishment  that  the  Appellant  may  receive
  failing to do so thus  far  and  the  Home  Office  Country  Assessment's
  comments upon draft evasion generally indicates the authorities  are  lax
  in pursuing it".  (Our emphasis).

  26. It is abundantly clear to us  therefore,  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      entirely mindful of the distinction to be drawn from the  summons  to
      the prosecutor's office and concluded on the evidence before  him  or
      indeed lack of it, that there was nothing to suggest that "the result
      of that might not be that he  simply  has  to  undertake  alternative
      service".

  27. We are satisfied the Adjudicator's approach does not  suggest  as  Mr
      Lewis has  contended,  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  failing  to
      appreciate that the Appellant had been  summonsed.   When  one  reads
      page 13 of the  determination  as  a  whole  it  is  clear  that  the
      Adjudicator did not fail to appreciate that the summons existed.

  28. Indeed earlier at paragraph 38 the Adjudicator had noted that:

  "Although the call-up  documents,  both  the  military  summons  and  the
  summons by  the  Ministry  of  Interior,  appeared  to  be  poor  quality
  documents I am prepared to accept that these are what they purport to  be
  and that the Appellant remains liable for military service and  may  well
  be the subject of some attention by the authorities  for  not  performing
  it".  (Our emphasis).

  29. Thereafter at paragraph  43  it  is  apparent  that  the  Adjudicator
      accepted that the Appellant would have to answer to the  call-up  and
      to the summons for failing to do so  in  the  past.   However  as  Mr
      Blundell rightly submitted, the Adjudicator had considered these  two
      issues and had answered them by reference  to  a  lack  of  evidence.
      There were indeed at least five references made  by  the  Adjudicator
      within his determination that made  it  clear  this  was  indeed  his
      reasoning.

  30. At  paragraph  39,  the  Adjudicator  referred  to  an  Adjudicator's
      determination placed before him in  Potramba  that  arose  out  of  a
      hearing  in  November  2000  some  three   years   previously.    The
      Adjudicator continued:

  "Before the Adjudicator in that case was documentation from War Resisters
  International.   There  is  no  such  documentation  before  me".    (Our
  emphasis).

  31. Later at paragraph 39 the Adjudicator continued:

  "There are two points  to  mention.   First  the  Adjudicator  based  his
  decision on evidence not before me, and secondly it was an asylum  appeal
  and the Adjudicator accepted the Appellant's political beliefs".

  32. It was in that context, that  the  Adjudicator  began  the  following
      paragraph 40 by stating "I can only  determine  this  appeal  on  the
      basis of the evidence before me".

  33. Whilst at paragraph 41 of his determination it is apparent to us that
      the  Adjudicator  accepted  that   prison   conditions   in   Moldova
      constituted inhuman and degrading treatment contrary to Article 3  of
      the ECHR, he was not satisfied that there was any evidence to suggest
      that anything further  would  happen  to  the  Appellant  to  suggest
      punishment that he would be incarcerated.  Indeed at paragraph 43 the
      Adjudicator concluded:

  "There is  no  indication  in  any  of  the  objective  evidence  to  any
  punishment the Appellant may receive failing to do so thus  far  and  the
  Home Office Country Assessment's comments upon  draft  evasion  generally
  indicates the authorities are lax in pursuing it".

  34. The Adjudicator continued at paragraph 4 "For these reasons,  I  find
      the Appellant has not satisfied me that he would be compelled  to  do
      military service and would suffer imprisonment if he failed to do  so
      or because he has failed to do so in the past".

  35. Notably and rightly the Adjudicator  concluded  at  paragraph  44  by
      stating:

  "The burden is on him to do that and he has  not  discharged  it.   As  a
  consequence I find that he is not at  risk  of  treatment  prohibited  by
  Article 3".

  36. We now turn to the report of Dr Robert Chenciner.

  37. Dr Chenciner raises matters within his report that do concern us  but
      as he clearly indicates he has been heavily reliant on a source  that
      he asks us not to name and whose objectivity we cannot  test.   Also,
      he does not explain to our satisfaction why it is appropriate to rely
      on his knowledge  of  Russian  criminal  law  rather  than  obtain  a
      translation of the Moldovan code, to which he makes reference.

  38. We are not suggesting that Dr Chenciner's report was prepared in  bad
      faith or that he should never be relied upon as an expert, but we are
      not able to accept that his report on Moldova is in any  way  helpful
      in the circumstances.

  39. Although it is self evident, for the above reasons that this is not a
      determination we consider to be suitable for country guidance we take
      this opportunity to make a general observation.

  40. When parties realise that the  Tribunal  may  be  considering  giving
      country guidance, they should think very carefully about applying  to
      call oral evidence as it will be the kind of case where the  Tribunal
      may be assisted by hearing oral evidence properly  tested  by  cross-
      examination.

  41. However in the case of Dr Chenciner's report before  us,  there  were
      aspects  of  it  which  caused  us  particular  concern  that  in  an
      appropriate situation he may have been able to resolve  had  he  been
      called to give oral evidence.

  42. In this regard we found Mr Blundell's observations  persuasive.   His
      specific criticisms of the report comprised:

      Lack of focus.

      Reliance on outdated material.

      An assumption that Russian laws were the same as those in Moldova.

      The  reliance  on  a  source  without  sufficient  detail  about  the
      objectivity of that source.

      The very slight detail about  that  source  in  comparison  with  the
      details given by Dr Chenciner of his CV.

  43. It suffices for the purposes of this determination, if  we  exemplify
      our concerns as to the reliability of this report by referring to the
      second paragraph at page 5 in which Dr Chenciner states:

  "The Moldovan criminal  and  procedural  codes  are  available  from  the
  Institut de Reforme Penale (IRP) but un-translated from Moldovan,  so  it
  is valid to briefly examine the parallel laws in Russia about alternative
  military service and the penalties for desertion, which are likely to  be
  similar  in  form,  content  and  application".   (Our  underlining   and
  emphasis).

  44. As Mr  Blundell  rightly  observed,  the  report  was  available  and
      therefore it begged the question as to why Dr Chenciner did not  seek
      to have the IRP report translated.  We would agree with  Mr  Blundell
      that Dr Chenciner's failure to  do  so  raised  questions  about  his
      methodology.

  45. Subsequently at page 6 of  his  report,  Dr  Chenciner  continued  as
      follows:

  "Accordingly in Appendix 5, there is a detailed description of  the  fake
  Russian system of alternative service that is parallel to the  system  in
  Moldova...".

  46. This clear contradiction  only  serves  to  demonstrate  further  the
      flawed methodology in Dr Chenciner's  report,  when  he  had  in  his
      possession  an  un-translated  Moldovan  report.   It  was  therefore
      accessible to him for translation but instead he sought to suggest by
      reference to the Russian criminal code that it represented a parallel
      system to that in existence in Moldova.

  47. Mr Lewis made reference to the  Adjudicator's  observations  and  his
      consideration of the CIPU Country  Assessment  of  October  2003  and
      repeated in the subsequent April 2004 report at paragraph  5.47  that
      included reference to the fact that the  pursuance  by  the  Moldovan
      authorities of draft evaders was not considered to be a priority.

  48. Mr Lewis submitted that laxity did not mean that no one was  pursued.
      Accordingly the reference in the CIPU report did not safely found the
      submission  to  the  effect  that  the  issue  of  a  summons  to  an
      investigator's office showed a general laxity so that there would  be
      no punishment.  He submitted it would appear far more likely that the
      passage averted to the many who did not respond to  call-up  but  who
      were not subsequently summoned.  It was  not  a  priority  to  pursue
      them.

  49. However, the Appellant was in Mr Lewis's submission, clearly  someone
      who, for whatever reason, the authorities had decided  to  pursue  so
      that the general laxity did not apply in the Appellant's case.

  50. It was however noteworthy that subsequently Mr Lewis in  response  to
      Mr Blundell's submissions accepted that there was  no  evidence  that
      being called to the Moldovan investigator's office was unusual and he
      agreed  with  us  that  the  suggestion  the  Appellant  was  someone
      specifically targeted "for whatever reason" was just speculation.  He
      agreed that it could not  be  said  that  this  Appellant  was  being
      treated specially in any way.

  51. Indeed Mr Lewis agreed that there was no evidence to suggest that all
      or many of those who failed to answer their call-up would  not  as  a
      matter of  course  be  subsequently  summonsed  to  the  prosecutor's
      office.

  52. In the view of the Tribunal, the Adjudicator evaluated this appeal in
      a very careful and comprehensive way and reached findings  that  were
      properly  open  to  him   on   the   evidence.    The   Adjudicator's
      determination discloses no material error of law.

  53. It follows that we find there to be no proper basis  upon  which  the
      Tribunal should reverse or set aside those findings.

  54. The appeal is therefore dismissed.







                                                               N H GOLDSTEIN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION

