
H-TW-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |AG (GBTS, "tab" and other   |
|                           |        |records) Turkey CG [2004]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00168                 |
|On 12 May 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|22 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane  - Vice President                                     |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                  |
|Mrs J Holt                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For the Appellant:           Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                       Wilson & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Morris, Senior Home Office Presenting
            Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals with  permission  against
    the Determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs S Kebede, sitting at Surbiton,
    in  which  she  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  the
    Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  on  21
    February 2001 to refuse to grant  the  Appellant  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant was born on 11 September 1982 and was thus aged 17 when
    he entered the United Kingdom at Dover (having embarked at  Calais)  on
    12 February 2000.

3.    The Appellant told the Adjudicator that he came  from  "a  completely
    Kurdish village in the province of K. Maras" in  Turkey.   He  used  to
    support the PKK by giving them food.  As a result, he was "beaten  many
    times by the gendarmes and was detained."  He  said  that  his  parents
    were also detained and beaten for the same reasons  and  the  gendarmes
    shot his brother in the leg during an incident in 1998 when the  father
    had been beaten up in front of the family.  After himself being  beaten
    by the gendarmes in January 2000, the Appellant  decided  to  flee  the
    country.  He said that he would receive his call-up to military service
    when he reached 19 years of age and he did not wish to do such  service
    as he was unwilling to fight  against  the  PKK  (paragraph  7  of  the
    Determination).

4.    In cross-examination, the Appellant said that his family still  lived
    in the village of K.Maras but that only four or five houses were  still
    occupied there.  "All the Kurdish people in the  Kurdish  villages  are
    suspected of being PKK supporters, as they all help the PKK  by  giving
    them food."  The Appellant decided to leave Turkey when he "became  fed
    up of the torture and pressure he received".  He considered  that  "the
    military law in the mountains [of eastern Turkey] is different  to  the
    rest of the country, as the people are treated like animals" (paragraph
    11).

5.    At paragraph 21 of  the  Determination,  the  Adjudicator  noted  the
    Appellant's  references  to   "continual   harassment,   beatings   and
    detentions of his family members and himself over a  period  of  years,
    culminating in an attack on his home and family in  1998  and  then  an
    attack on himself in January 2000.  When asked by Ms Matharoo [for  the
    Home Office] why the  gendarmes  suspected  his  family  of  being  PKK
    supporters, the appellant said that  all  the  Kurdish  people  in  the
    Kurdish villages support the PKK.  When asked again why his family were
    particularly suspected of helping the PKK, the appellant said  that  it
    was not only his family but all the  people  in  his  village  and  the
    Kurdish villages.  He said that his family helped the PKK by  providing
    food and cigarettes".

6.    At paragraph 22 the Adjudicator observed that the  description  given
    by the Appellant of assistance given by  his  family  to  the  PKK  and
    harassment suffered by the family as a  result  at  the  hands  of  the
    Turkish gendarmes was "entirely consistent with the objective  evidence
    and I therefore have no doubts as to the  credibility  of  his  claim".
    The Adjudicator then went on to note that "as  the  objective  evidence
    shows and as the Appellant himself confirmed, his experiences  were  no
    different to that of the many Kurdish families living in  the  villages
    in south east Turkey.  The Appellant has never  claimed  to  have  come
    from a family involved with the  PKK  in  any  way  other  than  simply
    assisting them by providing basic supplies.  He has  never  claimed  to
    have had any involvement in politics other than his support for the PKK
    and he has never claimed to have been of  particular  interest  to  the
    authorities over and above any other  Kurdish  villager  in  the  area.
    Whilst he claims that his father was detained on several occasions  and
    that he himself experienced  detention,  he  never  claimed  that  such
    detentions were anything other than routine detentions by the gendarmes
    on the basis simply of being a Kurdish villager".

7.    At paragraph 23, the Adjudicator noted what (as at 11 September  2002
    when the appeal was heard) was the evidence from the most  recent  Home
    Office CIPU Report on Turkey.  The  Appellant's  "own  province  of  K.
    Maras is referred to as suffering from the  brutality  of  the  Turkish
    forces.  However, following the capture of Okalan [the  leader  of  the
    PKK] in 1999, PKK fighters withdrew from Turkey at the  end  of  August
    1999 and the number of armed confrontations in the south east  declined
    considerably".  Having been almost completely inactive in 2000, the PKK
    on 16 April 2002 announced that it had ceased activities and  regrouped
    as KADEK.  The Adjudicator considered that the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant of his family's problems at the hands of  the  gendarmes  was
    "consistent with the heightened tension  at  that  time  (i.e.  1993  -
    1998).  The Adjudicator considered that the beating in January 2000 was
    "a  more  isolated  incident  rather  than  the  regular  beatings  and
    detentions prior to the cessation of the PKK's activities".

8.     At  paragraph  24,  the  Adjudicator  considered  that,  whilst  the
    treatment meted out to the Appellant's family prior to 1998 amounted to
    persecution on the basis of Kurdish ethnicity, along with all the other
    Kurdish families in the villages in the area, she found that "the risks
    of  continued  persecution  abated  with   the   cessation   of   PKK's
    activities".  Finding that the Appellant was  "no  longer  at  risk  of
    persecution on the basis of his ethnicity nor on the basis of any links
    with the PKK when he left Turkey and that he would no longer be at risk
    now", the Adjudicator concluded that "the  Appellant's  departure  from
    Turkey at this time was motivated by an avoidance of  military  service
    rather than fears of persecution".

9.    At paragraph 25, the Adjudicator considered that the Appellant  would
    not on return be viewed as a  suspected  separatist  on  the  basis  of
    records of previous events and detentions.  These detentions,  together
    with those of the Appellant's father, were in  the  Adjudicator's  view
    "no more than routine detentions to establish links to the PKK and  the
    fact that neither were detained for any  considerable  amount  of  time
    indicates that the authorities had no particular interest in  them  and
    did  not  consider  them  to  be  linked  to  the  separatists."    The
    Adjudicator therefore found "that the Turkish authorities would have no
    interest in the Appellant and that he could safely return to  his  home
    area".

10.   In any event, the Adjudicator found at paragraph 26  that,  were  the
    Appellant not able to return to his home area, it would not  be  unduly
    harsh to expect him to relocate outside south east Turkey, such  as  in
    Istanbul "where there are  large  Kurdish  communities  and  where  the
    Kurdish people no longer experience discrimination".   The  Adjudicator
    referred to the CIPU Report at paragraph 5.103 and 5.105 as noting that
    Kurds were integrated and assimilated into  Turkish  society  and  that
    outside south east Turkey Kurds do not usually  suffer  persecution  or
    even bureaucratic discrimination, provided that they do not publicly or
    politically assert a Kurdish ethnic identity.  Given that the Appellant
    was "a young, healthy male who has managed  to  make  his  way  to  and
    reside in a new country with a  different  culture  and  language"  she
    considered that he would be able to establish himself in a city such as
    Istanbul.

11.   At paragraph 27 the Adjudicator  felt  unable  to  place  significant
    weight on the psychiatric report on the Appellant, which stated he  was
    suffering from chronic post traumatic stress disorder, given that  this
    conclusion "was based upon  a  2-hour  assessment  and  also  upon  the
    Appellant's own description of his feelings rather than a more  lengthy
    and objective assessment".  In any event, the  Adjudicator  noted  that
    there  were  adequate  facilities  available   in   Turkey   to   treat
    psychological problems.

12.   At paragraph 28 of the Determination the Adjudicator  considered  the
    question of risk on arrival at the airport in Istanbul, in the light of
    her findings of fact.  Noting that the  CIPU  Report  stated  that  the
    Turkish police could question any deported citizen upon arrival at  the
    airport, she also observed that in general there  was  said  to  be  no
    follow-up unless a returnee was  subject  to  legal  proceedings.   The
    Adjudicator found that in  the  present  case  the  Appellant  was  not
    subject to such proceedings.  The  report  went  on  to  indicate  that
    undocumented returnees were generally not being maltreated whilst being
    kept  in  custody  unless  they  were   suspected   separatists.    The
    Adjudicator found that the Appellant was not  a  suspected  separatist.
    She found it "unlikely that the Appellant's family's  history  will  be
    recorded, given that it  is  no  different  to  that  of  most  Kurdish
    families living in Kurdish villages in south east Turkey  and  even  if
    such records did exist, I find no reason to  suggest  that  they  would
    lead to any further interest in the Appellant ".

13.   As for military service, the Adjudicator stated at  paragraph  29  of
    the Determination that the  Appellant  had  not  claimed  to  have  yet
    received any call up papers, notwithstanding that his evidence was that
    he had been in contact with his family, since arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, even if he had failed to register for such  service,
    the CIPU Report stated that  people  who  had  evaded  registration  or
    examination  or  failed  to  report  were  regularly   released   after
    questioning and instructed to report  to  their  military  registration
    office within a few days.  Usually, even if a person receives a  prison
    sentence for evasion, that sentence is generally commuted into a  fine.
    The Adjudicator rejected the submission put forward by Mr Hodgetts,  on
    behalf of the Appellant, that any questioning he would receive  due  to
    his evasion of registration would put him at risk.   This  was  on  the
    basis of the  Adjudicator's  findings  "that  he  is  otherwise  of  no
    interest to the authorities".

14.   The grounds of appeal assert that the Adjudicator's categorisation of
    the  2000  beating  of  the  Appellant  as  an  isolated  incident  was
    irrational, that her finding that the Appellant was of no  interest  to
    the authorities was perverse and that her overall finding that he would
    not be perceived as a suspected separatist was  also  irrational.   The
    grounds further  complain  that  the  Adjudicator's  treatment  of  the
    psychiatric evidence was perverse and cursory and that she   failed  to
    take into account the written evidence of Ms Sheri Laizer of 14 January
    2002;  in particular, the Appellant's accepted links with the PKK would
    be sufficient to put him at real risk on return.

15.   The Adjudicator is criticised for finding that  the  beating  of  the
    Appellant in January 2000 was an isolated incident.  The Tribunal  does
    not agree.  Paragraph 17 of the Appellant's statement (bundle, page 30)
    says that "after this incident in 1998, I was beaten  up  regularly  by
    the gendarmes.  They would beat me with truncheons and with the back of
    the rifle in my stomach and my chest.  It was because I was  young  and
    it was a way to try to intimate me".  Paragraph  18  then  begins  "the
    last time that I was beaten was in January 2000.  I was in the  village
    and the gendarmes saw me and started to hit me with truncheons.  It was
    snowing and then they kicked me and dragged  me  on  the  snow  in  the
    village.  After this incident I realised that I was not safe and I  had
    to flee.  I wanted to stay in the village but they pushed me out.   Due
    to my age I knew that I would be regularly tortured and persecuted".

16.   There is nothing in paragraph 17 of the statement  that  compels  the
    conclusion that the regular beatings described there continued right up
    to January 2000.  In particular, there is  nothing  that  suggests  the
    Adjudicator was wrong to infer that the events  involving  the  PKK  of
    1999, described at  paragraph  23  of  the  Determination,  would  have
    generated  the  level  of  interest  in  the  Kurdish  village  of  the
    Appellant, on the part of the authorities.

17.   In any event, whether or not the Adjudicator was  right  to  describe
    the incident of January 2000 as an isolated one, this does not  vitiate
    her overall findings.

18.   The Tribunal also rejects the submission on behalf of the  Appellant,
    that the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  at  paragraphs  21  and  22  of  the
    Determination to view the ill-treatment of the Appellant and his father
    as no more than the sort of problems which Kurdish families in general,
    living in the villages of south-east Turkey, were experiencing  at  the
    hands of the authorities at the relevant time.  However  the  Appellant
    may have chose  to  put  the  matter  in  his  written  statement,  the
    Adjudicator was plainly entitled as a matter of  law  to  place  weight
    upon the way in which he had put his case in his oral evidence to  her.
    There is no indication that the Adjudicator, at paragraphs 21  and  22,
    has mis-stated the way in which that oral evidence was given.

19.   The Adjudicator dealt with risk on return to the airport in  Istanbul
    at paragraph 28 of her Determination and this is a matter upon which we
    heard detailed submissions from Mr Hodgetts.

20.   Upon the documentary evidence available to her at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, the Adjudicator concluded, as we already observed, that it was
    unlikely the Appellant's family's history would be recorded "given that
    it is no different to that of  most  Kurdish  families  living  in  the
    Kurdish villages in south-east Turkey".  On that evidence, the Tribunal
    is satisfied that the Adjudicator was entitled to her conclusion.

21.   In the October 2003 CIPU Report on Turkey, new information emerged on
    the precise scope of the Central Computer Information System, known  as
    the  GBTS,  said  to  be  operated  by  the  Turkish   authorities   at
    international airports.  That information was analysed by the  Tribunal
    in the case of O (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT  00038.   What  was  significant
    about the information regarding the GBTS considered in the  case  of  O
    and, indeed, the present case, is that it appears that  the  GBTS  does
    not contain a record of someone who has merely  been  detained  by  the
    gendarmerie, without being formally arrested or charged.

22.   Mr Hodgetts submitted that the information now  found  at  paragraphs
    6.240 to 6.242 of the April 2004 CIPU Report  on  Turkey  was,  in  its
    earlier form in the October 2003 Report, not considered by the Tribunal
    in O and that as a result, the conclusions of the Tribunal in that case
    cannot be relied upon.

23.   In fact, the relevant materials (referring to a Netherlands Report of
    January 2002) were  expressly  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  O  at
    paragraphs 39 to 46 of the Determination  in  that  case.  Furthermore,
    there is no substance in Mr Hodgetts's submission that the reference at
    (what is now) paragraph 6.241 of the CIPU Report to checks  on  whether
    there is a criminal investigation by the gendarma against the returnee,
    in some way is  incompatible  with  the  information  now  set  out  at
    paragraphs 5.49 to 5.53  of  the  April  2004  report,  concerning  the
    information that is held on the GBTS system.

24.   On return  to  Turkey,  the  Appellant  will  be  questioned  by  the
    immigration authorities.  They will, it is accepted  by  both  parties,
    have access to the GBTS system.  If the Appellant's name does not occur
    on that system, then the likelihood of the Appellant ending up  in  the
    offices of the  anti-terror  branch  (where  torture  of  suspects  is,
    regrettably, likely) must, in  the  Tribunal's  view,  be  regarded  as
    remote.

25.   Paragraphs 5.54 to 5.57 of the April 2004 CIPU Assessment refer to  a
    non-governmental  organisation  called  the  Swiss   Organisation   for
    Refugees which, in a report published in  June  2003,  notes  that,  in
    addition to the GBTS system, various security forces  each  have  their
    own systems.  These include the gendarmerie  and  the  military  secret
    service.  The report concludes that "it is therefore perfectly possible
    for someone not to be listed on the central system but to be sought  by
    the anti-terrorist unit".  Paragraph  5.57  states  that  "despite  the
    absence of entries in the Central Information  System,  the  individual
    concerned might be listed on one  of  the  other  information  systems.
    This must certainly be assumed in the  case  of  individuals  who  have
    already been taken into custody by  the  police,  gendarmerie  or  some
    other branch of the security forces in the past".

26.   In paragraph 3(iii) of her latest report (bundle page  59)  Ms  Sheri
    Laizer states that at Turkey's international airports "an  individual's
    details  are  keyed  into  the  computer.   In  the  booth  where   the
    Immigration Officer sits, there  are  also  printed  lists  of  persons
    sought  by  the  state.   Taped  to  the  walls  of  the   booths   are
    photographs".

27.    The Tribunal has  no  doubt  whatsoever  but  that  the  immigration
    official at Istanbul or one of the other  international  airports  will
    have available a list of persons who are  "sought  by  the  anti-terror
    unit" or otherwise "sought by the state".  In the case  of  persons  in
    respect of whom a warrant of  arrest  has  been  issued,  the  relevant
    details will appear on the GBTS system.  In addition,  we  consider  it
    reasonably likely that individuals who are sought by the anti-terrorist
    unit or who are otherwise regarded as undesirable may well feature on a
    printed list available  to  the  immigration  official.   According  to
    paragraph 2(iii) of Ms Laizer's report, she  believes  that  her  name,
    together with certain British MPs and Lords, who  had  been  associated
    with Kurdish and Turkish refugees outside Turkey, featured on the  GBTS
    system, with the result that she was  denied  access  to  Turkey,  upon
    arriving there  in  1998.   The  weight  of  the  documentary  evidence
    regarding the GBTS, including that  of  the  Turkish  lawyer  Mr  Kanat
    (featured at pages 61 and 62 of the bundle) makes it, however, unlikely
    that these details featured on the GBTS.  It is in our view more likely
    that they were available on some printed list.   Be  that  as  it  may,
    however, the point at issue is whether this Appellant's details,  as  a
    person who had the experiences with the Turkish authorities  in  south-
    east Turkey found by the Adjudicator, would feature on the GBTS or on a
    printed list as someone sought by  the  anti-terrorist  unit.   On  the
    evidence, the Tribunal can find no reason why this should be so. As for
    being "undesirable" such as Ms Laizer was regarded as being,  there  is
    no evidence  whatsoever  that  the  Appellant,  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom, has associated himself with Kurdish affairs to the point  that
    he might have come to the attention of  any  elements  of  the  Turkish
    security services that may operate in the United Kingdom.

28.   It is also pertinent to observe that  at  paragraph  5.57  the  Swiss
    Organisation for Refugees merely notes that a person "might" be  listed
    on one of the other information systems.  Whilst the report goes on  to
    say that this must be assumed in the  case  of  individuals  "who  have
    already been taken into custody by  the  police,  gendarmerie  or  some
    other branch of the security forces", there is no reason to assume that
    the reference to people being taken into custody is to be equated  with
    the sort of informal detention which, as paragraphs 5.40 to 5.43 of the
    CIPU Report make clear, is frequently resorted  to  by  the  police  in
    Turkey,  as  opposed  to  custody  following  arrest.   In  short,  the
    information emanating from the Swiss Organisation for  Refugees  cannot
    be said to demonstrate a reasonable  likelihood  that  the  immigration
    officials at the airport will have computerised access to a record that
    would  show  that  this  Appellant  was  previously  detained  by   the
    gendarmerie  in  his  home  village  in  southeast   Turkey,   in   the
    circumstances he described to the Adjudicator.

29.   Much of Ms Laizer's report is devoted to  an  article  in  a  Turkish
    newspaper which "attracted wide public attention and  provoked  incense
    (sic) when exposing the Turkish military's (secret) plans to gather and
    maintain its own intelligence database on significant  sectors  of  the
    public  including  socially  and  politically  prominent   individuals,
    artists, actors, opposition writers, thinkers, television companies and
    radio  stations,  persons  from  ethnic  minority  groups  about  whose
    activities, economic sources, local leaders and programmes  information
    was to be gathered,  groups  whose  aims  were  not  clear,  meditation
    groups, cults, sects, high society groups,  rich  kids'  groups  etc.".
    The significance of this is, however, in the present  context  minimal.
    The plans of the Turkish military appear to be just that,  rather  than
    an already functioning system.  Furthermore, there is no reason why the
    Appellant should fall into any of the categories mentioned.

30.   The Turkish lawyer Mr Kanat, at page 62 of the bundle, is clear about
    what is accessible from the computers at the airport:-

      "The computer system at the airport does contain the GBT records - at
         times, not all of the GBT records are contained.  But,  it  should
         be noted that the records contained in  their  computers  are  the
         records contained in the GBT."


31.   The preceding paragraphs of Mr Kanat's report confirm  the  scope  of
    the GBTS, as recorded in paragraphs 5.49 to 5.53 of the April 2004 CIPU
    Report.

32.   Mr Hodgetts asked the Tribunal  to  find  that,  in  any  event,  the
    gendarmerie in the Appellant's locality would have a record of him  and
    his father, as being suspected of helping the PKK.  In this regard,  Mr
    Hodgetts referred to the Sheri Laizer report  and  Mr  Kanat's  report,
    both of which speak about what are described as "tab records".  At page
    60 of the bundle,  paragraph  3(viii),  Ms  Laizer  opines  that  these
    locally held records "will also  establish  any  political  links  with
    other family members and associates who may have come to the  attention
    of the police and security services".  She considers such records to be
    "a vital useful ongoing means of keeping  the  local  population  under
    surveillance and of monitoring their ongoing  activities,  comings  and
    goings in order to maintain the Kemalist state".

33.   Mr Kanat has this to say:-

      "However, in some cases we are aware, depending on the nature of  the
         offence/crime, even if details are  erased  from  the  system  the
         security  forces  will  have  separate  record/files.   In   daily
         language this is known as "a tab  record"  "Fis  Kaydi"  (informal
         records kept by  the  security  forces  and  anti-terror  branch).
         These records do not cause a problem for the individual  as  such,
         however should the individual be taken into  custody  for  another
         offence, the security forces will refer to this record and prepare
         a  file  in  respect  of  previous  incidents  to  file  with  the
         judiciary".


34.   It appears from this that Mr Kanat is more circumspect that Ms Laizer
    as to what might be kept on a "tab record".   It  would  appear  likely
    that only details of offences or crimes  appear  on  the  tab  records.
    However, even if one assumes that at a gendarmerie station in southeast
    Turkey a tab record will  still  exist  in  respect  of  the  Appellant
    (whether personally or by  reference  to  his  father,  or  both),  the
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  simply  does  not  show  a  reasonable
    likelihood that this information will be accessible by the  immigration
    authorities at the airport.

35.   Mr Hodgetts put forward two possible ways  in  which  the  Appellant,
    even if he did not feature on the computerised record at  the  airport,
    would nevertheless be at real risk of being handed over  to  the  anti-
    terror branch.

36.    First,  paragraph  6.242  of  the  CIPU  Report  (referring  to  The
    Netherlands Report of 2002 - see above), states that questioning of the
    Appellant will include his reasons for exiting from Turkey.   If  asked
    why he left, Mr Hodgetts suggests that the Appellant will  be  expected
    to tell the truth, namely, that he fled from the gendarmerie  who  were
    regularly beating him because they suspected he was assisting the  PKK.



  37. We have already stated that the Adjudicator was,  in  the  Tribunal's
      view, entitled to find that the Appellant was, in reality, describing
      to her no more than an instance of the general, hostile attitude that
      the Turkish authorities took towards rural Kurdish  villagers  during
      the height of the PKK terrorist campaign in the 1990s.  Indeed, as we
      have already noted, that  is  how  the  Appellant  himself  chose  to
      characterise the position in his evidence to  the  Adjudicator.   The
      Turkish authorities at the airport will manifestly be well  aware  of
      the situation in south east Turkey  during  the  state  of  emergency
      which existed in various provinces of south east Turkey but which was
      lifted in the last two remaining provinces  in  November  2002  (CIPU
      paragraph 6.301).  As 6.240 of the CIPU  Report  notes  (quoting  The
      Netherlands Report of January 2002), the Turkish authorities are also
      "aware that many citizens leave the country for economic reasons  and
      apply for asylum elsewhere.  However,  people  who  have  engaged  in
      activities abroad which the Turkish authorities regard as  separatist
      are at risk of persecution if the Turkish authorities find out".


  38. The re-grouping of the PKK as KADEK, noted by the Adjudicator in  the
      present case, was followed  by  a  decision,  recorded  at  paragraph
      6.172, in September 2003 that that organisation would end  its  four-
      year ceasefire.  However, a spokeswoman  for  the  PKK/KADEK  "stated
      that she did not expect a return to all-out conflict but instead some
      sort of low  intensity  warfare".   The  Tribunal  has  not  had  its
      attention drawn to any documentation to  show  that,  following  this
      announcement, the situation in southeast Turkey,  which  had  plainly
      been improving, has significantly deteriorated.  On the  contrary,  a
      European Commission  Report  of  November  2003  observes  that  "the
      lifting of the state of emergency had a positive psychological impact
      in the region in spite of increased tension caused by events  related
      to the Iraq war with the deployment of military  units  and  concerns
      about  possible  resurgence  of  terrorism.   Although  the  security
      situation has continued to improve in recent months, there have  been
      several armed clashes  resulting  in  casualties,  including  deaths.
      Checkpoints are still present in the area but  controls  are  scarcer
      than in the past and the military presence less  visible"  (paragraph
      6.174).  The Commission continued by noting that "as a result of  the
      improved security, an increasing number  of  cultural  manifestations
      were authorised and took place with high levels of participation.  Of
      particular  significance  was  the  celebration  of  the  Diyarbakir,
      Hakkari and Tunceli festivals.  In a few cases, however, events  were
      banned and incidents with security forces occurred.  There are  still
      reports of violation of fundamental freedoms although these are  more
      limited in scope" (paragraph 6.175).

39.   Against this background, it is highly unlikely in  reality  that  the
    Turkish authorities at the airport would  be  interested  in  the  fact
    that, over four years ago, the Appellant, in common with many others at
    the time, suffered the adverse attentions of the local gendarmerie.

40.   The Tribunal makes this finding, notwithstanding what is said  in  Dr
    Sen's medical report (bundle, pages 36 to 44).  Dr Sen  diagnosed  post
    traumatic stress disorder and depression.  He  also  recorded  what  he
    must have been told by the Appellant  was  the  latter's  distress  and
    fright upon seeing "sights of policemen and sights of Turkish  soldiers
    on television".  That report is, however, dated as long ago as 24 April
    2001.  In it, Dr Sen recommended  that  the  Appellant  should  receive
    treatment  including   the   prescription   of   anti-depressants   and
    counselling.  If he has received  such  treatment  in  the  past  three
    years, the Tribunal has not been made aware of  it.   The  Adjudicator,
    who had the benefit of seeing and hearing the Appellant give  evidence,
    makes no  reference  to  his  being  in  difficulties  in  giving  that
    evidence, notwithstanding that appearing before the  Adjudicator  would
    no doubt have been a stressful experience for him.   On  the  contrary,
    she described the Appellant at paragraph 26 of the Determination as  "a
    young, healthy male who has managed to make his way to and reside in  a
    new country with a different culture and language". In short, we do not
    accept that the Appellant's  appearance  or  likely  behaviour  at  the
    airport on return to Turkey would be such as to put him at risk  during
    questioning.

41.   The second reason why Mr Hodgetts  submits  the  Appellant  would  be
    given a much more thorough investigation on return, which could lead to
    the uncovering of local records about him, is because the Appellant  is
    "a draft evader".  There is, however, no evidence before  the  Tribunal
    that draft papers have ever been sent to the Appellant's  address.   As
    the Adjudicator records, he left Turkey before he became of an  age  to
    do compulsory military service.  In any event, paragraph 6.245  of  the
    CIPU Report has this to say on the matter:-

      "6.245     The Netherlands report on military  service  (July  20021)
         states that "if [draft evaders and deserters  are]  arrested,  the
         arresting body transfers them within a  minimum  of  48  hours  to
         their military unit.  If  the  persons  concerned  are  not  being
         prosecuted  for  (political)  offences  other  than   evasion   of
         registration/examination  or  enlistment  or  for  desertion,  the
         danger of abuse, intimidation, mistreatment or torture during  the
         interrogation or the 48-hour maximum  detention  is  very  slight.
         Persons who have  evaded  registration/examination  or  failed  to
         report are set free by the arresting body after interrogation  and
         summoned  to  appear  within  a  few  days   at   their   military
         registration office".


42.   There is no evidence to suggest that anything different would  happen
    in the present case.  Mr Hodgetts specifically  did  not  submit  that,
    during any time he might spend in the Turkish military,  the  Appellant
    would be at real risk of persecutory treatment.

43.   Accordingly, given that he is of military age, it may  well  be  that
    the Appellant, on return, would be required to undertake  his  military
    service.  If he is not, however, then the Tribunal finds that,  on  the
    evidence before it, the Appellant could return to his  home  area.   As
    the Adjudicator noted, the Appellant is in touch with his  family.   Mr
    Hodgetts's instructions (not, he was careful to emphasise, supported by
    any evidence before the Tribunal) were that the  authorities  had  been
    enquiring after the Appellant.  Even if this is  so,  however,  it  may
    well be because they want to enlist him for military service.   In  any
    event, there is no evidence before us that the father of the  Appellant
    has been recently subjected  to  ill  treatment.   Given  the  improved
    security situation in southeast Turkey, the Tribunal concludes that the
    Adjudicator was correct to find that the Appellant  could  return  home
    today.  Even if there are "tab records" on  him,  still  held  locally,
    those records would not, as Mr Kanat observes at page 62 of the bundle,
    cause him a problem  unless  he  is  taken  into  custody  for  another
    offence.

44.   If both the Adjudicator and the Tribunal are wrong about the  ability
    of the Appellant to return to his home area, and if he is not  required
    to do military service, then it is  manifest  that  he  could  relocate
    without undue hardship to another part of Turkey such as Istanbul.  The
    objective evidence records that many thousands of Kurds  live  in  that
    city.  As Mr Morris submitted, on the evidence in this case,  there  is
    no reason why the Appellant  could  not  register  with  a  Mukhtar  in
    Istanbul.  That Mukhtar may contact the Mukhtar in the Appellant's  own
    area.  However, there is no cogent evidence before the Tribunal to show
    that this would result in any "tab records" on the  Appellant  becoming
    available to the Istanbul Mukhtar, even if such records exist, nor that
    the Istanbul Mukhtar would be reasonably likely to  do  anything  about
    them.  In any event, the objective evidence shows that very many people
    choose not to register with a Mukhtar.  That has certain disadvantages,
    including limitation on access to social services, but a young  man  in
    the position of this Appellant cannot be said to be doomed to a life of
    undue harshness, should he choose not to register.

45.   Similarly, the Tribunal sees no reason in the present  case  why  the
    Appellant could not seek to obtain an  identity  card  (see  paragraphs
    6.133 to 6.136 of the CIPU Report).

46.   This appeal is dismissed.





            P R LANE
            VICE PRESIDENT
