

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |AA (Marriage _ Country of   |
|                           |        |Nationality) Somalia [2004] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00031                 |
|Date:  20 January 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 February 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|P R Lane                                                          |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Entry Clearance Officer - Pretoria                                |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances:

For the appellant: Mr M Schwenk, Counsel,  instructed  by  South  Manchester
                   Law Centre.
For the respondent:  Mr J Wyatt, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  This  determination  is  being  reported  because  it  concerns   the
      interpretation  of  paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      Tribunal finds that, where a person ('A') leaves the  country  of  her
      nationality and subsequently marries a man ('B')  in  another  country
      where A has become  habitually  resident,  B  is  not  precluded  from
      relying upon paragraph 352A in order to join A in the  United  Kingdom
      by reason only of the fact that the country in  which  A  and  B  were
      married is not the country of A's nationality, in  relation  to  which
      she has been recognised by the United Kingdom as a refugee.


   2. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia who is currently residing in South
      Africa, appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Dr O T C  Ransley,  sitting  in  Salford,  in  which  she
      dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer, Pretoria, to refuse to grant him entry clearance to
      the United Kingdom as the spouse of Mrs Fatima  Munya,  who  had  been
      granted refugee status in this country.

  3.  Although the explanatory statement refers to  the  application  being
      refused under paragraph 281(v) of the Immigration Rules, it  is  clear
      from  the  paragraph  which  appears  under  the  heading  "Background
      Information" that the Entry Clearance Officer impliedly  rejected  the
      application by reference to paragraph 352A of those Rules.

  4.  As in force at the time of the decision, rule 352A read as follows:

      "352A.      The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                 enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  a
                 refugee are that:


                 i)    the applicant is married to a person  granted  asylum
                       in the United Kingdom; and


                 ii)   the marriage did not  take  place  after  the  person
                       granted  asylum  left  the  country  of  his   former
                       habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and


                 iii)  the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection
                       by  virtue  of  Article  1F  of  the  United  Nations
                       Convention and Protocol relating  to  the  Status  of
                       Refugees if he were to seek asylum in his own  right;
                       and


                 iv)   if seeking leave to  enter,  the  applicant  holds  a
                       valid United Kingdom entry  clearance  for  entry  in
                       this capacity".


   5. The reason why paragraph 352A must in practice have  been  considered
      by the Entry Clearance Officer is that the sponsor  is  undoubtedly  a
      recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.   The  paragraph  under  the
      heading "Background Information" contains the following sentences:-

           "The  information  received  from  the  Home  Office  after  the
           appellant's interview confirms that the  appellant  and  sponsor
           had met and married in  Ethiopia  after  the  sponsor  had  fled
           Somalia to ultimately seek asylum in the  UK.   The  appellant's
           application was therefore treated as  a  settlement  application
           from the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.   The
           appellant was asked to attend a further interview  in  order  to
           clarify the relationship between himself and  the  sponsor,  and
           the ability  of  the  appellant  and  sponsor  to  maintain  and
           accommodate themselves in the  UK  without  recourse  to  public
           funds."


   6. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application, by reference  to
      paragraph 281, because he was not satisfied  that  the  parties  could
      maintain and accommodate themselves without recourse to such funds.


  7.  The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal do  not  take  issue  with  the
      finding in relation to paragraph 281.  Instead, they contend that  the
      Adjudicator was wrong to find that, in the circumstances of this case,
      the appellant failed to bring himself within paragraph 352A which,  as
      can be seen, contains no maintenance and accommodation requirement.


  8.    According to the interview record of the sponsor, undertaken by the
      Home Office in connection (it would seem) with the sponsor's claim for
      asylum in the United Kingdom, the sponsor fled Somalia for Ethiopia in
      1997.  The sponsor's interview record (prepared by the Entry Clearance
      Officer) states that he had moved to Ethiopia from  Somalia  in  1991.
      The appellant told  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  the  sponsor
      arrived there in 1993.  As the  Adjudicator  noted,  that  is  plainly
      inconsistent with what the sponsor told the Home Office.


  9.  The appellant told the Entry Clearance Officer that  he  married  the
      sponsor on 25 June 1999 in Ethiopia.  In relation to this matter,  the
      Adjudicator has this to say at paragraph 5 of her determination:


           ".... The explanatory statement recorded that no evidence of the
           marriage was before the ECO.  However, it would appear that  the
           respondent decided not to challenge the appellant's  claim  that
           he had married the sponsor in June 1999  in  Ethiopia  following
           the ECO's communication with the Home Office.   The  nature  and
           contents of such communication was not before me".


    10.     According to the appellant's interview record,  she  lived  with
      friends in Ethiopia from her arrival there  until  she  left  for  the
      United Kingdom in 2000.  Given that the fact of the marriage has  been
      accepted by the respondent in this case, we assume (and  there  is  no
      evidence to contradict this) that, from the date of  the  marriage  in
      1999 until 2000, the parties lived together where the sponsor had been
      residing prior to her marriage, namely, with the  family  in  Ethiopia
      whom she knew.

   11.      The sponsor said that she felt that she did not want to live  in
      Ethiopia because she had  nothing  there.   Accordingly,  her  husband
      collected some money and made  arrangements  with  an  agent  for  the
      sponsor to be taken abroad.  There was not enough money  for  both  to
      travel together.

  12. There is little information as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
      sponsor claimed, and was granted, asylum in the United  Kingdom,  save
      that there is before us a copy of a letter dated 30 July 2000 from the
      Home Office to  the  sponsor,  stating  that  she  has  "been  granted
      indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  refugee  recognised
      under the 1951 United Nations Convention relating  to  the  Status  of
      Refugees and its 1967 Protocol.  This means that you are free to  stay
      in this country permanently".

  13. After the departure  of  the  sponsor  for  the  United  Kingdom,  the
      appellant appears to have lived in a refugee camp in Ethiopia but  the
      time came when "the refugee agency could not help us any  more  so  we
      left"  (first  interview,  question  16).   The  appellant   travelled
      directly to South Africa, arriving there in July 2001.

  14. According  to  the  answer  to  question  5  of  that  interview,  the
      appellant considers himself to be a "refugee" in South Africa.  He is,
      however, not legally permitted to work, although  he  buys  and  sells
      goods, as a way of surviving (questions 28 and 29).

  15. The essential question in this case is  whether,  on  the  facts,  the
      appellant has satisfied the requirement of paragraph 352A(ii)  of  the
      Immigration Rules, that his marriage to the sponsor did not take place
      after "the person granted asylum" [i.e. the sponsor] "left the country
      of [her] former habitual residence in order to seek asylum".

   16.  It  is  clear  from  paragraph  6  of  the  determination  that  the
      Adjudicator found against the appellant on this question  because,  in
      the Adjudicator's view, "the meaning and the  intention  of  paragraph
      352A(ii) is clear: the wording  'former  habitual  residence'  clearly
      means the country from which the asylum seeker was fleeing persecution
      in order to seek asylum.   In my opinion although the person  must  be
      granted asylum in the UK in order for paragraph  352A(ii)  to  operate
      the wording 'left the country of his/her former habitual residence  in
      order to seek asylum' is not restricted to seeking asylum in  the  UK.
      The implication is that the asylum seeker could  seek  asylum  in  any
      country outside of the country of his former habitual  residence  from
      which he/she flees persecution" (adjudicator's emphases).

  17. On this construction of the provision,  the  Adjudicator  found  that,
      since the marriage occurred after the sponsor "had left  Somalia  (the
      country of her former habitual residence) to go to Ethiopia in 1997 in
      order  to  seek  asylum",  the  appellant  could   not   satisfy   the
      requirements of paragraph 352A.

  18. For  the  appellant,  Mr  Schwenk  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's
      construction of paragraph 352A(ii) was too narrow.  She failed to have
      regard to the background to the  rule,  and  the  latter's  underlying
      purpose.

  19. As Mr Schwenk indicated, the origin of rule 352A  lies  in  the  Final
      Act of the United Nations Conference on the  Status  of  Refugees  and
      Stateless Persons.  As set out at Annex I of the UNHCR  Handbook,  the
      Conference,  considering  that  the  family  was  "the   natural   and
      fundamental group of society" and that unity of  the  family  was  "an
      essential right of the refugee" recommended that  Governments...  take
      the necessary measures for  the  protection  of  a  refugee's  family,
      especially with a view to ... ensuring that the unity of the refugee's
      family is maintained particularly in  cases  where  the  head  of  the
      family has fulfilled the  necessary  conditions  for  admission  to  a
      particular country".

  20. Prior to the coming into force of paragraph 352A (and  the  associated
      paragraphs 352B to F) of the Immigration Rules, the Government of  the
      United Kingdom had sought to give effect to the recommendation of  the
      Conference, by means of policy statements.

  21. In Gasmelsid (TH/20767/95), a determination of the Tribunal  in  1996,
      the question at issue  was  whether  a  particular  statement  of  the
      Secretary of State, made in connection  with  Somali  family  reunion,
      entitled Ms Gasmelsid to enter the United Kingdom to join her  spouse,
      notwithstanding that the marriage occurred by proxy,  over  two  years
      after the spouse had been  recognised  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
      refugee.  The fact that the Tribunal in  that  case  decided  that  Ms
      Gasmelsid was able to take advantage of particular statements  of  the
      Secretary of State does not, of itself, assist the  appellant  in  the
      present case.  The point sought to be made by Mr Schwenk, however,  is
      that in both Gasmelsid and the later case of Qurash Shah [2002]  UKIAT
      03389, it was, in effect, taken for granted  that  a  refugee  in  the
      United Kingdom is entitled under the relevant policies then pertaining
      to reunite in the United Kingdom with a spouse whom  the  refugee  has
      married prior to being recognised as a refugee.

  22. In Gasmelsid, although the Secretary of State sought  to  resile  from
      certain statements that the Tribunal found were determinative  of  the
      actual issue before them, his representative in that case nevertheless
      relied upon a letter of 17 May 1999 which set  out  the  Secretary  of
      State's policy as follows:-

           "If the UK sponsor has been recognised as a refugee... we follow
           the policy on family reunion  agreed  by  the  Conference  which
           adopted the Convention.  We will agree to the admission  of  the
           spouse and minor children of a refugee."


  23. In Qurash Shah, the Tribunal, at paragraph 15  of  its  determination,
      categorised the policy in question  as  one  "to  allow  the  existing
      family of a person granted asylum to join him  but  as  regards  later
      marriages he will have to meet the same standards as any other  lawful
      resident of the United Kingdom".   In  the  following  paragraph,  the
      Tribunal said that "it is only an existing spouse at the time a person
      is granted asylum  status  who  can  enter  without  consideration  of
      maintenance or housing."

  24. In the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal in the present  case,  it  is
      stated that, prior to the coming into force of paragraph 352A  et  seq
      "a spouse or minor child of a  refugee  was  admitted  to  the  United
      Kingdom without the need for the refugee being able to show that  they
      could be maintained and accommodated without recourse to public  funds
      as a matter of practice".  Reference is made to the Fourth Edition  of
      MacDonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice  at  paragraphs  12.120  to
      12.121.

  25. The grounds of appeal also attach a copy of  an  undated  letter  from
      Tony Mercer  of  UK  Visas  to  Mr  Scammel  of  the  Immigration  Law
      Practitioners Association, said to have been  written  around  15 May
      2002. This states that:-

           "As the Rules now stand, only those applicants who  fall  within
           the definition of  paragraphs  352A-D  are  entitled  to  family
           reunion as defined by the UK Government for the purposes of  the
           Final Act  of  Conference.   Essentially  this  means  the  pre-
           existing spouse and minor children of a recognised refugee".


      The letter then goes on to contrast this group of  persons  with  "all
      other  applicants  that  claim  to  be  dependents  of   UK-recognised
      refugees".  These "are dealt with under the other relevant  provisions
      of the rules.  This, as you will  realise,  includes  the  spouses  of
      refugees who married after they were recognised as refugees in the  UK
      and  other  family  members  not  included  in  previously   mentioned
      categories".


 26.   Although the reason for the letter being  written  appears  to  have
   been some question regarding the classes of cases in  respect  of  which
   fees are charged for visa applications, the appellant seeks to rely upon
   it as a further indication that, so  far  as  spouses  of  refugees  are
   concerned, the Secretary of State regards the  question  as  turning  on
   whether the marriage occurred before or  after  recognition  of  refugee
   status by the United Kingdom Government.


 27.    On 17 September 2002 the Entry Clearance Officer,  Pretoria,  wrote
 to the South  Manchester  Law  Centre  regarding  the  appellant's  actual
 application.  In that letter, the Entry Clearance Officer had this to say:-



           "To qualify for settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
           family reunion scheme, Paragraph  352A(ii)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules clearly states: 'the marriage did not take place after the
           person  granted  asylum  left  the  country  of  his/her  former
           habitual residence in order to seek asylum'.  The ECO who  dealt
           with  [the  appellant's]  application  was  not  satisfied  that
           Ethiopia was the 'country of  his/her  habitual  residence'  for
           either [the appellant or the sponsor] therefore the  application
           fell to be decided under the normal settlement rules.   The  ECO
           who finally made a decision on this case was not satisfied  that
           [the appellant] met the requirements of the rules and  therefore
           refused the application."


28.   In the present case,  the  Adjudicator  did  not  make  a  finding  on
      whether the sponsor  had  in  practice  been  habitually  resident  in
      Ethiopia.  This was because,  as  paragraph  6  of  the  determination
      indicates, she found that, for the purposes  of  paragraph  352A,  the
      words "former habitual residence" in  sub-paragraph  (ii)  could  only
      mean "the country from which the asylum seeker was fleeing persecution
      in order to seek asylum".

29.   It is certainly curious why paragraph 352A(ii)  has  been  drafted  in
      the precise way it has.  If, at the time of drafting, the Secretary of
      State's policy was indeed to permit the reunion of  a  married  couple
      whose marriage had taken place before the date when the refugee spouse
      had been recognised as such in the United Kingdom, it would have  been
      perfectly easy to say as much in the new rule.  On the other hand, the
      Adjudicator's interpretation of the provision is,  in  our  view,  not
      sustainable.   Having   regard   to   the   purpose   underlying   the
      recommendation  of  the  Final  Act  of  Conference,   there   is   no
      justification for construing the provision in so narrow a manner.

30.   Indeed, the Adjudicator's  approach  involves  making  an  unwarranted
      distinction between, on the one hand,  the  concept  of  seeking,  and
      being granted, "asylum" and, on the other, seeking  a  safe  place  of
      refuge.  One of the key features of the 1951 Geneva Convention is  the
      obligation it places upon Contracting States to recognise  the  status
      of a person as a refugee and to accord that person various rights,  as
      a consequence of that recognition.  In paragraph 352A(i), there can in
      our view be no doubt but that "a person granted asylum in  the  United
      Kingdom" is a person who has been formally recognised  as  a  refugee.
      By the same token, the reference in paragraph 352A(ii) to "the  person
      granted asylum" is, quite obviously, a reference  to  that  self  same
      person.

31.    The  Adjudicator's  construction  of  paragraph  352A(ii),   however,
      involves giving a far wider meaning  to the words "in  order  to  seek
      asylum".  Whilst the Tribunal makes  no  finding  upon  whether  those
      words must be restricted to  seeking  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom
      (since we do not feel we  have  heard  adequate  submissions  on  that
      matter), the Tribunal can see  no  reason  why  the  words  should  be
      construed as anything other than a reference to the person in question
      seeking refugee status.

32.   According to paragraph 6.63 of the April 2003  Country  Assessment  on
      Ethiopia, the  law  of  that  country  "includes  provisions  for  the
      granting of refuge and asylum in connection with the provisions of the
      UN Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  and  its  1967
      Protocol". There is no dispute that the sponsor, in the present  case,
      never sought and obtained from the  Ethiopian  Government  the  formal
      recognition of herself as a refugee.  According to  her  account,  she
      fled the difficulties she faced in Somalia,  by  moving  to  Ethiopia,
      where she stayed with a family who were known to her. At paragraph  11
      of her statement of 26 March 2003, we find  her view of the  situation
      in Ethiopia was  that "the government there refused to  accept  anyone
      from Somalia".

33.   Even the Entry Clearance Officer  himself  does  not  appear  to  have
      regarded paragraph 352A(ii) as having as narrow an application as that
      found by the Adjudicator.  The passage from his letter of 17 September
      2002, which we have quoted above (at paragraph 27), would plainly have
      been couched in different terms, had he done so.

34.   In many cases, the country of a person's  former  habitual  residence,
      which he or she leaves in order to seek asylum, will be the country in
      which the person granted asylum in the United  Kingdom,  has  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution.  If, however, the  drafter  of  paragraph
      352A had intended the reference to such  a  country  in  sub-paragraph
      (ii) to be so confined, it would have been an easy matter to have said
      so.

35.   We put to Mr Schwenk  the  following  point.   If  paragraph  352A(ii)
      falls to be construed so as to permit the  appellant  in  the  present
      case to succeed if he can show that his wife was  habitually  resident
      in Ethiopia, before coming to the United Kingdom, a potential  anomaly
      arises.  On the face of it, there would seem to be no good reason  why
      a couple who flee persecution in country X, and who marry in country Y
      in circumstances where their situation in country Y  is  so  temporary
      and/or precarious as to prevent them from  being  habitually  resident
      there, should be excluded from the  benefit  of  paragraph  352A.   Mr
      Schwenk's response was, in effect, to the effect that the existence of
      such a potentially anomalous situation should not lead the Tribunal to
      adopt a construction of paragraph  352A(ii)  which  removes  from  its
      ambit  even  more  cases  of  a  meritorious  nature,  thereby  taking
      paragraph 352A  even  further  from  the  spirit  and  intent  of  the
      recommendation of the Final Act of the 1951 Conference.  The  Tribunal
      agrees.

36.   However, even on this construction of paragraph  352A,  the  appellant
      will only succeed if he can show  on  balance  that  the  sponsor  was
      habitually resident in Ethiopia.  Mr Schwenk relied upon the House  of
      Lords' opinions in Nessa v Chief Adjudication Officer [1998] No.2  All
      ER 728.  In that case,  whilst  not  coming  to  the  conclusion  that
      "ordinary residence" and "habitual residence" were  synonymous,  their
      Lordships found that there was a degree of overlap and that the common
      core of meaning between  the  two  expressions  made  it  relevant  to
      consider case law decided on  the  meaning  of  "ordinary  residence".
      That expression connoted "residence in a place  with  some  degree  of
      continuity and apart  from  accidental  or  temporary  absences"  (see
      Levene v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1928] AC 217, 225).  In Shah  v
      Barnet London Borough Council [1983] 2 AC 309, Lord Scarman held  that
      "ordinarily resident" refers to a man's abode in a particular place or
      country which he has adopted voluntarily and for settled  purposes  as
      part of the regular order of his life for the time being,  whether  of
      short or of long duration.  The House of Lords in Nessa  remitted  the
      matter to be decided on a proper basis by the relevant  Tribunal.   In
      doing so, they accepted that "an  appreciable  period"  of  residence,
      such as to establish habitual residence, may be as short  as  a  month
      (see MacDonald's Immigration Law and Practice, fifth  edition,  paras.
      5.14 and 13.21).

37.   At paragraph 4 of her determination, the Adjudicator  doubted  whether
      the appellant and the sponsor had known each other in Somalia, to  the
      extent claimed.  The reasons she gives for her doubts in  this  regard
      are cogent ones.  She does not, however, find that the parties were in
      truth not married in Ethiopia, nor that they never lived  together  as
      husband and wife thereafter.  The most that she could be said to  find
      in this regard is that there were serious doubts  that  the  appellant
      has a "close relationship" with the sponsor  (determination  paragraph
      4).  Reading paragraph 10 of the determination, it  is  apparent  that
      the Adjudicator, whilst doubting that  the  relationship  between  the
      parties was as close as that claimed, specifically did not  find  that
      the marriage was not a genuine one.

38.   The uncontested evidence in this case is that  the  sponsor  lived  in
      Ethiopia between 1997 and 2000.  She  lived  in  the  household  of  a
      Somali family.  In 1999, she married the appellant. He ran a business,
      trading in goods between  Somalia  and  Ethiopia.   Although  life  in
      Ethiopia was plainly  difficult,  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the
      Ethiopian authorities regarded the sponsor's presence in that  country
      as unauthorised.  In her answer to question  45  of  the  Home  Office
      interview, "Did you have any problems with the Ethiopian authorities?"
      She replied, "No.  They don't help you but they  don't  give  you  any
      problems either". Her  comment  about  the  Ethiopian  government  not
      accepting people from Somalia appears to have been in the  context  of
      explaining why she took no  steps  to  be  formally  recognised  as  a
      refugee there.

39.   Against this factual background, the Tribunal finds that  the  sponsor
      was habitually resident in Ethiopia.  She left that country  in  2000,
      in order to seek asylum in the United Kingdom.  On 30 July 2000,  she
      was granted that status.  The marriage in 1999 preceded her  departure
      from Ethiopia.  Accordingly, the requirements  in  paragraph  352A(ii)
      are met.

40.   On 18  September  2002,  paragraph  352A  was  amended.   A  new  sub-
      paragraph (iv) was inserted,  requiring  that  "each  of  the  parties
      intends to live permanently with the other as his or  her  spouse  and
      the marriage is subsisting".

41.   The decision in the present case precedes this amendment of  paragraph
      352A.  There is nothing we have been  shown  that  suggests  this  new
      requirement is intended to have retrospective effect.

42.   Having said  this,  the  Tribunal  doubts  whether,  even  before  the
      change, a person could successfully have invoked paragraph 352A if the
      marriage  to  the  recognised  refugee  was  found  to  be  a   "sham"
      arrangement or was found  to  have  irretrievably  broken  down.   The
      intention of the Final Act of the 1951  Conference  was,  plainly,  to
      encourage the facilitation of the reunion of families of refugees.  It
      is, therefore, a moot point whether the appellant could have succeeded
      in his application, had  the  Adjudicator  found  that  there  was  no
      intention to carry on any kind of family life with the sponsor in  the
      United Kingdom.

43.   In the event, the Tribunal does not have  to  reach  a  conclusion  on
      this issue.  As is apparent  from  what  we  have  already  said,  the
      Adjudicator in the present case, whilst doubting the closeness of  the
      relationship between the parties, has made no finding  to  the  effect
      that the marriage was anything other than a genuine one.  Nor has  she
      found that the parties have no intention of  living  together  in  the
      United Kingdom.

44.   Given that the appellant meets the  requirements  of  paragraph  352A,
      his appeal falls to be allowed on that basis.

45.   This appeal is accordingly allowed.




                                                                    P R Lane
                                                              Vice President
