

             FD (Kosovo - Roma) Serbia and Montenegro  CG [2004] UKIAT
                                                                  00214  | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 13th February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                14 July 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                                Mr N Kumar JP
                               Mr P Rogers JP

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Miss S Chuni of Markandan & Co



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of an
     Adjudicator, Mr N M K Lawrence, promulgated on 26th  August  2003,  by
     which he allowed the Claimant's appeal  under  both  the  Refugee  and
     Human Rights Conventions.

  2. The Claimant is a national of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia  and
     Montenegro (FRY) from Kosovo.  He was  born  on  11th  June  1986  and
     arrived in the United Kingdom on 17th February 2003, some four  months
     short of his seventeenth birthday.  He claimed asylum three days after
     arriving.  The Secretary of State refused his claims in a letter dated
     9th April 2003.

  3. The claim was based on racism, because the  Claimant's  father  was  a
     Roma and his mother a Serb.  He had been  called  names  by  Albanians
     living in his village and the police  offered  no  protection  against
     Albanians who committed crimes against Roma or  Serbs.   The  Claimant
     had said that his father was shot and killed on 10th February 2003 and
     that he feared that he would be killed  as  well  if  he  returned  to
     Kosovo.

  4. The  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  considered  the  general
     position in Kosovo, referring to the improvement in  political  infra-
     structure,  a  general  reduction  in  violent  crime,  the  improving
     position of ethnic minorities and to the fact that UNMIK and UNHCR had
     been seeking to encourage the  voluntary  return  of  ethnic  minority
     refugees in planned initiatives.  The Secretary of State said that  he
     was aware that members of the Roma  community  in  Kosovo  were  still
     victims of occasional violent incidents, but  he  was  satisfied  that
     UNMIK, KFOR and KPS were generally able to provide  a  sufficiency  of
     protection for these groups.  He noted that there was no  evidence  to
     substantiate the claim that the father had been  shot  and  killed  by
     Albanians.  However, acknowledging the  incidents  of  discrimination,
     harassment and the limitations on freedom of movement which members of
     the Roma community might experience, he  did  not  consider  that  the
     cumulative effect of those would usually engage the  United  Kingdom's
     international  obligations:   the  overall  situation  for  Roma   had
     improved to the extent that being a Roma would not in itself qualify a
     person for the grant of asylum.  He did not think  that  anyone  would
     have any reason to regard the Claimant as being  of  mixed  ethnicity,
     because the Claimant had had no contact with his mother since  he  was
     two years old.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  that  the
     Claimant had  taken  an  unreasonable  time  to  provide  evidence  to
     establish his claim under the Rules.  Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of
     State refused the application.

  5. The Secretary of State was not  represented  at  the  hearing  of  the
     appeal, which undoubtedly placed the Adjudicator  at  something  of  a
     disadvantage.  The Adjudicator set out the law in relation  to  asylum
     and human rights in just under three pages of  his  determination  and
     then turned to the evidence.  He said that  the  documentary  evidence
     was contained in two bundles;  he then simply said that  the  Claimant
     had given oral evidence confirming the contents of the screening form,
     the SEF and a witness statement  of  July  2003.   He  said  that  the
     Claimant gave further oral  evidence  recorded  in  the  Adjudicator's
     notes of evidence, which he did not propose to repeat.

  6. All else apart, that was an unhelpful approach to the issues here.  It
     has made it more difficult than it ought to  have  been  to  obtain  a
     picture of the evidence, the issues to which it gives rise and whether
     conclusions were required on more issues than were  dealt  with.   For
     this appeal we have had to consider therefore the Adjudicator's  hand-
     written notes and a variety of hand-written statements.

  7. The  Adjudicator  records  the  basis  of  claim  as  being  that  the
     Claimant's father was a Roma, his mother a Serb, and that he had  been
     discriminated against because of his "ethnicity".  He said that people
     in Kosovo considered "us" as traitors.  He said his  father  had  been
     accused of treason, beaten and shot dead on 10th  February  2003,  and
     that the police in Kosovo do not  take  action  against  Albanians  on
     behalf of Roma victims.  He said that on seeing his  father's  killing
     he feared for his (we assume that the Adjudicator meant to add in  the
     word "life") and left FRY with his uncle's assistance.

  8. The Adjudicator then quoted a number of paragraphs in  full  from  the
     UNHCR Position Paper on Kosovo of January 2003.   He  said  that  that
     Paper continued to identify Kosovars of  mixed  ethnicity  as  needing
     protection, but it did not appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the
     Secretary of State in reaching his conclusions.  In paragraph 5.5, the
     Adjudicator said:

           "The UNCHR paper indicates that in Kosovo grenades  attacks  and
           stoning are taking place against the minorities such as Roma.  I
           consider the appellant's evidence about his father's killing  in
           the light of this kind of objective evidence and I it a credible
           account."[sic].


  9. After citing what Professor Hathaway has described as persecution, the
     Adjudicator said briefly that there was evidence  that  Roma  suffered
     the serious risk of being denied various fundamental human rights  and
     that he was satisfied that there was insufficiency of protection.   He
     added "the police are  engaged  in  violating  the  fundamental  human
     rights of the Roma".  He concluded that the Claimant faced persecution
     on two fronts:  "firstly, on the basis that his  father  is  a  Roma";
     secondly "because his mother is  a  Serb.   The  Respondent  says  the
     Appellant has not seen his mother since he was two years  of  age.   I
     rather doubt that that makes much of a difference.  The Appellant told
     me in evidence although his father's names are Albanian  his  mother's
     name,  Maria  Todic,  is  Serb  and  it  is  recorded  in  his   birth
     certificate.  No sooner this comes to the attention of the authorities
     in Kosovo the Appellant is likely to suffer persecution" [sic].

 10. In his conclusion the Adjudicator said that he had considered all  the
     evidence and submissions  and  then  allowed  the  appeal  under  both
     Conventions.

 11. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal allege,  in  summary,  that
     there was a failure  by  the  Adjudicator  to  consider  some  of  the
     relevant background material, in particular the relevant CIPU Paper on
     Serbia and Montenegro which was  in  the  bundle  before  him  on  the
     Secretary of State's behalf.  It was also said that he  had  not  made
     credibility findings on a number of relevant issues.

 12. We accept that first point and Miss Chuni could  scarcely  resist  it.
     The  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  the  background  material   was
     inadequate;  he had ignored the  relevant  CIPU  Paper.   He  gave  no
     reason for doing so.  We have accordingly examined all the  background
     material.

 13. It became apparent, however, during the course of our consideration of
     the background material that a number of facets of the Claimant's case
     needed to be fleshed out from the material before the Adjudicator, but
     to which he unfortunately made no  reference,  in  order  to  see  how
     significant various matters were.  So the second ground of  appeal  is
     also made out.  These included whether mixed ethnicity of itself was a
     problem, whether the Claimant would be regarded as  a  Roma  or  as  a
     Serb, or as neither, whether he spoke Albanian and what evidence there
     was as to difficulties which he or his family had  experienced  living
     in Kosovo until 2003.  These were important issues because of passages
     in the CIPU Report which drew on UNHCR/OSCE Assessments, in particular
     dealing with mixed ethnicity.  In K.6.64  of  the  October  2003  CIPU
     Report, which in most paragraphs was essentially the same  as  in  the
     previous CIPU Report, it said:

           "Ethnic identification as Roma, Ashkaelia  or  Egyptian  is  not
           necessarily  determined  by  easily  discernible   or   distinct
           characteristics or cultural traits, but rather by a  process  of
           self-identification.   It  is  not  uncommon   in   Kosovo   for
           individuals to change their ethnic self-identification depending
           on the pressures of local circumstances, especially when  it  is
           necessary in order to distance themselves from other  groups  to
           avoid negative associations.  In general, however,  ethnic  Roma
           clearly identify themselves as Roma and tend to  use  Romany  as
           their mother tongue, although a large  percentage  of  the  Roma
           population can speak Serbian (and to a lesser  extent  Albanian)
           languages."  (UNHCR/OSCE assessment)

 14. K.6.85 said:

           "People in mixed marriages with people from ethnic minorities or
           children from such families may  face  similar  difficulties  as
           those groups.  Unlike other minority groups, mixed families  may
           be excluded from all communities and may be unable to resort  to
           the relative security of mono-ethnic enclaves."

 15. In paragraph K.6.68 in dealing  with  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptians
     generally, it said:

           "The ability to speak fluent Albanian is likely to be  a  factor
           in the degree to which  RAE  are  able  to  integrate  with  the
           majority  community.   But   overall,   RAE   have   experienced
           significantly  improved   possibilities   to   move   about   in
           communities where they reside,  with  increased  use  of  public
           transport and access to public services."

 16. We filled in the factual gaps with the assistance of the  hand-written
     material and of Miss Chuni, who had appeared before  the  Adjudicator.
     The Claimant had explained that his father had been accused of treason
     against the Albanians  and  that  the  Claimant  had  been  scared  of
     encountering the racist Albanians all the time after the war.  He said
     they had always  been  treated  differently.   Everywhere  in  Kosovo,
     gypsies were treated the same.  When he was asked to describe  in  the
     SEF to which race or ethnic group or nationality he belonged,  he  had
     said that he was gypsy, and his mother was Serbian.  He said the  same
     when providing further information  later.   He  also  said  that  his
     father was killed "because of his ethnicity" and if he were to  return
     he would be killed by "unruly Albanians".  He said the people knew his
     family history, which included the fact that his mother was a Serb.

 17. In his statements before the Adjudicator, he said that he was the only
     child in the family and had  no  relatives  in  the  Dragosh  area  of
     Kosovo.  In evidence to the Adjudicator he said that  in  his  village
     there were no Roma and he had no relatives in Kosovo.  He did not know
     what had happened to his house, the Kosovars did not like  "us  Roma",
     and they could not go anywhere.  The Serbs did not like  "us  either".
     Both his  names  were  Albanian  names.   It  is  only  on  his  birth
     certificate that his mother's Serbian maiden name Todic would  appear.
     He had been to school for five years but was called names and  treated
     differently by all the people in the village;  they  were  doing  that
     because of his father and mother;  he never had any  friends  and  was
     discriminated against at school by his teachers and only  spent  three
     or four years at school.  His father used to sell goods from  a  small
     shop, was friendly with the police but had been accused of  spying  on
     the Albanians.  His father had been attacked several times before 2003
     and wanted to move out but no one was prepared to buy his land.

 18. The Claimant said that he did not know the names or  the  identity  of
     the people who killed his father, nor the  reason  for  their  killing
     him.  In another statement, he said that his father had been killed by
     racists.  He had gone outside having seen his father beaten and killed
     and was so terrified that he ran away to the house in the neighbouring
     village of an Albanian friend of his father.  That friend, who was too
     scared to keep him in his house, arranged for an agent to take him  to
     the United Kingdom which he did a few days later.

 19. At his asylum interview he said that he would prefer to speak Albanian
     and spoke no other languages.  Miss Chuni accepted, as we analysed the
     evidence, that the fact that his father was a Roma and his mother  was
     a Serb was not a proper basis for the Adjudicator concluding  that  he
     would face problems.  The  mixed  ethnicity  was  not  of  itself  the
     problem which he faced.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he  had  been
     treated badly because of his mixed ethnicity.  He had been brought  up
     as a Roma, he was seen as a Roma by the Albanians  and  would  not  be
     liked by the Serbs because they too would see him as a Roma.   He  was
     complaining about the way he had been treated as a Roma.  There was no
     evidence that Roma despised him because he was half Serb, although  it
     was clear from his evidence that he could not turn to  the  Serbs  for
     assistance, because they too would  see  him  as  a  Roma.   The  real
     problems which he faced and against  which  his  position  had  to  be
     considered arose from the fact that he was a Roma and would be seen as
     such by both Albanians and Serbs.  It is therefore necessary  to  look
     at the position of Roma in Kosovo in general and the position of  this
     Claimant in particular.

 20. The Adjudicator has not got to grips with the problem because  he  has
     ignored the significance of mixed ethnicity here.  It is not that both
     the Roma and the Serbs exclude him, it is simply that he is seen as  a
     Roma.  There is  no  justification  in  any  material  we  have  seen,
     including the UNHCR Position Papers to suggest that a  Serb  name,  as
     his mother's  in  his  birth  certificate,  would  give  rise  to  any
     difficulties whatsoever.  The Adjudicator's comment  that  this  would
     lead to instant  problems  with  "the  authorities"  is  misconceived.
     There are a number of "authorities" in Kosovo, including  UNMIK,  KFOR
     and KPS;  there is no  evidence  that  any  of  those  or  indeed  any
     "authority"  would  react  in  the  way  ascribed  to  them   by   the
     Adjudicator.

 21. The comment in paragraph K.6.85 is not material in view of the way  he
     was perceived, considered himself and the lack  of  contact  with  his
     mother since he was two.  The Adjudicator's further comment  that  the
     police were "engaged in violating" the  fundamental  human  rights  of
     Roma was not supported by any material which we were  shown  or  which
     the Adjudicator cited.  The Adjudicator's assessment of the facts  and
     the basis of the risk he thought would be faced on  return  is  deeply
     flawed.

 22. It does not, however, follow from that that the result of the case  is
     wrong.  We have considered all the background evidence in reaching our
     conclusions.

 23. We were referred by Ms Holmes  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
     Tribunal decision in B Serbia and  Montenegro  (Kosovo)  [2003]  UKIAT
     00013B.  This case concerned  someone  who  was  half  Roma  and  half
     Albanian, from Kosovo.  The Adjudicator concluded that that  Appellant
     did not look like a Roma.  The Tribunal concluded that  there  was  no
     reason not to suppose that the Appellant would be able  to  return  to
     Kosovo and pass as an ordinary  Albanian  everywhere  apart  from  the
     immediate area of where he had lived. There was  no  evidence  that  a
     young single Albanian speaking  and  Albanian  looking  man,  with  no
     family ties, could be identified by others as a half gypsy or would be
     entitled to insist on so identifying himself to them regardless of any
     risk involved.  Accordingly, the Tribunal could see no reason  not  to
     return that Appellant to Kosovo.  The  Tribunal  did  however  express
     concern about  the  position  of  an  Appellant  returned  to  Kosovo,
     identified as a gypsy because of conditions in the IDP  camps,  if  an
     Appellant had had to return to them.

 24. The Appellant, however, in that case was in a position to disguise his
     mixed Roma ethnicity and to pass  himself  as  an  ordinary  Albanian,
     because of his appearance, language and upbringing, provided he stayed
     clear of the small area which knew his precise  background.   In  this
     case there is no suggestion that the Claimant would be  able  to  pass
     himself off as an  Albanian,  or  alternatively  as  a  Serb;  on  the
     material as it was before the Adjudicator, the true picture is that he
     would be seen as a Roma.  The potentially different position of such a
     person on return to Kosovo needs therefore to be considered.

 25. Miss  Holmes relied on a number of passages in the October  2003  CIPU
     Report dealing with Kosovo, which were essentially but not  always  in
     detail, the same as those in the  April  2003  Report.   At  paragraph
     K.6.31, it was said that the number of incidents of  violence  against
     minorities had decreased significantly since the period following  the
     conflict and that improvement continued in 2002.  Although  there  was
     still a low level background of inter-ethnic violence, most crime  was
     now considered to be economically motivated.  Amnesty International in
     April 2003 considered the threat of violence to be  ongoing  and  that
     ethnic minorities lived in "mono-ethnic" areas, in a climate  of  fear
     and denial of basic human rights.  There had been a  significant  drop
     from the year 2000 to 2002 in ethnic murders, a drop attributed to the
     increase in effectiveness  of  UNMIK  police,  KPS  and  the  judicial
     system.

 26. Paragraph K.6.34 referred to UNHCR noting a continued  improvement  in
     the situation of the minorities, the gradual  decrease  in  ethnically
     motivated crimes and the increased participation of  minority  members
     in the Kosovo police.  But it also  noted  that  minority  communities
     "continued to face varying degrees  of  harassment,  intimidation  and
     provocation, as well as limited freedom of movement".  This  concurred
     with Amnesty International's conclusion that ethnic minorities in  May
     2003 still come under attack  with  occasional  incidents  of  serious
     violence.  Ethnic minorities faced an unemployment rate of about  85%,
     many heavily dependent on humanitarian assistance for survival.   Some
     also faced obstacles to accessing health, education and  other  public
     services, most of which are run by ethnic Albanians.  It  could  still
     be dangerous sometimes to speak Albanian with a Roma accent in public.
      Various other  initiatives  to  improve  inter-ethnic  tolerance  and
     institutional advancement were referred to.

 27. In K.6.42 the Secretary General to the UN was quoted as  observing  in
     his Report of 17th July 2002  that,  for  the  first  time  since  the
     arrival of UNMIK, a climate had been created which appeared  conducive
     to promoting inter-ethnic return, a matter of increasing interest  and
     commitment from UNMIK.   There  was  now  recognition  at  the  Kosovo
     political level of the need to encourage the return  process.   Ethnic
     Albanian leaders had signed up to statements  in  favour  of  and,  in
     particular, urging ethnic Serbs to return.

 28. Paragraph K.6.49 said that of the estimated 2,668 minority returns  in
     2002, 46 percent were  Roma/Ashkaelis/Egyptians.   There  had  however
     been setbacks.   In the section dealing with  Roma,  paragraph  K.6.61
     said that Kosovo Roma had been targeted as a group because  they  were
     seen as having collaborated with Serb mistreatment of ethnic Albanians
     during the conflict.  Allegations  of  criminal  acts  or  opportunist
     looting had blackened the name of other  Roma  of  whom  approximately
     25,000 had fled to Serbia, Montenegro  or  Macedonia,  and  those  who
     remained tended to move to Roma enclaves.  It was  likely  that  about
     36,000 Roma remained within Kosovo.  They  are  described  as  not  an
     homogenous or a cohesive group  but  comprising  various  groups  with
     different allegiances  and  traditions,  but  mostly  with  a  settled
     lifestyle.

 29. The Albanians at the local community level were said not generally  to
     perceive  the  differences  between  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptians,
     however differently they might regard themselves;  Albanians saw  them
     all roughly as gypsies.   It was also said that the treatment of  Roma
     by the Albanians might depend on the state of Serb  Albanian  tensions
     at that particular time and place.  There  had  been  improvements  in
     security and freedom of movement for  Roma  throughout  2002,  but  it
     varied according to perceptions of the majority  population,  locality
     and language issues.

 30. Although overall there had been significantly  improved  possibilities
     for Roma to move about in the communities where they resided and there
     had been a significant improvement in the crime statistics,  (12  Roma
     murdered in 2000, none in 2002), there had been several  incidents  of
     assault, attempted murder, arson, grenade and  bomb  attacks  on  Roma
     property and such incidents had often occurred after long  periods  of
     relative calm.  Although not all incidents were  ethnically  motivated
     directly, Roma could be seen as an easy target for general  crime  and
     their security could still be precarious.

 31. Paragraph K.6.70 said that Roma continued to experience adverse living
     conditions due to historical patterns of discrimination, ostracism and
     marginalisation; large numbers  of  them  still  lived  in  collective
     centres or IDP camps in poor conditions.  The fact that they chose  to
     stay there suggested they were concerned about the security  situation
     or lacked adequate accommodation in their areas of origin.  There  was
     a lack of adequate construction assistance for repairing property.

 32. There had been progress with the  spontaneous  facilitated  return  of
     Roma to some locations with about 1,200 Roma, Ashkaeli  and  Egyptians
     returning during 2002.  Some  returns  passed  off  without  incident,
     although there had also been occasions where returnees' homes had been
     stoned or subject to grenade attack.   Amnesty  International  in  May
     2003 considered that attacks and discrimination  continued  on  ethnic
     minorities to drive them into enclaves or out of Kosovo and that those
     living outside Kosovo would be unable to return until minority  rights
     were guaranteed, but it did acknowledge  the  marked  improvements  in
     security conditions for minorities since July 1999  and  a  measurable
     decline in violent attacks on their lives and property.

 33. Miss Chuni, in addition to referring to parts of the  CIPU  Assessment
     to which we have  made  reference,  put  great  weight  on  the  UNHCR
     Position Paper of January 2003.  In paragraph 3, UNHCR  expressed  the
     view that notwithstanding the general  improvements  which  had  taken
     place, the security situation of minorities continued to  be  a  major
     concern.   They  face  security  threats  placing  their   lives   and
     fundamental freedoms at risk fuelling ongoing departures.   The  level
     of risk was variable depending on the minority concerned  as  well  as
     the location.  Kosovo Serbs, Roma, Egyptians and  in  many  cases  the
     Ashkaelia continued to face security threats.   The  UNHCR's  position
     "is that members of minority groups in  Kosovo...,  especially  Kosovo
     Serbs and Roma, but also Ashkaelia and Egyptians  should  continue  to
     benefit from international protection in countries of  asylum.   UNHCR
     stresses that return of  these  minorities  should  take  place  on  a
     strictly voluntary basis and be based  on  fully  informed  individual
     decisions.  Any such voluntary return  movements  should  be  properly
     coordinated, and reintegration should be supported through  assistance
     to ensure sustainability".  They should not be forced  or  induced  to
     return to Kosovo.  Although Kosovo Serbs remained the  primary  target
     of ethnically motivated violence and while  there  have  been  general
     improvements in the  overall  situation  of  Roma  with  a  stabilised
     security situation in  many  regions,  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian
     communities continued to face serious protection problems.

 34. Paragraph 10 of the UNHCR Paper said that Roma faced those problems to
     an extent comparable to the  Serbs.   The  problems  included  grenade
     attacks,    physical    harassment,    acute    discrimination     and
     marginalisation.  Their physical security remained precarious.

 35. Paragraph 11 said that the Roma, Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities
     tended to live in a concentrated  group  to  enhance  their  sense  of
     safety.  They had restricted freedom of movement but  it  varied  with
     their language ability, Albanian speaking being  of  assistance.   But
     there were restrictions on their overall  ability  to  exercise  their
     basic rights and this aggravated an  already  impoverished  situation.
     Many Roma returnees to Kosovo had relocated to larger  communities  of
     their own ethnic group rather than to their places  of  origin.   This
     had led to overcrowding and a further obstacle to return.

 36. Although there had been progress with the return of Roma, it  remained
     minimal and was often  characterised  by  secondary  displacement  and
     relocation to a few already overcrowded locations.  Achievements  with
     spontaneous and facilitated voluntary returns  indicated  improvements
     but not a substantial general improvement in the situation  for  Roma.
     UNHCR concluded that to be  safe,  dignified  and  sustainable,  Serb,
     Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptian communities could only be returned  on  a
     voluntary basis and in a very gradual manner.

 37. There was other material in the same vein.  (Some of the  material  to
     which we were referred however related to the  unhappy  conditions  of
     Roma who had left  Kosovo  and  were  living  in  poor  conditions  in
     Serbia.)  The US State Department Report for 2002 referred, as did the
     CIPU Paper, to those minorities who had  returned;  since  2000,  some
     5,500 were estimated to have returned, of whom just  over  3,000  were
     ethnic  Serbs  and  just  over  2,000  from  other  minority   groups.
     Ethnically motivated violence and crime  continued  to  be  a  serious
     problem for minorities; some Roma living  alongside  ethnic  Albanians
     had reported that  their  security  situation  improved  during  2002,
     although violence and harassment continued and freedom of movement was
     restricted in parts of Kosovo.  Roma in some areas reported that  they
     were afraid to leave their enclaves due to fear  of  intimidation  and
     attack by ethnic Albanians.  The remaining Roma in Kosovo were largely
     settled in  enclaves  and  settlements,  dependent  almost  wholly  on
     humanitarian aid.

 38. A Human Rights Watch Report of (it appears) July 2002 said that  Serbs
     and Roma in particular continued  to  face  severe  threats  to  their
     personal safety, freedom of movement  and  socio-economic  well-being.
     Attacks appeared to be increasingly focused and sophisticated.   Those
     returning from Serbia and other neighbouring countries were frequently
     victims of armed attack; incidents in 2000 and 2001 were referred  to.
     The number of returnees were said to be small.

 39. Miss Chuni said that the position of the UNCHR  as  set  out  in  CIPU
     referring  to  the  improvement  in  the  position  of  the   minority
     communities, with attacks becoming decreasingly significant  and  more
     randomly, contained in the Report of the  Secretary  General  of  July
     2002, was superseded by the observations in the January 2003  Position
     Paper.  Miss Chuni produced a Report of 22nd  October  2003  from  the
     European Roma Rights Center relating to the forced return of  Roma  by
     Denmark to Kosovo.   It  said  that  the  position  of  Roma  remained
     extremely unsafe and that the  Danish  government  had  been  severely
     criticised.  The relevant minister said that  Denmark  did  not  expel
     aliens who were at risk, plainly of the view that the Roma  would  not
     be.

 40.  The  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe  produced,
     according to the  provisional  edition  dated  2nd  December  2003,  a
     recommendation on the forced returns of Roma to Serbia and  Montenegro
     from the Council of Europe States.  It said that Roma were  particular
     vulnerable and that  their  security  could  not  be  "guaranteed"  in
     Kosovo.  They were confronted with subtle  discrimination  everywhere.
     The Assembly recommended that there be no forced  returns  of  Kosovan
     Roma to Kosovo so long as the security situation did not allow for it.
      (That is somewhat circular.)  The decisions on forced  return  should
     be taken on a case by case basis, taking  all  relevant  circumstances
     into account.

 41. In order to relate that background material to this case, we start  by
     examining the position of this Claimant.  He is  an  Albanian  speaker
     who lived in his village as the only Roma with his  father  throughout
     the whole of strife between Albanians and Serbs  and  their  perceived
     sometime supporters, the Roma.  Although he says that his  father  was
     accused of treason by helping the Serbs and there had been attacks  of
     an unspecified nature, nothing of significant severity seems  to  have
     happened until  he  was  killed  in  February  2003.   The  Claimant's
     evidence as to who did it as judged by their appearance is vague.   He
     does not know who they were; his statement said it was a racist attack
     but he  told  the  Adjudicator  he  did  not  know  the  reason.   The
     difficulties which he described at school, being picked on by teachers
     and fellow pupils, are consistent with a pattern of discrimination but
     not with anything more serious.  He left immediately after the killing
     and has made no effort at all to seek the assistance of UNMIK, KFOR or
     the KPS in relation to what happened.  His evidence about  the  police
     being of no assistance when he  was  at  school  appears  to  draw  no
     distinction between the present position and the past.

 42. There is no sound evidence that the Appellant has been  persecuted  in
     the past or treated in a way which would  constitute  treatment  which
     would breach his Article 3 rights and there is no evidence that living
     where he did, he would have been unable to obtain  the  assistance  of
     the current forces of law and order in Kosovo.  He had after all lived
     in an Albanian village with no real problems for many, many years.  He
     is now nearly eighteen and has benefited from some  education  over  a
     number of years in Kosovo.  There is no evidence as to the position in
     relation to his  father's  house.   He  was  fortunate  in  having  an
     Albanian family friend, whom he  described  as  an  uncle  at  various
     times, who arranged rapidly for his departure from  the  country  with
     the help of an agent.

 43. Turning to analyse the background  material,  Miss  Holmes  and  to  a
     lesser extent Miss Chuni suggested that the CIPU Report and the  UNHCR
     Paper were in conflict but neither came up with  any  very  compelling
     reasons as to  why  one  should  be  preferred  to  the  other.   Both
     suggested that the paper less favoured by  them  was  to  some  extent
     biased.  We could not see that  that  was  so.   The  UNHCR  Paper  is
     derived from its sources in the field and they must be well placed  to
     provide sound information;  it would then have been through a  process
     of consideration through the UNHCR hierarchy, so it should be regarded
     as  a  responsible,  well  researched  and  considered  analysis.   It
     obviously takes some time for such a process to  be  completed  before
     January 2003, but there is nothing in the CIPU Report  which  suggests
     that the picture has changed  significantly  since  the  analysis  was
     prepared which the CIPU alone has been able  to  consider.   The  CIPU
     Report draws on a wide range of sources including UNHCR,  and  Amnesty
     International.

 44. The UNHCR Paper is more general and provides less  detail  as  to  the
     position for Roma, than the CIPU Report.  But that detail is generally
     supportive of the general picture  in  the  UNHCR  Paper.   They  both
     recognise that there have been improvements in the position of Roma in
     Kosovo since 2000.  They both  recognise  that  there  are  continuing
     problems of security, movement, discrimination in public services  and
     employment.   The  Roma  are  generally  dependent   on   humanitarian
     assistance.  Few now live in mixed communities, most  having  gathered
     into mono-ethnic communities for safety.  Both acknowledge that  there
     have been returns by Roma to Kosovo; UNHCR lays emphasis on  the  need
     for that to be supported and done on a voluntary basis.   CIPU  refers
     to the return of some 1,300 RAE in 2002, to the 36,000 Roma  left  and
     to the problems faced by those who return.  Attacks, if they return to
     whence they came, create secondary displacement.  It acknowledges  the
     poor conditions in the camps but does not provide  much  detail.   The
     more we have considered the two documents the  fewer  the  differences
     have appeared to be.  There may be a  difference  in  emphasis  and  a
     greater degree of optimism in the CIPU Report but it is  not  a  large
     one.

 45.  The  real  difference  is  that  the  UNHCR  Papers  offers  a  clear
     recommendation  about  return  whereas  the  CIPU  contains  no   such
     conclusion;  as is normal with such reports, it leaves the question of
     safety on return to those who have to make the decisions.   The  UNHCR
     Paper is unusually strong in its language about the risk on return and
     whether  in  general  Kosovan  Roma   should   continue   to   receive
     international protection.  Some of that is no doubt  directed  at  the
     countries around Kosovo to which Roma fled;  in part it is directed to
     larger scale returns and to the economic  conditions  which  would  be
     faced on return;  but it does also  consider  how  individual  returns
     should be managed.  It is primarily directed at those who fled  during
     the war but it recognises that there are some who  still  leave  under
     ethnic pressure from the majority.   It  is  however  clearly  against
     enforced return.

 46. We do not give the same weight to the disputed claims of the ERRC, nor
     to the recommendation of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council  of
     Europe, which seems to require "guarantees" of safety,  which  is  not
     the relevant test.

 47. We now apply the material to the circumstances of the Claimant.  As we
     have said, we do not find the evidence that  he  has  been  persecuted
     very persuasive.  The Adjudicator made no findings as  to  the  reason
     for the killing of the Claimant's father and if he accepted  what  the
     Claimant said about it, he made no effort to consider  the  basis  for
     the assertion that it was racially motivated, in view of the fact that
     the family had lived in the same  village  for  so  long  through  the
     troubles without anything serious happening.  Nor did he consider  the
     lack of effort made to engage UNMIK or KPS assistance.   The  Claimant
     himself had been discriminated against  at  school  and  although  his
     father had seemingly been friendly with the local police, they had not
     assisted him.  There is nothing in  this  individual's  experience  to
     mark him out for any particular attention from the Albanian Kosovars.

 48. However, the nature of the ethnic hostility is such that  the  killing
     could have been racially motivated.  There is no evidence  as  to  any
     family who could help the Claimant on return or any place to which  he
     could go; there is no  evidence  that  accommodation  would  still  be
     available to him in his village.  If he was the only Roma left in  his
     village, it would fit with the background material for it to have been
     taken over in his absence by Albanian Kosovar villagers.   The  nature
     of ethnically motivated hatred means that he  cannot  be  regarded  as
     safe from attack simply because he  has  so  far  survived  personally
     unscathed.

 49. So he would return as a young man,  not  quite  eighteen  at  present,
     someone who faced the problems of Roma in general rather than  someone
     at particular risk.  He would be returned to Pristina.

 50. The picture which we draw from the various Reports is that  there  has
     been a decrease in violence against the  ethnic  minorities  including
     the Roma over the last  few  years,  although  incidents  of  violence
     continue to occur with Roma amongst those targeted  by  other  groups.
     It is of course not possible for any system  to  provide  a  guarantee
     against violence and it does not suffice in order to show  that  there
     is a real risk of persecution by non-state agents  against  which  the
     state is unable to offer protection, to point out that such attacks do
     occur.  We have to bear in mind that the  UNMIK  police  and  the  KPS
     together with the judicial system have been effective in reducing  the
     level of attack upon ethnic minorities.  There is evidence  that  they
     do investigate and  prosecute  before  judges  of  improving  quality,
     independence and diversity,  those  who  commit  such  offences.   The
     evidence does not suggest that those incidents are so widespread  that
     the forces now present in Kosovo are unable to  provide  a  system  of
     physical protection to minorities, even though  it  cannot  prevent  a
     number of unpleasant attacks.  The reported incidence  of  attacks  is
     hard to gauge from the material when set against the fact  that  there
     are some 36,000 Roma in Kosovo and 1,200 RAE returned in  2002  alone;
     but it does not appear to be high.

 51. Roma do not all live in Roma enclaves or in camps and those  who  live
     outside do not all face persecution;  the picture is somewhat variable
     depending on time and place.  We  assume  however  that  the  claimant
     would not return to his village but would instead go to a Roma enclave
     or to a camp. We make that assumption because of what  he  said  about
     being the only Roma family there and the  likelihood  that  his  house
     will have been taken over by ethnic Albanians.   The  position  in  an
     enclave, however, does not suggest  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
     persecution there;  Roma concerned about the security situation can go
     to such enclaves where there  is  a  greater  prospect  of  collective
     protection than outside.

 52. There is no evidence that conditions in the camps, should the Claimant
     go to one, breach Article 3 of the ECHR.   They  are  overcrowded  and
     conditions are poor.  The fact that they are overcrowded suggests that
     the security situation, freedom of movement and discrimination  are  a
     long way from what is aimed for.  However, the threshold  for  such  a
     breach is very high.

 53. The evidence shows that the general conditions of life for  many  Roma
     involve routine and quite severe discrimination  in  accessing  public
     services, poverty, a high degree of dependency on humanitarian aid and
     fears for their future and security.  We  do  not  consider  that  the
     conditions as evidenced by the various  reports,  however,  show  that
     there is a real risk that the claimant's  Article  3  rights  will  be
     infringed if he is returned.  There is humanitarian aid; some are able
     to access public services;  not all are subject to the same degree  of
     discrimination.  The position in enclaves or camps is likely to afford
     scope for greater collective  opportunities  for  protection  and  the
     provision of services.

 54. The UNHCR is legitimately  concerned  about  more  than  just  refugee
     status and addresses humanitarian issues without necessarily drawing a
     distinction,  let  alone  a  precise,   distinction   between   Geneva
     Convention refugees and those whom  it  considers  should  still  have
     humanitarian protection.  But it does not apply the same test  on  the
     face of the material as is required by the  Article  3  jurisprudence,
     which may explain the way in which it expresses its concerns  and  why
     the Tribunal's assessments of whether  someone  can  be  returned  can
     properly differ.

 55. It is plain that the improving situation in Kosovo has enabled  ethnic
     minorities to return  in  increasingly  significant  numbers  although
     caution is exercised about  their  enforced  or  large  scale  return.
     There  is  some  evidence  that  ethnic  Albanians  take  violent   or
     destructive action to prevent those returning doing so to  the  multi-
     ethnic areas where they once  lived  and  that  there  has  been  some
     secondary displacement.  But with the international forces in  Kosovo,
     even if they are unable to  prevent  such  an  unwelcome  response  to
     returns, there is no  evidence  that  those  who  returned  have  been
     persecuted and unable to find state protection or alternative areas in
     which to live, notwithstanding the discomfort and poor  conditions  in
     which they may then have to live.  None of the evidence suggests  that
     there would be a breach of Article 3.   In  those  circumstances  even
     though we can understand why the UNHCR discourages the additional load
     which would be placed upon welfare and aid resources there, we do  not
     consider that its views preclude this Claimant's return.

 56. We do not consider that this Claimant  has  shown  that  he  has  been
     persecuted in the past, and he would face no greater  risk  on  return
     than that which would be faced by Roma in general.  We do not consider
     that the evidence as a whole justifies the conclusion that the  ethnic
     discrimination and violence to which Roma are at  times  subject  from
     other groups is of a level or frequency to mean that he would  face  a
     real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  were  he  to  be
     returned.  That would be to ignore the presence and  effectiveness  of
     the  international  forces  there.   Neither  do  we  think  that  the
     conditions of life have been shown to be of the severity requisite for
     the return to constitute a breach of Article 3.

 57. The above was written  before  the  recent  outbreak  of  inter-ethnic
     violence in Kosovo, following an incident in mid-March 2004  in  which
     three young ethnic Albanian boys drowned while trying to  escape  from
     Serb children in Mitrovica  who  were  chasing  them  with  dogs.   We
     invited submissions from both parties and, following  the  publication
     of a  UNHCR  position  paper  of  30th  March  2004  on  international
     protection  needs  in  Kosovo  as  a  result  of  those   inter-ethnic
     confrontations, we invited further submissions  explicitly  addressing
     that paper.

 58. Neither party made any submission.

 59. The outbreak of violence and the UNHCR paper do not cause us to change
     our analysis of the situation.

 60. The UNHCR paper describes a series of incidents  in  which  two  Serbs
     were killed in drive-by shootings, and another  was  killed  close  to
     Pristina.  The violent Serb protests were followed by the drowning  of
     the three young  Albanians.   This  led  to  mass  demonstrations  and
     violent protests by ethnic Albanians across Kosovo, which was directed
     against ethnic minorities and the UN Administration.  Serbs  were  the
     primary target, but Roma  and  Ashkaelia  were  attacked.   Albanians,
     where in a minority, were the subject of reprisal  attacks.   Albanian
     mobs attacked churches, hospitals and  schools.   Twenty  people  were
     killed,  including  two  police  officers,  over  1,000  were  injured
     including nearly 200 police officers, over 700 houses  were  destroyed
     or  damaged.   Over  4,000  ethnic  minorities,  mainly  Serbs,   were
     displaced.  Systematic attacks were directed against UN personnel  and
     infrastructure.  The widespread and systematic nature of the  violence
     took Kosovo's authorities by surprise.  It was of the order of a  week
     before NATO forces were sufficiently reinforced to quell the violence,
     though  the  prospects  of  identification  and  prosecution  of   its
     instigators are limited.

 61. The UNHCR paper says that this was  the  worst  outbreak  of  violence
     since 1999 and that relations  between  ethnic  groups  are  extremely
     tense,  leaving  minorities  with  a  heightened  sense  of  fear  and
     isolation.  Confidence in the  ability  of  KFOR,  UNMIK  and  KPS  to
     protect minorities had dropped;  local authorities had failed to  take
     a firm stand against violence.

 62. It said that the situation had now been brought under control  largely
     because of the prompt deployment of additional NATO  forces.   But  it
     represented a "huge setback" in the "slow but steady improvements"  of
     the last five years.

 63. The UNHCR's position was that it had only just started to evaluate the
     impact and consequences of those events.  It thought  it  likely  that
     detailed reports would be published in April  2004,  though  none  had
     been published by mid-late May 2004.  It first urged  that  up-to-date
     information be taken into account;  this we  have  done.   Second,  it
     said that its position "remains that members of all  minority  groups,
     particularly Serbs, Roma, Ashkaelia, Egyptians as well as Bosniaks and
     Goranis should continue to benefit from  international  protection  in
     countries of asylum.  Induced or forced  return  movements  jeopardize
     the highly delicate ethnic balance and may  contribute  to  increasing
     the potential for new inter-ethnic clashes".

 64. We see no reason to revise our view that the  Claimant  would  return,
     not to his former village, but to a Roma enclave or camp,  neither  of
     which would involve a breach of Article 3.  The  situation  prevailing
     before the recent outbreak of inter-ethnic violence  was  not  one  of
     substantial peace and harmony.  Inter-ethnic  hatreds  simmered  below
     the surface of daily life, with  sporadic  violent  eruptions  against
     which the UN Authorities and  KPS  provided  a  sufficient  degree  of
     protection.  The return of ethnic minorities led to  actions  designed
     to intimidate and deter such returns, and to  prevent  return  to  the
     place where the returnees originally lived.

 65. The events of mid-March represent an extreme but temporary  expression
     of those hatreds and a clear  demonstration  of  the  promptitude  and
     effectiveness of the protecting response.  They were  not  anticipated
     but they reflect what was there below the surface which already,  over
     the years,  had  been  manifesting  itself  in  isolated  and  smaller
     outbreaks of violence, secondary  displacement,  reduction  in  ethnic
     mixing, and constant discrimination, counteracted by the UN  and  NATO
     forces.  The response of the UN and NATO forces was prompt and brought
     the violence swiftly under control.

 66. The numbers  killed  and  injured,  the  property  destroyed,  whether
     domestic, institutional or ecclesiastical, were not of a  scale  which
     prevented an effective,  controlling,  protecting  response  from  the
     authorities.

 67. We do not see this as leading to a change in our conclusions.   Events
     of that sort, whilst the timing and organised scale  may  have  caught
     the authorities by surprise, do not  warrant  a  major  re-evaluation.
     Although violence of itself may reflect underlying tensions but in its
     effect exacerbate them, altering them in degree and  nature,  changing
     people's attitudes, there is nothing of substance before  us  to  show
     that the political or inter-ethnic landscape  has  changed  such  that
     there is now a real risk of treatment which would breach Article 3  or
     of persecution under the Geneva Convention for reasons  of  ethnicity.
     Rather, they demonstrate  that  the  tensions  lead  to  sporadic  and
     unpleasant violence which the authorities have the will and ability to
     suppress.

 68. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

