

|                           |        |                                |
|                           |FS and others (Iran - Christian Converts) |
|                           |Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303                |
|                                                                      |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                           |
|                                                                      |
|Date of Hearing:  16th & 17th March 2004                              |
|Date Determination notified:                                          |
|........17/11/2004...............................                     |
|Before: |
|                                                                      |
|The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)                         |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                        |
|Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)                                      |
|                                                                      |
|Between:                                                              |


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                                     and

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

For the Secretary of State:  Mr S Wilken, instructed by Treasury Solicitor
For FS:                Ms A Weston, instructed by Switalski's Solicitors
For TB:                Mr S Vokes, instructed by Richard Heynes & Coopers
For NS:                Ms A Weston, instructed by Derby Law Centre
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is the determination in three appeals which raise similar  issues
     concerning the risk of persecution and other breaches of human  rights
     to Christian apostates, citizens of Iran, who might be returned there.
      Two appeals are by the individuals and one is  by  the  Secretary  of
     State for the Home Department.  That is  the  case  of  FS  which  was
     remitted to the Tribunal by the Court of Appeal [2003] EWCA Civ  1562,
     on the grounds that the Tribunal's stance or guidance in  relation  to
     this issue was inconsistent and that it  should  reconsider  what  its
     guidance was.

  2. Sedley LJ said at paragraph 29, dealing with the Secretary of  State's
     argument that each case rather depended on its facts:

           "I accept readily that it is not  a  ground  of  appeal  that  a
           different conclusion was open to the tribunal below on the  same
           facts,  or  therefore  that  another  tribunal  has  reached   a
           different conclusion on very similar facts.  But it has to be  a
           matter of concern that the same political and  legal  situation,
           attested by much the same in-country data from case to case,  is
           being evaluated differently by different tribunals.  The  latter
           seems to me to be the case in relation to religious apostasy  in
           Iran.  The differentials we have seen are related  less  to  the
           differences   between   individual   asylum-seekers   than    to
           differences in the Tribunal's reading of the  situation  on  the
           ground  in  Iran.   This  is  understandable,  but  it  is   not
           satisfactory.  In a system which is as much inquisitorial as  it
           is adversarial, inconsistency on such  questions  works  against
           legal certainty.  That does not mean that the  situation  cannot
           change, or that an individual's relationship to it does not have
           to be distinctly gauged in each case.  It means that in any  one
           period a judicial policy (with the  flexibility  that  the  word
           implies) needs to be adopted on the  effect  of  the  in-country
           data in recurrent classes of case."

  3. After citing what Laws LJ said in S and others v Home Secretary [2002]
     INLR  416  about  the  Tribunal's  role  in  providing   authoritative
     determinations in relation to the  position  for  various  classes  of
     people in various countries, Sedley LJ continued in paragraph 31:

           "The undesirability of such  factual  disparities  was  recently
           reiterated by this court in Gurung [2003]  EWCA  Civ  654:   see
           especially the judgment of Buxton LJ at paragraph 12.  Mr Kovats
           has argued that, while it may be  proper  to  insist  that  good
           reasons be given for departing from an otherwise consistent line
           of factual decisions of the present kind, there can be  no  such
           requirement where, as here, there is no  consistent  line.   But
           this does not answer Ms Webber's  point  that  it  is  the  very
           inconsistency of the decisions which is inimical to justice."

  4. We respectfully acknowledge and agree with what Sedley LJ had  to  say
     and accept that he is right that the Tribunal on this issue  had  been
     inconsistent in its approach, even though over time on  a  problematic
     issue there had been a growing consistency.

  5. We were provided with a number of previous Tribunal  decisions,  which
     exemplified not just the evolution of the Tribunal's thinking but also
     its inconsistency, at times, which we have already noted.  We  see  no
     point, in the light of the comprehensive and up-to-date evidence which
     we have heard in drawing upon them,  let  alone  trying  to  reconcile
     them.  Where the parties placed  particular  reliance  on  a  Tribunal
     decision in relation to risk on return of failed asylum seekers, or on
     what foreign Tribunals have said about the risk on return of converts,
     we do deal with them.

  6. We would add the comment that although S&K [2002] UKIAT 05613*  was  a
     starred  decision,  it  was  starred  for  the  point   of   statutory
     interpretation which arose in it.  The system  of  starring  decisions
     relates only to points of law and in that way marks  them  as  binding
     authority for the Tribunal and Adjudicators.  The giving  of  guidance
     in relation to country conditions or issues is of the same nature  for
     this area as the sentencing guideline cases for the  criminal  courts.
     They are expected to be followed unless distinguishable  by  reference
     to individual circumstances  or  unless  changes  in  conditions  have
     occurred;  see paragraphs 21 (curiously to be found between 8 and  9),
     72 and 73 of DK [2003] UKIAT 00953 (Croatia).

  7. For ease of reference, we shall refer to each of  the  individuals  as
     Appellants even though one (FS) is a Respondent in this Tribunal.

 The facts in FS

  8. He is now 30, arrived in the United Kingdom  in  July  2001,  claiming
     asylum shortly afterwards.  His claim was summarised in the  Court  of
     Appeal and in the Tribunal in  the  following  way.   The  Appellant's
     father had spent  five  years  in  the  early  1980s  as  a  political
     prisoner.  His brother-in-law, who, with the Appellant's  sister,  had
     been a member of the Mojahedin, had spent six years  in  prison.   His
     own  home  had  been  searched  several  times  by  the  security   or
     intelligence service, with whom his activities in  a  radical  theatre
     group had earned him a file.  He had been injured and  arrested  in  a
     student  demonstration  in  1999.   Released  after  a  day,  he   was
     rearrested and menacingly interrogated for four days, and was made  to
     sign a document  professing  repentance.   On  release  he  went  into
     hiding.  On learning that the authorities were again looking  for  him
     and had a warrant out for him, he fled the country.

  9. On a holiday to Turkey in 1995, the Appellant had become interested in
     Christianity when he visited a church and discussed Christianity  with
     a priest.  He did not explore Christianity in  Iran,  but  soon  after
     coming to the United Kingdom he began to attend a  Church  of  England
     congregation in Pontefract.  He was baptised there  on  19th  December
     2001.  The certificate of baptism was  produced  to  the  Adjudicator.
     Thereafter the Appellant began to experience difficulties with Moslems
     in Pontefract and he was relocated to Birmingham.  There  he  attended
     another Church of England congregation, whose vicar  is  the  Reverend
     Goss.  Reverend Goss produced a witness  statement  and  attended  the
     hearing to give oral evidence to the Adjudicator to the effect that he
     believed the Appellant's conversion to be genuine.

 10. The Adjudicator, Mrs N A Baird, in a determination promulgated on 20th
     August 2002, accepted that a warrant had been issued  for  his  arrest
     even though she said that she had no idea what was in it.  She doubted
     that the authorities in Iran already  knew  of  his  conversion.   She
     referred to evidence relating to the  evangelical  churches,  although
     she accepted that the Appellant was not an evangelical Christian.   He
     attended a mainstream Church of England church.  Indeed  it  is  clear
     that he is  not  interested  in  proselytising  as  evidenced  by  his
     departure from Pontefract because he was afraid  that  Iranians  there
     would find out that he was a Christian.  Illogically, as the Court  of
     Appeal said, she found  that  he  would  not  be  persecuted  for  his
     political opinions but concluded that it would  be  a  breach  of  his
     rights under Article 3 were he to be returned, because he  would  find
     it exceedingly difficult to practise his religion in Iran particularly
     because he had been baptised in the United Kingdom.

 11. The Secretary of State is the  actual  Appellant  in  this  case.   He
     appeals on the ground that the Adjudicator, on those facts, ought  not
     to have found that FS was at risk of a breach of his Article 3  rights
     and ought to have  found  that  he  would  not  be  persecuted  for  a
     Convention reason.  He did not pursue his challenge to the findings as
     to the genuineness of the conversion.

 12. There are no findings by the Adjudicator as to  how  FS  would  behave
     upon return to Iran. Issues which would arise in cases  of  this  sort
     are whether the Appellant would actually practise his religion  eg  by
     attending  church  and  with  other  activities  and  if   so,   which
     denomination, and where;  it would be important to know the extent  to
     which he would make his conversion known in  other  ways  such  as  by
     talking about it or by trying to convert others.  We do not blame  the
     Adjudicator for this;  the importance of some  of  those  issues  only
     became clear as we examined the background material.  Nonetheless,  we
     had to make some assumptions for the purposes of this appeal.   It  is
     sensible that we should approach our assessment on the basis  that  he
     would be likely, at least initially, to seek  to  join  the  Anglican,
     also  called  the  Episcopalian,  Church  as   an   ordinary   regular
     worshipping member of the congregation, but that he would not set  out
     to convert others or to draw attention to himself in  connection  with
     his religious conversion in other ways.  The Adjudicator found that he
     was not an evangelical Christian.

The facts in NS

 13. NS is a 39 year old woman who left Iran in November  2001.   She  said
     that she left because of the continual persecution which she faced  as
     a sole female in  Iran,  harassed  because  of  her  failure  on  many
     occasions to satisfy strict Islamic dress requirements.  She had  been
     detained for a week in 1993, because her explanation of being  at  the
     bus station with a male friend was not accepted,  and  for  which  she
     received a suspended sentence of lashing.  She could not rent  a  flat
     because she was a woman and she  experienced  discrimination  in  work
     because she did not practise her Muslim religion.   She  first  became
     interested in Christianity in Iran through conversations with a friend
     and with many of her work colleagues who  were  Christians.   Although
     fascinated by the religion she hesitated to embrace it  there  because
     of the implications which that  would  have.   Her  asylum  and  human
     rights claims were rejected by the Secretary of State in January 2002.

 14. She said that in the United Kingdom she  had  regularly  attended  her
     local church, also a mainstream Church of England church.  It  was  in
     February 2002 that the Appellant had approached the Minister, who  was
     also her language tutor, after an  English  lesson  to  inquire  about
     local churches and Christianity.  She had been a regular and committed
     member  of  her  congregation  since  June  2002.   She  had  prepared
     thoroughly for her  baptism  and  confirmation  which  took  place  in
     November 2002.  Oral evidence was given by one of the Ministers at her
     local church who prepared her for her baptism and  confirmation.   The
     Minister  supported  the  genuineness  of  her  conversion   and   her
     commitment to her faith describing how she was a  regular  worshipper,
     and a helper with church activities.

 15. The Adjudicator, Mr P A Spencer,  rejected  this  in  a  determination
     promulgated on 3rd April 2003,  pointing  out  that  her  interest  in
     Christianity in the United Kingdom commenced after the refusal of  her
     claims by the Secretary of State, and rejecting as a recent story  the
     suggestion that she had had any interest in Christianity in Iran.  The
     Adjudicator noted the similarities between this claim and the claim of
     her sister who had also become a convert  after  refusal  of  her  own
     claim to asylum.  She appealed on the grounds that  the  Adjudicator's
     credibility findings were flawed;  these were obviously the basis upon
     which the assessment as to risk was made.

 16. At the appeal before us, the Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
     conversion was genuine.  This still left us in  the  position  of  not
     knowing what else that imported in terms of how she  would  behave  in
     relation to her new faith upon return to Iran.   As  with  FS,  it  is
     sensible that we should again assess matters on  the  basis  that  she
     would join, at least initially, the Anglican Church and participate as
     an  ordinary  member,  worshipping  regularly.   On  that  basis   her
     religious activities would be the same as those of FS.

The facts in TB

 17. This Appellant is now 36.  He  claimed  asylum  upon  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom in July 2002 shortly after he left Iran  where  he  had
     been living.  His claim was based on his  conversion  to  Christianity
     from Islam in August 2001.  The Secretary of State concluded that  the
     Appellant lacked credibility and refused his claim in September  2002.
     In November 2002, he was baptised into the  Jesus  Fellowship  Church.
     His appeal was dismissed by the Adjudicator, Mrs V A Osborne, on  both
     asylum and human rights grounds, in  a  determination  promulgated  on
     14th January 2003.  She accepted the genuineness  of  his  conversion,
     but  concluded  that  he  would  not  engage  in   proselytising   and
     evangelising and so would not be at risk on  return.  The  grounds  of
     appeal allege that a convert would be at risk, that the Appellant  was
     an evangelical Christian and would be at serious risk.

 18. The Adjudicator found that although he  was  a  genuine  convert,  his
     interest was strongly influenced by a more  liberal  social  order  as
     opposed to the strict Islamic way of life which it  was  necessary  to
     follow in Iran in order to obtain certain employment.   The  Appellant
     had given no evidence of any evangelising in Iran or of having  joined
     a Protestant Church.  Although he said that he had not been  attracted
     by Orthodox ceremonial, his conversion in Iran occurred  when  he  had
     met with an Armenian priest.  He had also given evidence, about  which
     the Adjudicator made no explicit findings but which we accept  in  the
     light of her generally favourable findings on credibility that he  had
     spoken about Christianity to a cousin who, like him, was not a  devout
     Muslim.  The police had  raided  his  home  when  he  was  not  there,
     denounced him to his mother  as  a  Christian  and  removed  Christian
     material.
 19. The Adjudicator continued in paragraph 27 and 28:

           "I  have  given  careful   consideration   to   the   background
           information particularly that  contained  in  the  CIPU  Country
           assessment about the position of Christians  in  Iran  and  note
           that there is likely to be distinct discrimination against those
           who have converted  from  Islam  to  (particularly)  evangelical
           forms of Christianity.   Converts  may  be  arrested  (paragraph
           5.02) there is a possibility of execution (5.51) and there  have
           been reported incidents of government harassment (5.52).   There
           is a significant danger to someone who has converted from  Islam
           to Christianity and who preaches Christianity  with  a  view  to
           converting other Muslims - the penalty for this being  execution
           (5.54).  Since being in the United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  has
           joined and become an active  member  of  an  evangelical  Church
           although he has not said at any point in his evidence that if he
           were to return to Iran he would feel it incumbent  upon  himself
           to take part in evangelical activities with a view to converting
           other Muslims.  I have noted that since his "conversion" on  the
           15th August 2001 until his departure almost  a  year  later  the
           Appellant was apparently content to  practice  his  religion  in
           safety by restricting his activities to his personal reading and
           writing in the safety of his own home and he had never attempted
           to join an evangelical Church in his own  Country.  I  therefore
           find that the Appellant had  adopted  a  cautious  and  sensible
           approach to his wish to follow Christian teaching and philosophy
           and I can see no reason why if he were to be returned to Iran he
           would not behave in a similar manner.  I accept that he would be
           proscribed from evangelising and  attempting  to  convert  other
           Muslims to his way of thinking but he has not described  a  need
           or a wish to do so.

           I am therefore left to consider whether what transpired prior to
           the Appellant's departure  from  Iran  was  likely  to  lead  to
           persecution if he  were  to  be  returned.   The  Appellant  has
           produced no evidence that he is of any ongoing  concern  to  the
           authorities and I have noted that the  penalties  likely  to  be
           imposed for a failed asylum seeker upon return are  unlikely  to
           be unduly harsh (paragraph 5.94 and 5.95  of  the  CIPU  Country
           Assessment)."

 20. It was on that basis that the Adjudicator concluded that he  would  be
     unlikely to face persecution upon return.  TB  produced  a  subsequent
     statement;  he had tried to spread  the  gospel  in  Iran,  which  the
     failings of his previous representative had caused to be omitted  from
     his  case  before  the  Adjudicator.   That  had  led  to  his  cousin
     denouncing him.  He had pledged himself to the Jesus Fellowship Church
     in June 2003 and he had attended evangelical events.

 21. Mr Vokes, who appeared for this Appellant, sought to  argue  that  the
     nature of the evangelical church to which the  Appellant  belonged  in
     the United Kingdom would mean that he would behave in a different  way
     from FS and NS upon return, though he would  also  seek  to  join  the
     Anglican Church.  He produced  some  notes  on  the  Jesus  Fellowship
     Church and evangelism.  It purported to answer the question of whether
     or not the evangelical Church considered it part of an  ordinary  lay-
     member's duty to proselytise in a foreign country, where to do so  was
     against the law and could result in death.  The answer, in so  far  as
     it was provided at all, was not explicit from the text.  Mr Vokes,  as
     we understood his answer, said ultimately that such proselytising  was
     a part of the ordinary lay-member's duty  notwithstanding  the  risks.
     Nonetheless, it did not appear that there was a duty on  him  to  seek
     out those who, in response, would persecute the evangelist, nor a duty
     to remain in  a  place  despite  persecution.   But  there  were  many
     scriptural passages referred to and  support  could  be  found  for  a
     variety of views from amongst them. The notes also drew a  distinction
     between evangelising and missionary work and work as a pastor  on  the
     one hand, to  which  only  some  would  be  called  by  God,  and  the
     obligation on every church member, as  it  was  seen,  whether  of  an
     evangelical church or not, to bear witness.  This involved talking  to
     one's family or work colleagues about the Christian faith and the  way
     in which one lived one's life.  It would also be impossible, submitted
     Mr Vokes, for someone who was a true member of an  evangelical  church
     and had embraced Christianity through such a church  not  to  want  to
     pass on the Gospel news to those around him so that they  could  share
     in the joy which that brought.

The background evidence:  conversion

 22. We shall deal first with the material which concerns Christianity  and
     apostasy.

 23. Although the Constitution declares that Iran  is  an  Islamic  Shi'ite
     state, it recognises Christians as one of three  religious  minorities
     to whom the right to religious practice and education  is  guaranteed,
     though there is evidence that that is often subject to  administrative
     disruption.  They could run their own charities, and their own schools
     including religious education.  They have a number of  seats  reserved
     for them in the Majlis  but  otherwise,  according  to  the  US  State
     Department Report on Religious Freedom in Iran 2003, are discriminated
     against  in  a  number  of  ways.   They  cannot  be  elected   to   a
     representative body except for the reserved seats;   they  are  barred
     from certain state employment;   the  requirements  for  knowledge  of
     Islam restricts their entry into university and there are other  forms
     of officially sanctioned  discrimination  in  other  areas  of  public
     service.  There are various  forms  of  discrimination  in  the  legal
     system, although the inheritance laws have been changed  so  that  the
     law of inheritance is that of the deceased and so the former  position
     whereby  any  Muslim  successor  was  preferred  over  any  non-Muslim
     successor appears to have changed.  Changes have  been  proposed  (and
     subsequently passed) to equalise the blood money payable as between  a
     Muslim and a member of a recognised religious minority.  There is also
     a greater degree of acceptance that, for Armenians, decisions relating
     to personal status and family  law  can  be  dealt  with  by  Armenian
     Courts.

 24. There are varying numbers given for the Christian population in  Iran,
     a problem compounded by the inter-reaction between an ethnic  minority
     and its religious denomination.  The Iranian Government  estimated  in
     1997 that there were between 117,000 and 200,000 Christians  in  Iran.
     The US State Department refers to 300,000 Christians, the majority  of
     whom are ethnic Armenians (the majority)  and  Assyrian-Chaldeans  but
     Christians  had  been  emigrating  at  15,000-20,000  a  year.   These
     Christian groups are ethnically based and represent communities  which
     have lived in Iran since before the Islamic era.  Those groups conduct
     their services in Armenian or Assyrian, although there is an  increase
     in the number of Farsi services.  The absence of  church  services  in
     Farsi has been seen by the Government as making it  less  likely  that
     they would be proselytising. Tolerance of  their  activities  requires
     them to refrain from anti-Islamic or  anti-Republican  activities  and
     proselytising  of  Muslims  is  forbidden.    Members   of   religious
     minorities  have  frequently  been  charged  with   crimes   such   as
     "confronting the  state"  and  such  trials  have  been  conducted  as
     national security trials, but this does not appear  to  have  happened
     for some years on the  evidence  overall.   The  US  State  Department
     Country Report of 2002 referred to the close monitoring  of  religious
     minorities by  the  Ministry  of  Intelligence  and  Security.   Their
     organisations, activities, schools and events were monitored.

 25.  There  is  an  important  distinction  between  the  ethnically-based
     Christian Churches which do not proselytise and rarely, if ever, admit
     converts, and which  represent  the  continuance  of  ethnic  minority
     communities centuries old in Iran, and the more recent  Protestant  or
     evangelical  Churches  which  do  evangelise,  proselytise  and  admit
     converts from Islam, with varying degrees of enthusiasm.  The position
     of the latter group is what we are concerned to assess here.

 26. The context for this examination is that Iran is an Islamic theocratic
     state.  The interests of the state and its religion  are  inseparable.
     Conversion from Islam is against the law, punishable as  apostasy,  in
     theory by death.

 27. The CIPU Report for October 2003, para 6.48 said that  the  Government
     was "highly suspicious of any proselytising of Muslims by  non-Muslims
     and can be harsh in its response, in particular  against  Baha'is  and
     evangelical Christians".  At 6.54, it said that "the authorities  have
     become particularly vigilant  in  recent  years  in  curbing  what  is
     perceived  as  increasing  proselytising  activities  by   evangelical
     Christians, whose services are conducted in  Persian".   It  described
     the reaction of the authorities to this perceived activity.   Churches
     had been closed and converts  arrested.   "Government  officials  have
     reacted to this perceived activity by closing evangelical churches and
     arresting converts.  Members of evangelical congregations are required
     to carry membership cards, photocopies of which must  be  provided  to
     the authorities.   Worshippers  are  subject  to  identity  checks  by
     authorities  posted  outside  congregation  centres.    Meetings   for
     evangelical services  have  been  restricted  by  the  authorities  to
     Sundays, and church officials have been ordered to inform the Ministry
     of Information and Islamic Guidance before admitting  new  members  to
     their congregations."  This information is not specific as  to  number
     or time or the upshot of any  arrests.   It  draws  on  the  US  State
     Department Report.

 28. Paragraph 6.57 continued:

           "Mistreatment of evangelical  Christians  continued  during  the
           period covered by this report.  Christian groups  have  reported
           instances of government harassment of churchgoers in Teheran, in
           particular  against  worshipers   at   the   Assembly   of   God
           congregation in the  capital.   Instances  of  harassment  cited
           included conspicuous monitoring outside  Christian  premises  by
           Revolutionary Guards to  discourage  Muslims  or  converts  from
           entering  church  premises  and  demands  for  presentation   of
           identity papers."

 29. Apostasy is a crime punishable by  death.   Paragraphs  6.59  to  6.62
     state:

           "6.59 Apostasy, or conversion from Islam to another religion, is
                 not acceptable in Islamic law.  It states that  an  innate-
                 apostate, one whose parents were Muslims and  who  embraced
                 Islam but later left Islam, if a man, is  to  be  executed.
                 If a women, she is to be imprisoned for life, but  will  be
                 released if she repents.  A  national  apostate,  a  person
                 converting  from  another  faith   to   Islam,   and   then
                 reconverting back to the other faith is to be encouraged to
                 repent and, upon refusal to repent, is to be executed.  The
                 most prominent cases of apostasy appear to occur from Islam
                 to Christianity although Baha'is have also been accused  of
                 it and the death sentence has been carried out even  though
                 the accused have said that they had always been Baha'i  and
                 were not therefore apostates.

           6.60  Proselytising apostate converts who have  begun  preaching
                 Christianity are likely to face execution. 17  clerics  are
                 known  to  have  been  in  detention  in  1995.   In   that
                 connection, a Western embassy said that there had  been  no
                 reports  of  person  being  executed  on  the  grounds   of
                 conversion from Islam since 1994. In the source's  opinion,
                 although a convert may still be  sentenced  to  a  term  of
                 imprisonment if the authorities hear about his  conversion,
                 it is very rare nowadays for a criminal case to be  brought
                 against a convert.  The source stressed that converts often
                 remain Muslim for official purposes.

           6.61  The source thought that converts  who  are  known  to  the
                 Iranian authorities are summoned to  an  interview  at  the
                 Ministry of Information in order to be  reprimanded.   They
                 are then allowed to go after being warned not to talk about
                 what has taken place at the Ministry.  If a  criminal  case
                 is brought against them, they will be accused of  something
                 other than conversion.  Many  individuals  try  to  convert
                 with  a  view   to   emigrating,   considering   that   the
                 opportunities for obtaining asylum in the West are  thereby
                 greater.   The   Christian   churches   send   letters   of
                 recommendation to converts and to other  persons  belonging
                 to the church on request.  It would appear however, that at
                 present the  Government  is  not  pursuing  an  active  and
                 systematic policy of investigation and prosecution of cases
                 of apostasy.

           6.62  In practice, Muslim  converts  to  Christianity  may  face
                 obstacles such, as not being admitted to university or  not
                 being issued a passport.  Even Muslim converts, however, in
                 reality appear able to practise their new  faith  up  to  a
                 point.   This  means,  for  instance,  that  weekly  church
                 attendance is a possibility.  On the other hand, those  who
                 actively display their new faith in public,  in  particular
                 by proselytising, can expect  to  face  severe  repression,
                 even if their conversion goes back decades."

 30. The CIPU also notes, as do a number of reports, the  deaths  of  eight
     evangelical Christians at the hands of the  authorities,  though  says
     that there have been none since 1994.

 31. The US State Department Report on Religious Freedom  2003  is  to  the
     like effect;  it describes the threatening atmosphere for  evangelical
     Christians and some other religious  minorities.   It  refers  to  the
     refusal by those churches to comply with the Government's demands that
     they provide membership lists of their congregations.  There have been
     demands that the leaders sign pledges that they would not  proselytise
     nor admit Muslims to their services.  On the other hand the Government
     appeared to wish to encourage at least among world  religious  leaders
     an interfaith dialogue.

 32. Not surprisingly, the US State Department Country Report for 2002 (and
     indeed the preceding one) is in much the same vein and  at  times  the
     same language, language which has also featured,  properly  attributed
     in the CIPU.   The  US  State  Department  draws  on  non-governmental
     sources because it has no diplomatic representation in Iran.

 33. The US State Department Report for 2000 referred to reports  from  one
     organisation that 8 evangelical Christians  had  been  killed  in  the
     previous ten years by the authorities, and that in  1997-1998  between
     fifteen and twenty-three Iranian Muslim converts to  Christianity  had
     been reported by  a  Christian  organisation  as  having  disappeared,
     presumed  killed  by  the   authorities.    The   general   background
     information which it contains is similar to that in the later Reports.
      It added that two leading lay converts had been  compelled  to  leave
     Iran as a result of harassment  from  the  authorities;   others  were
     identified who had lost their jobs and  had  been  beaten  up  by  the
     authorised  thugs  of  the  Basiji  and  Hezbollah,  or   aggressively
     interrogated.  The 1999 Report  said  that  evangelical  leaders  were
     under pressure to sign pledges that they would not seek converts  from
     Islam.  Other reports pointed out that the Orthodox churches in  Iran,
     by contrast, did not allow Muslims to attend their services, and  that
     if any individual member sought to make a convert, he did so in  great
     fear.

 34. A Canadian Refugee Board Report in 1998 said that it  was  up  to  the
     alleged convert, facing charges of apostasy in court, to disprove  his
     apostasy by proving his religious commitment to Islam.  Another of its
     reports in 1996 said that Muslim converts who did not  announce  their
     conversion would not face problems but that they  would  if  they  did
     make it public.

 35. In 1997, the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board produced a  report
     on Iran in which it drew attention to the pressures on the  Protestant
     churches to stop conducting services in  Farsi  and  to  stop  Muslims
     participating in them;  their churches had been  closed  and  converts
     arrested.  Ethnically based churches which did  not  proselytise  were
     not targeted.  It referred to some restrictions imposed on Pentecostal
     clergy and to the extra-judicial killings  of  the  three  Pentecostal
     clergy in 1994, for which three women said to be members of  the  PMOI
     had been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in 1995.

 36. The Belgium Office  of  the  Commissioner  General  for  Refugees  and
     Stateless Persons (CEDOCA) Report of a seven week mission to  Iran  in
     mid 2002 contains much relevant information intended to assist in  the
     proper assessment of asylum applications from Iran.  It does not claim
     to be an exhaustive picture of Iran, but endeavours to give, according
     to its  authors,  information  to  meet  the  needs  of  those  making
     decisions in this area, using local contacts.  The  persons  consulted
     in Iran included  a  number  of  Churches:   the  Assyrian,  Assyrian-
     Chaldean, Armenian Gregorian, Russian Orthodox,  and  importantly  for
     the Secretary of  State's  submissions,  two  Pentecostal  Evangelical
     Assembly of God Churches (Armenian and Assyrian) as well as the German-
     language Evangelical  Church.   The  Appellants  are  right  that  the
     Anglican Church was not one of those consulted.

 37. The Report deals with the perceived greater degree of flexibility from
     the authorities since 1997.  It described the situation  generally  as
     one which had improved for Christians over the last few years and said
     that  "Generally  speaking  there  is  no  longer  any  repression  or
     persecution".  Christians were able to  practise  their  faith  within
     their community but the economic crisis led many to leave the country,
     although the church leaders were trying to stem the outflow  of  those
     who saw  no  future  in  Iran.   This  trend  towards  flexibility  is
     attributed by the CEDOCA Report to the freer atmosphere introduced  by
     President Khatami  in  1997  and  Iran's  growing  concern  about  its
     international image.

 38. It said that few churches in Iran proselytised;  the  most  active  in
     that respect were the two Assembly of God Churches and  the  Episcopal
     Church of  Iran,  the  Anglican  Church.   Some  other  churches  only
     admitted new members upon  marriage  and  the  Armenian  Catholic  and
     Gregorian Churches, the Roman Catholic  and  Assyrian  Churches  never
     admitted converts.

 39. It described the  baptism  process  as  a  long  process  because  the
     applicant had to be vetted by the Church to ensure that he was  not  a
     Government infiltrator;  they  had  to  take  a  course  in  Christian
     doctrine and participate in church activities so  that  they  did  not
     become members just to enable them to  leave  the  country  and  claim
     asylum.  The ceremony was carried out in most cases "with the greatest
     discretion".

 40. It continued:

           "The authorities are often aware of conversions but  do  not  do
           anything to oppose them.  As long as the religion  is  practised
           privately and the person concerned  is  not  too  obtrusive,  in
           principle there is  no  problem.   It  is  only  if  the  person
           practises his religion publicly and actively attempts to convert
           others that he could be in trouble.  However, this applied  more
           to small towns, where it  appears  that  members  are  sometimes
           questioned, than to Teheran, where things  are  somewhat  easier
           given the anonymity of  this  big  city.   One  of  the  sources
           related that one of its members was currently in  detention  for
           distributing Bibles and because of open proselytising.  None  of
           the other sources we consulted had any knowledge of such cases.

           Muslims regularly attend services in the different churches.  In
           most cases this is known to the authorities,  but  they  do  not
           make any problems."

 41. The interviews and analyses of the individual  churches  are  of  some
     note. The Armenian Gregorian  Church,  which  never  admits  converts,
     complained of the  proselytising  activities  of  certain  evangelical
     churches, both of Muslims and of Armenian  Christians.   This  Church,
     which did not encourage conversions of Armenians, was  very  reluctant
     even to have contact with non-Christians who wanted to  discuss  their
     faith.  They could practise as they wished.

 42. The Armenian Assembly of God Church has three churches in Teheran  one
     of which holds its services in Farsi, the others  in  Armenian.   They
     have seven other churches in Iran.  They also hold meetings in private
     houses.  They were a recognised religion but not  registered  as  such
     and could build no more churches.  The headquarters  church  had  some
     800 members of which 80 percent were converted Muslims  and  the  rest
     were  converted  Armenian  or  Assyrian  Christians.   The   assistant
     superintendent, who was the source of the information  reported,  said
     that there had been considerable improvements over the last few years,
     the pressure from the authorities had let up and members  were  rarely
     picked up for questioning.  Those who had been picked up on  the  last
     large scale questioning in 1997 had not been frightened into returning
     to Islam, which was the object of the exercise.  Only one  member  was
     currently detained because of his activities and  he  was  a  "zealous
     evangelist".  There were sometimes problems with  the  authorities  in
     the smaller towns with minor forms of intimidation, with members  held
     for a short while and then released and left in peace.

 43. However, it said:

           "If  the  authorities  become  aware  that  someone   has   been
           converted, this can lead to the person  losing  his  job.   This
           applies more to civil servants  than  to  people  who  work  for
           private businesses.  Among the  believers  there  is  a  general
           atmosphere of fear, so  much  so  that  they  tend  to  restrict
           themselves in  their  proselytising  activities.   Also  members
           regularly stay away from  the  church  to  divert  somewhat  the
           negative attention of the authorities.


           On the whole, the ordinary population have a  positive  attitude
           towards Christians.  There are only rarely  negative  reactions.
           However, six or seven years  ago  the  headquarters  received  a
           visit from a few members of the  secret  services  who  demanded
           that their Friday church services be stopped and  that  everyone
           who wanted to attend the  church  service  on  Sunday  gave  his
           identity.  However,  this  demand  was  refused  by  the  church
           authorities, and they simply continued as  before,  without  any
           further problems.  Of course,  they  are  well  aware  that  the
           authorities are very well informed of their activities and  that
           there are probably also spies among their members.


           According to Rev Avanesian, all the members of the church can at
           some time have problems with the authorities,  even  though  the
           situation  of  most  of  the  members  is  tolerably  good.   He
           understands that some choose to leave the country, but he rather
           puts this down to economic factors and the  desire  to  lead  an
           untroubled life.  Those who have 'the true faith' choose instead
           to stay and to witness to their faith."

 44. There had been no death sentence for apostasy in the last seven years.
      The civil law impact of conversion rather varied from judge to judge.
      The process of conversion was described and  reflects  what  we  have
     already set out above. The Church  took  some  active  steps  to  seek
     converts, eg through selling Bibles on the streets.

 45. The Assyrian Assembly of God Church had one church in Teheran and also
     met in private houses.  One pastor was a Muslim convert.  Its  pastors
     had  experienced  problems  with  the  authorities.   The  interviewee
     described the situation  as  very  bad  economically,  especially  for
     Christians  who  were  barred  from  certain  jobs  because  of  their
     religion.  The church is not registered and  the  government  disrupts
     the elections which it must hold every three years  for  its  priests.
     The church is under constant surveillance.  Young people in  the  army
     got no office jobs and recruits were often  insulted.   In  the  state
     schools where everyone is  forced  to  study  Islam,  Christianity  is
     portrayed in a negative light.

 46. Its proselytising activities seem quite limited,  depending  on  those
     who make contact or become interested through  talking  to  a  member.
     They do not issue any documents in support of an asylum claim.

           "For the moment, because they have not been active in this field
           for very long, the church has so far had no problems because  of
           its proselytising activities.  As long as converts  keep  a  low
           profile and are not very obtrusive about their new  beliefs,  in
           principle they have no problems [an exception  was  identified].
           However, converts who want to get married have problems when  it
           comes to registering  their  marriage.   Also,  they  cannot  go
           through the conventional Christian marriage ceremony."

 47. The situation was much worse up to seven years ago  when  people  were
     regularly summoned for questioning and sometimes detained for  several
     days.  The Sharia law on  apostasy  was  now  only  used  to  frighten
     people.  An  incident  was  recounted  in  which  5,000  clandestinely
     printed Bibles were confiscated, but the pastor was told that no legal
     proceedings would be taken against him if he kept his head down.

 48. The Assyrian Chaldean church  was  declining  in  numbers  and  cannot
     engage  in  active  proselytising.   The  Assyrian  Church,   although
     acknowledging civil and personal law  discrimination,  said  that  its
     church and religion was recognised by the Iranian Government.  But  it
     did not allow conversions, and had made none since the  12th  Century.
     Although a few Muslims attended, they could understand little, for the
     services were conducted in Assyrian.  The Russian Orthodox Church said
     that  the  period  1990-1995  had  been  a  very  difficult  one   for
     Christians;  it was a small church;  converts were rare  and  baptised
     in secret.  A few  Muslims  attended  services  without  problems  for
     themselves or for the Church.

 49. Under the aegis of the  Council  of  the  EU,  a  Danish  fact-finding
     mission had been to Iran in September 2000, and  reported  in  January
     2002.  It had been undertaken because of the relatively high number of
     Iranian asylum seekers  in  Denmark.   Meetings  were  held  with  the
     relevant Iranian authorities and Western diplomats.  They were focused
     on Teheran.

 50. Western embassy information confirmed the decline in  the  numbers  of
     Christians in Iran due to  large-scale  emigration,  diminishing  from
     350,000 before the revolution to 150,000 in 2001.  It  emphasised  the
     change between persecution at the start  of  the  revolution  and  the
     discrimination  now  faced.   A  sign  of  the  change  was  that  now
     Christians were permitted to run schools  with  Christian  principals.
     Conversion in Iran was a lengthy process, and churches  were  cautions
     about accepting converts; baptisms would be in secret.   It  was  only
     the Protestant and Assembly of God Churches  which  accepted  converts
     anyway and actively proselytised.  Other material  from  this  mission
     features in the CIPU Report, paragraphs 6.60-6.61.

 51. A Netherlands Report to CIREA on the position in 2000,  drawn  from  a
     number of sources, diplomatic, UN and NGO and others, painted the same
     picture  of  discrimination  but  not  persecution  facing  Christians
     generally.  Many had  opted  to  go  to  the  West  in  recent  years.
     Likewise, it was the Protestant churches  which  sought  converts  and
     those who proselytised were intimidated;  its comment was repeated  in
     paragraph 6.62 of the CIPU Report of October 2003.

 52. The CIREA papers for 1998 and 1999 on freedom of religion in Iran said
     that intimidation of those who proselytised as  Christians  continued,
     though there were no details  of  any  actual  prosecutions  for  that
     activity.  The Armenian and Assyrian  Churches  were  well-integrated,
     ethnically based, permitted to trade and follow  their  own  rules  in
     personal and family law, and were not seen as a threat to Islam by the
     authorities.  They did not proselytise. Protestant churches did accept
     converts but with great restraint, save for the  Pentecostal  Assembly
     of God Churches.  There had been no recent cases in  which  the  death
     penalty had been imposed on converts:

           "Those who, in  the  view  of  the  authorities,  offer  Muslims
           alternative to Islam run the risk of  falling  victim  to  human
           rights violations.  There have recently been  fresh  reports  of
           threats and intimidation, including house searches, directed  at
           churches  which  include  converts  among  their  congregations.
           Repression of Christians is  directed  particularly  at  leading
           members of the Anglican church and the Assemblies of God."

 53. Converts faced travel restrictions and other obstruction, instructions
     to cease church attendance, threats but not the fact  of  prosecution.
     Those who openly demonstrated their religious conviction faced serious
     repression;   there   had   been   several   murders   attributed   to
     fundamentalist elements who may have been within the government.   But
     that had not occurred since 1997.  It was estimated that there were  a
     few hundred converts resident in Iran.

 54. Mr Wilken made particular reference  to  a  decision  of  the  Refugee
     Review Tribunal (RRT) in Australia  dated  2nd  September  2003.   The
     Claimant was an Iranian convert from Islam to an evangelical Christian
     church.  He had started his interest in Christianity when he was still
     in Iran, had been arrested for expressing that interest, and had  been
     inspired to learn more.  However his  full  conversion  did  not  take
     place until he arrived in Australia.  He regarded  sharing  his  views
     with others  as  an  important  obligation  on  Christians.   He  gave
     evidence to the effect that if he were to keep his religion to himself
     on return to Iran, it was possible that nothing would  happen  to  him
     but that  he  had  taken  an  oath  to  proselytise.   The  Australian
     Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  (DFAT)  provided  information
     from the Assembly of God Church in Teheran;  this was information upon
     which Mr Wilken placed considerable  reliance  as  well  as  upon  its
     appraisal in this Review Tribunal decision.

 55. We set out initially DFAT's earlier material of 1996  because  of  the
     contrast with the June  2002-February  2003  material,  which  was  so
     significant to the RRT.  The DFAT  Report  of  1996  referred  to  the
     discrimination faced by Christians  and  the  difference  between  the
     traditional or orthodox churches and the evangelical churches in their
     attitude towards proselytising among Muslims.  Attempting to convert a
     Muslim was a serious offence, the existence of which in the penal code
     was intended to harass.  Converts were generally tolerated so long  as
     they kept a very low  profile.   Workplace  harassment  and  dismissal
     would be possible if they worked for the government  or  revolutionary
     organisation,  but  the  most  common  source  of  pressure  was  from
     "concerned" family members.  Churches felt that they were  infiltrated
     with "suspect" members there to intimidate and monitor the others, and
     especially converts.  There  were  no  accounts  however  of  ordinary
     converts being tortured or killed because of their beliefs.

 56. The picture painted of the Orthodox and ethnic Churches reflects  what
     we  have  already  described,  although  there  were  limitations  and
     discrimination.

           "2.3.17.8    Despite  constitutional  guarantees  of   religious
                       freedom for  Christians,  those  denominations  which
                       fall  outside  the  historically   well   established
                       Armenian and Assyrian traditions have been  subjected
                       to  a  greater   degree   of   officially   sponsored
                       intimidation.  Those churches which did not have what
                       the Government regarded as indigenous  roots  at  the
                       time  of  the  Revolution  have   been   accused   of
                       espionage,  collaboration  with  foreign  powers  and
                       cultural imperialism.  The  majority  of  non-Iranian
                       clergy have had their  visas  revoked  or  have  been
                       pressured to leave.


           2.3.17.9    While the violent excesses of the past have  abated,
                       a process of  attrition  remains.   For  example,  in
                       1993,  the  Anglican  church  was  divested  of   its
                       substantial property holdings.  The Anglicans  appear
                       to have fared badly under  the  current  regime.   At
                       present the most virulent threat to  the  maintenance
                       of an Anglican presence here remains insolvency.   In
                       the  early  days  of  the  Revolution,  all  Anglican
                       property under  the  name  of  the  then  Bishop  was
                       frozen, comprising land, schools, hospitals and homes
                        Previously frozen assets have been  confiscated  and
                       title deeds amended to preclude any future  assertion
                       of interests.  No  compensation  has  been  proposed.
                       The  confiscation   was   conducted   without   prior
                       consultation.  No paper trail  is  available  to  the
                       aggrieved thus  rendering  the  pursuit  of  judicial
                       redress impossible.  The legal justification for  the
                       latest act relates to  the  apostasy  of  the  former
                       Bishop, in  whose  name  the  property  was  formerly
                       invested.  Property rights enjoyed by the  individual
                       are extinguished and revert  to  the  Islamic  State.
                       The Anglicans have changed their name to  'Episcopal'
                       and now have  an  entirely  indigenous  clergy.   The
                       Catholic Church has also had  most  of  its  property
                       seized since the Revolution."

 57. It then went on to refer to the murder of the three  clergy  in  1994.
     It concluded that among those who were candidates then for an  imputed
     political profile were Christians involved in proselytising activities
     and converts from Islam who publicly witnessed their new faith.

 58. This is part of the material which the Review Tribunal thought out  of
     date in the case cited above.  An earlier Refugee Review  Tribunal  in
     Australia (NOO/ 36328) had held  in  June  2002  that  an  evangelical
     convert who had expressed an interest  in  Christianity  in  Iran  was
     entitled to refugee status. This was in line with earlier decisions.

 59. We now turn to the DFAT material from June, August and  November  2002
     and February  2003.   DFAT  was  the  source  through  its  diplomatic
     channels in Teheran for the information which the Country  Information
     Service provided to refugee decision-makers.  The  questions  provided
     some background information about the applicant.  He had  attended  an
     Assembly of God Church in  Teheran  for  about  two  years,  attending
     Friday service and did not have to go through any  formal  process  in
     order to be able to attend services. The actual answers  were  drafted
     by the DFAT based on information supplied  by  a  single  unidentified
     source described in the Tribunal's decision as a senior member of  the
     clergy of the Assembly of God Church in Teheran.

 60. Visitors to the church were welcomed but it took normally between  two
     and three years to progress to baptism.  It commented on the reference
     in the 2001 USSD Report to increasing vigilance and identity checks by
     the authorities outside church.  Checking outside church was  said  to
     be unusual or unlikely unless outside contacts had given rise to  such
     questioning.  There was a suspicion that churches were infiltrated  by
     the authorities.  When members were called  in  for  questioning  they
     were asked to sign a declaration that they would not  continue  to  be
     involved in proselytising; this was  rarely  followed  up  and  prison
     sentences were no longer  passed  and  members  continued  with  their
     unashamedly proselytising activities.  Some 80 percent of its  members
     were Muslim converts, (at least of this particular church in Teheran).
      Pressure had eased considerably since the election in 1997, but there
     was still  discrimination  in  employment  and  the  need  to  declare
     religion when applying for a passport, about which  members  were  not
     allowed to lie, led to restrictions on travel;  government  jobs  were
     lost and the negative attention which conversion  led  to  had  caused
     many converts to go abroad.

 61. The more positive tone of this report contrasted with earlier  reports
     of the not so distant past and this softening was queried by CIS:  was
     this a genuine  softening  by  Iranian  authorities  or  a  local  and
     informal response?  The answer was that further enquiries had  led  to
     the conclusion that conversions from  Islam  were  being  increasingly
     tolerated by the authorities.  There were Assemblies of God and  other
     evangelical churches which were very active in proselytising among the
     traditional churches as well as among Muslims;  the figure of 200 plus
     baptisms for 2001 in three such active churches is not broken down  as
     between the different sources of potential converts.  A leader of  one
     church which had not baptised converts for 10 years had now  dared  to
     resume that practice.

 62. It continued:

           "Overall, Muslim converts currently seem to be able to  function
           reasonably  well  in  Iranian  Society,  without  much  fear  of
           persecution.  Muslim converts to Christianity share some of  the
           same problems of those or other recognised  religions,  such  as
           Jews, and those  who  are  `born'  into  Christianity.   Muslims
           routinely attend church services (particularly at Christmas  and
           Easter), often out of curiosity, and often they are attracted by
           the ritual associated with the  services,  including  music  and
           singing.   Many  subsequently  register  for  and  attend  Bible
           classes.


           The current tolerance toward Christians and proselytising  could
           mark a genuine improvement in human rights in  Iran,  attributed
           to President Khatami's influence and that  of   former  Minister
           for Culture and Islam Guidance, Attaollah Mohajerani.  We do not
           know of any recent arrests or sentences on the basis  purely  of
           proselytising or apostasy (MORTAD). However,  the  prospect  for
           charges of this nature being imposed in political trials remains
           (see for instance the case of Eshkevari who, in  late  2000  was
           accused of apostasy as part of broader political trial).   Those
           who change their faith do remain vulnerable to a change  in  the
           domestic political climate, and their conversion could  be  used
           subsequently  to  prosecute  them  if  they   attract   negative
           attention from authorities for other reasons."

 63. The November 2002 material dealt with the question  of  whether  other
     reports including a US report showed a different picture  and  a  more
     reliable one.  They referred to the pressure to sign pledges that  the
     churches would not convert Muslims or  allow  them  to  attend  church
     services, and the active harassment of worshippers outside church with
     conspicuous monitoring by Revolutionary Guards.  DFAT replied that  it
     did not consider that assessment to  be  accurate.   The  interlocutor
     said that the legal position in relation to  existence  of  the  death
     penalty for apostasy was unchanged but the reality was very different.
      There was a "relatively benign environment ... evidenced  by  growing
     number of Muslim conversions  ...  and  rising  attendance  at  church
     services".  He thought that there might well be a political element to
     the assessments which he criticised, an element composed of  NGOs  who
     worked actively with refugee organisations which had  an  interest  in
     painting a bleak picture of the position in the source country.   DFAT
     thought that its source was credible and that what he had to  say  was
     borne out by others with whom they had regular contact, and pointed to
     the advantage which those in Iran had over  others  in  assessing  the
     human rights situation.

 64. In February 2003, in response to a claim that there had been a summons
     to face charges issued to a senior member of an Assembly of God church
     over the distribution of CDs of Christian songs,  DFAT's  interlocutor
     said that he had no knowledge of any questioning or charges  over  the
     distribution of proselytising material,  although  there  had  been  a
     distribution of 2000 Bibles, religious films  and  CDs  in  buses  and
     taxis in Teheran at Christmas 2002.  There had been  no  deterioration
     for Christians in Iran, although he acknowledged that the position  of
     converts who make their position known publicly is more  complex  than
     of those who do not.  This  later  arose  from  the  evidence  that  a
     convert who had made his  conversion  known  had  suffered  from  some
     harassment from his neighbours in a Kurdish dominated city but who had
     moved  to  Teheran  and  there  made  his  conversion  known   without
     consequence and was able to attend church freely in Teheran.

 65. The RRT concluded that the applicant would be able to return  to  Iran
     and practise his religion, even though he could be subjected  to  some
     harassment and discrimination were he to be open about his  conversion
     and proselytise.  The RRT analysed the evidence as follows:

           "In the  past,  the  independent  evidence  has  suggested  that
           Muslims who convert to Christianity and who proselytise  Muslims
           could be at risk of persecution in Iran.  However, there is  now
           strong evidence before the Tribunal suggesting that  members  of
           the Assembly of God Church, which has a congregation  consisting
           largely of Muslim converts, are able to attend church and engage
           in evangelical activities  without  encountering  serious  harm,
           either  from  the  government  or  the  community.   This  is  a
           different picture to that portrayed in  a  report  published  by
           Iranian Christians International earlier  this  year.   It  also
           differs from views expressed in reports such as those written by
           the US State Department. However, I am  of  the  view  that  the
           information  provided by the Australian Embassy as a consequence
           of recent and direct discussions with senior Christian clergy in
           Teheran is much more reliable than the information (much  of  it
           quite dated) of the kind contained in the ICI report.  I am also
           of the view that the US  State  Department  is  not  a  reliable
           source on the current situation for Iranian Christians in  Iran,
           given that the US does not have diplomatic relations  with  Iran
           and is therefore in no position to directly  obtain  information
           from Iranian Christian clergy in Iran.  The advice given to DFAT
           by the Church is not in the form of a public statement, but as a
           result of a number of private  discussions  with  an  Australian
           diplomat.  I am of the view that this information  is  credible,
           reliable and reflects the actual situation for Muslims who  have
           converted to Christianity.


           However, no information is provided which suggests that  members
           of the Church have in fact been seriously  harmed  because  they
           had been involved in proselytising.   On  the  other  hand,  the
           information provided to DFAT indicates that church members  have
           been involved in specific proselytising activities (handing  out
           Bibles in public transport in  the  lead-up  to  Christmas  last
           year)  without  encountering  serious  harm.   The   independent
           evidence indicates that Christians have engaged in proselytising
           activities without encountering serious harm notwithstanding the
           disparaging view of such activities expressed in  the  newspaper
           article provided by the applicant's adviser.


           It appears that the contents of the DFAT reports are  now  well-
           known in the Iranian Christian community.  The applicant in this
           case was aware of the reports prior to the hearing.  I have been
           told in other cases that the Assembly of God Church in Australia
           is in contact with the Assembly of God Church in Teheran.  In my
           view, if the DFAT reports were incorrect or misleading it  would
           have been open to the Assembly of God Church in Teheran - having
           been made aware of the situation by the Church in Australia - to
           take this up with the Australian Embassy.  This  could  be  done
           without the church putting anything in writing.  I am  satisfied
           that if this had been done the  Australian  Embassy  would  have
           passed on the information.  The fact that  no  such  information
           has been provided strongly suggests that the leadership  of  the
           Assembly of God Church in Teheran accepts that the DFAT  reports
           are correct.  In the circumstance, I prefer the DFAT reports  to
           the information provide by the applicant in his latest statutory
           declaration.


           I accept  that  the  applicant  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
           government employment if he were open about  his  conversion  to
           Christianity  and  engaged  in  proselytising  activities.   The
           independent evidence does not suggest that the  applicant  would
           have any  particular  difficulty  obtaining  employment  in  the
           private sector nor being self-employed because of his conversion
           to Christianity.  I am not satisfied that the applicant would be
           denied the  capacity  to  earn  a  livelihood  because  of  this
           conversion to Christianity.


           I accept that the applicant  would  not  be  able  to  study  at
           university if he declared  his  conversion  to  Christianity  or
           engaged in proselytising activities.


           The applicant indicated  that  his  conversion  to  Christianity
           would prevent him from registering his marriage if he married in
           the future.  There  is  independent  evidence  before  me  which
           indicates that in February 2000 following a change  in  the  law
           the head of the  judiciary  issued  a  circular  letter  to  all
           registry offices throughout Iran that provided for any couple to
           be registered as husband and  wife  without  being  required  to
           state their religious affiliation."

 66. We turn from various Government sources  to  UNHCR.   The  1995  UNHCR
     background paper confirmed the killing of three evangelical clergy  in
     1994;  proselytising converts from  Islam  were  especially  at  risk;
     those converts who practised their faith  openly  suffered  harassment
     and intimidation, and official restrictions.   In  1994,  it  reported
     that there had been  a  fierce  campaign  against  Christians,  public
     expression of hatred from the authorities, torture  and  imprisonment,
     with converts especially at risk.  The Assemblies of God Churches  had
     been especially targeted.

 67. A UNHCR Paper on Iran in 1998 said that those Christians who  belonged
     to distinct ethnic groups, which accounted for the  vast  majority  of
     Iranian Christians, were allowed to maintain  their  own  schools  and
     cultural activities but were subject to discrimination  if  they  took
     their  activities  outside  their  own   community.    This   occurred
     especially in the education, employment, housing and the court  system
     spheres.  It contrasted their position with  that  of  the  10,000  to
     15,000 members of Protestant groups in  Iran  especially  Evangelicals
     whose origins dated back to Western missionary activity  in  the  19th
     century and whose traditions were  based  on  proselytising,  services
     conducted in Farsi, and the dissemination of religious  texts.   Their
     links with European and especially US churches fuelled the  suspicions
     of the Iranian Government.  There were reports from Iranian Christians
     International that converts from Islam and  leaders  of  the  churches
     were arrested, threatened, detained and tortured,  activity  which  in
     1998 was said to have increased.

 68. The UN Commission on Human Rights considered a report of January  2002
     on Iran.  It noted in the summary that there had been little change in
     the official and societal discrimination experienced by religious  and
     ethnic minorities, treatment which  sometimes  escalated  in  to  open
     persecution.   Officially  recognised  religious  minorities  had  the
     status of second class citizens.  It continued in  paragraphs  80  and
     81:

           "80.  However, their lot is considerably better than that of the
                 unrecognised, that is, the non-ethnic Christians.  These
                 are those groups of Christians who are for the most part
                 ethnic Persians.  Evangelical Christians such as members of
                 the Assemblies of God have been harshly persecuted over the
                 years, apparently on the grounds that they had been or
                 might be proselytising.  Some of them are said to have been
                 convicted for apostasy.  Some have been sentenced to death
                 and a few have been executed.  The Special Representative
                 has been informed that only three small Persian-speaking
                 churches may remain in operation and that they have had to
                 agree not to evangelize Muslims.  The printing of Christian
                 literature is prohibited and Christian bookstores are
                 banned.  A number of Christian activists have reportedly
                 fled the country.


           81.   In the Special Representative's opinion, the situation  of
                 the Christians,  particularly  the  non-ethnic  Christians,
                 does not seem to have improved since the 1996 report of the
                 Special Rapporteur on religious intolerance on his visit to
                 Iran (E/CN.4/1996/95/Add.2).   The  Special  Representative
                 again  calls   on   the   Government   to   implement   the
                 recommendations of  the  Special  Rapporteur  on  religious
                 intolerance."

 69. Reference was also made to the  7th  UNHCR/ACCORD  Country  of  Origin
     Seminar of June 2001, which provided reports on Iran for the  purposes
     of assisting in the decision-making  on  asylum  claims.   Whilst  the
     organisers said that the views in it were comprehensive, they were not
     necessarily those of the two organisations.

 70. Although the 1997 election of President Khatami had  been  seen  as  a
     major development, there had been a conservative backlash and  in  any
     event the country  continued  to  be  far  from  a  democracy  and  to
     experience widespread abuses of human rights.  Even Islamic clergy who
     question the prevailing orthodoxy or the role of  the  clergy  in  the
     state were liable to face vague charges of "insulting" religion  which
     could lead to the death penalty;  journalists  could  also  face  such
     charges.  There was no evidence  of  the  death  penalty  having  been
     carried out for those offences.

 71. For apostates from Islam who were born to Muslim parents, the  penalty
     was death.  Although there  had  been  executions  for  that  offence,
     particularly in the early years of the revolution, it appeared that in
     2001 the Government was not pursuing an active and  systematic  policy
     of investigation and prosecution of cases  of  apostasy.   It  drew  a
     distinction between those who converted before  their  departure  from
     Iran, who had taken a very great risk, and those who converted outside
     Iran.  It continues:

           "It is important to add that conversion  abroad  could  also  be
           perfectly genuine.  Iran is a place where  people  are  fine  as
           long as they do what they do  behind  closed  doors  and  within
           their own four walls.  People may drink, practice  homosexuality
           and their religious faith after conversion. Yet, if a person who
           converted abroad walked down central Teheran  wearing  a  cross,
           s/he would certainly have to face difficulties.  S/he may not be
           at risk if s/he keeps a low profile.  In general, however, it is
           very difficult to assess what is going to happen to a person who
           converted to another faith upon return. In such cases, a case by
           case assessment would need to be made taking  into  account  the
           ultimate reasons for conversion  and  the  degree  of  publicity
           surrounding the case.  In addition, although  Iranian  embassies
           may well monitor activities  of  Iranian  exile  communities  it
           would be highly unusual if they kept track of  Iranian  baptisms
           abroad."

 72. Proselytising was said to be  an  activity  which  all  churches  were
     extremely cautious about with the possible exception of the Assemblies
     of God Churches.   In  1994,  three  prominent  evangelical  Christian
     clergy had been killed, after having been accused  of  seeking  Muslim
     converts.  It was not thought that intra-Christian proselytising would
     lead to adverse reactions from the state;  proselytising was  said  to
     be a fundamental aspect of  practising  a  universal  and  evangelical
     faith, although it was difficult to prove that anyone carried out such
     activities if they were said to have been carried out in  the  privacy
     of the home.

 73. A US Immigration and Naturalization Service Note of November  2002  on
     conversion from Islam to Christianity reported the views of NGOs  such
     as HRW.  It said that HRW had reported numerous  cases  in  which  the
     death penalty had been handed out  for  apostasy,  as  well  as  other
     severe penalties and lesser sanctions later in the 1990s.  It noted an
     improvement in  the  lifestyle  for  those  Christians  who  were  not
     converts or engaged in  converting  Muslims.   Evangelical  Christians
     could face harassment and sometimes persecution.

 74. An International Christian Concern Report last updated  in  May  2003,
     identified individuals who had suffered at the hands  of  the  various
     authorities  in  Iran  because  of  their  conversion  from  Islam  to
     Christianity.  One had been tortured in 2001,  another  in  1999;  two
     lost their jobs in 1999.  In 1998, another family were  harassed,  one
     lost his job, his car was burnt and he was beaten and threatened.   In
     1997, members of an Assembly of God church were made to  promise  that
     they would meet only in churches and would not allow Muslims to  enter
     and that guards would  check  on  their  identity.   In  Autumn  1997,
     several converts were tortured and many disappeared;  twenty to thirty
     had been arrested on another occasion and treated badly.  A pastor had
     been sentenced to death in 1995 for apostasy but  he  had  since  been
     released.  In 1996,  pastors  and  church  leaders  had  faced  severe
     harassment and one had been killed by police.   Charges  of  espionage
     and adultery were brought against a convert because of his  conversion
     but he had been released after international pressure and had left the
     country.

 75. Mr Wilken placed some weight on the optimistic  note  struck  by  some
     Iranian newspaper reports.  The December 2003 Teheran  Times  reported
     that the President urged a dialogue between  Islam  and  Christianity.
     The  "Iranian"  noted  the  Christians  of  Teheran  were  celebrating
     Christmas in their own way  and  acknowledged  the  deep  roots  which
     Christianity had in Iran.

 76. We turn now to the  evidence  of  the  Appellants.   FS  and  NS  each
     produced a report from an  academic  who  was  suitably  qualified  to
     provide the report relied on.  We were  provided  with  the  necessary
     details, and accepted an application from these  two  Appellants  that
     the expert, for reasons which we were given, should remain  anonymous,
     to be known as AB.  The report for NS was an earlier one.

 77. The Report includes an analysis of the background papers  produced  by
     various bodies.  Much of what it says is consistent with the  material
     relied on by the Secretary of State.  It refers to the  difference  in
     approach to proselytising  of  the  ethnic  Christian  churches  which
     generally discourage conversion, the Catholic Church  which  is  small
     and wary of proselytising and the Protestant churches into which  most
     conversions take place.  The terms  "evangelical",  "Protestant",  and
     "converts", tend to converge in the Iranian context for  that  reason.
     Only three Protestant Churches remained in Iran - the Assembly of God,
     the Episcopalian or Anglican Church which was on the evangelical wing,
     and the Armenian Evangelical Church.  The report concludes that  those
     who are most at risk as Christian converts from Islam in  Iran  belong
     to the evangelical communities.  Christian apostates who were executed
     in the early 1990s judicially or extra judicially were all Pastors  at
     these  churches.   But  other  forms  of  harassment  and  persecution
     suffered by ordinary converts were more probably linked to the fact of
     conversion and membership of an evangelical congregation.   There  had
     been a sharp reduction in  numbers  among  the  Christian  communities
     since the 1979 Revolution but there were indications that  the  number
     of converts to Christianity since 1979  had  increased  substantially.
     Nonetheless, such conversions were said to be relatively rare.  It was
     difficult to estimate the number of evangelical Christians  or  Muslim
     converts in Iran because many were forced to worship  in  private.   A
     1990  estimate  was  that  perhaps  half  of  the  various  Protestant
     congregations of 30,000 people might be Muslim converts; but there had
     been substantial emigration during the early 1990s when persecution of
     evangelicals was at its worst.  The Report made three specific  points
     of relevance when assessing the available information.

 78.  First,  documentation  of  harassment  and   discrimination   against
     Christian  converts  was   likely   to   underestimate   rather   than
     overestimate the position because minorities often maintained  silence
     for fear of attracting greater persecution for their  community  as  a
     whole.  This had specifically happened in 1994 following  the  killing
     of three Pastors.

 79. Second, the Report commented that the reports of official western fact
     finding delegations were likely  to  be  limited  by  the  fear  which
     individuals approached for information in Iran might have in  speaking
     frankly to them.  The report gave two examples of what had happened in
     2003 following visits to Iran by UN human  rights  monitors  examining
     alleged abuses of political prisoners.

 80. Third, the political and human rights situation in Iran had fluctuated
     considerably  over  the  last  few  years  with  periods  of  relative
     relaxation being followed by periods of pressure for one or  other  of
     the groups at risk.  It referred to the tenuous  nature  of  President
     Khatami's position and the conservative opposition to him.  It  quoted
     a US State Department Report of 2002 suggesting that it was  only  for
     the non-evangelical or non-convert  Christian  groups  for  whom  life
     under Khatami had improved.

 81. The Report then turned to apostasy.  It commented on the  CIPU  Report
     of October 2003 noting that it omitted the reference in  the  1999  US
     State Department Report on Iran to between  fifteen  and  twenty-three
     disappearances of  Muslim  converts  in  the  year  November  1997  to
     November 1998 and the comment in the 2002 US State  Department  Report
     that most or all of those were believed to have been killed.  This was
     seen as contradicting the CIPU comment that there had been  no  deaths
     of evangelical Christians at the hands of the authorities since  1994.
     It was necessary also to examine the role of extra  judicial  killings
     in this respect.  The law of Islamic punishment would allow  a  Muslim
     to murder a convert to Christianity or other evil people with impunity
     if the sin could later be proved in  court.   Examples  of  this  were
     given: one was that of a convert Christian  pastor  found  hanging  in
     1996.  Formal charges of apostasy were not routinely  brought  against
     converts but the law was an ever present threat and there  were  other
     forms of harassment to which converts were subject.  The fact that the
     Iranian codified criminal law did not specifically include apostasy as
     a crime did not mean that it could not be  charged  as  a  crime.   An
     insult to or denial of the Prophet gave rise to charges  of  blasphemy
     and an accusation of apostasy would lead to the court turning to  such
     sources  outside  codified  law  as  the   judge   might   regard   as
     authoritative.

 82.  The  Report  then  turned  to  other   forms   of   persecution   and
     discrimination.  It pointed out that  Muslim  converts  were  excluded
     from the protection of Article 13 of the  Iranian  Constitution  which
     guaranteed  religious  freedom  to  Christian  Iranians.   Indeed,  an
     accusation of apostasy could be levelled at those who did not  observe
     the obligatory practices of Islam as seen by the  ruling  clerics  and
     even those campaigning for  the  introduction  of  modern  norms  into
     Islamic society could be regarded as apostates;  apostasy  involved  a
     renunciation of Islam rather than conversion  necessarily  to  another
     religion.  It referred to the January 2002 Report  of the  UN  Special
     Representative for Iran, and said that in 2001 the UNSR  had  reported
     that the evangelical Christians did not enjoy the  limited  rights  of
     ethnic Christians and that their services were subject  to  harassment
     and that "from time to time they had  suffered  persecution  and  even
     death for their beliefs".

 83. AB's Report then referred to what the CIPU  and  US  State  Department
     said about registration and monitoring of  services,  the  closure  of
     churches, the banning of Farsi in sermons, and the prohibition on  the
     sale of the Bible in Farsi.  It  referred  to  evidence  that  Iranian
     authorities monitored Christian communities outside the  country.   It
     reported that in 2003  two  German  Christian  pastors  believed  that
     Iranian converts in their congregation had been informed on by Iranian
     intelligence and beaten severely in the street.  It pointed out as the
     other reports had done that converts to Christianity could be deprived
     of the right to work in the  Civil  Service  or  in  Government  owned
     companies which formed a large proportion of the job market  and  that
     many important private sector institutions also in  practice  observed
     that selection process.  The vetting  system  would  exclude  a  known
     convert to  Christianity  from  State  employment  and  large  private
     companies.

 84. Christians and converts were vulnerable to arbitrary arrest  and  ill-
     treatment at the hands of paramilitary vigilantes such as the  Basiji,
     Islamic fundamentalists allowed by the Iranian authorities to  enforce
     religious law.  Examples were given of two people in 2001, one of whom
     was detained and tortured by the Basiji and another who  was  abducted
     on a number of occasions by secret police;  he  and  his  family  were
     forcibly evicted from their home in the provinces, but having fled  to
     Teheran found that fellow believers from  his  home  area  were  being
     arrested and questioned about his own whereabouts, so he had fled Iran
     with his family.

 85. The Report said that this kind of conduct was a  principal  source  of
     arbitrary persecution and was sanctioned by the Islamic requirement to
     commend the good and forbid the evil.  The Basiji,  the  Revolutionary
     Guard and Ansar e Hezbollah saw giving effect to that  requirement  as
     part of their religious duty.  Murder in the course  of  such  actions
     was effected with impunity and an example of the Iranian courts giving
     effect to those principles was cited.  Examples  of  arbitrary  arrest
     and imprisonment were given.  In 1996 and 1997 three groups of members
     of the Assembly of  God  Church  in  Sari,  Shiraz  and  Teheran  were
     arrested,  detained  and  although  released,  had  been  dealt   with
     violently with torture.  Other examples  were  given  of  arrests  and
     beatings  in 1996 to 2000 of those who were  converts  or  related  or
     working with the Protestant churches.

 86. The Report then turned to proselytising.  It agreed with  the  comment
     in the April 2003 CIPU to the effect that the government was  vigilant
     in curbing those activities by evangelical Christians  whose  services
     were conducted in Persian and that a Christian who was  caught  trying
     to convert another would be treated harshly.   This  Report  commented
     that while an active proselytiser would be particularly vulnerable  to
     persecution, "persecution is  not  necessarily  linked  to  individual
     proselytising activities".  Most of  the  examples  of  ill  treatment
     given involved members of evangelical congregations and there had been
     no evidence that  they  had  been  engaged  in  active  proselytising.
     "What, however, they have in common in most cases is that they  belong
     to congregations suspected as a group, of proselytising by the Iranian
     authorities".

 87. It pointed out that those  who  were  suspected  of  proselytising  or
     propagating the Christian faith might be charged under laws other than
     those relating to the law of apostasy but  yet  might  be  subject  to
     harsh and  disproportionate  punishment.   An  example  would  be  the
     provisions in the penal and press Codes which precluded the  insulting
     of religion and which could lead to death or  imprisonment.   Writings
     against Islamic standards are also  subject  to  a  criminal  penalty.
     Other examples of laws  which  might  be  used  to  harass  Christians
     included "corrupting public morality",  "the  dissemination  of  false
     information" or "spreading corruption on earth".  The penalty for such
     offences included imprisonment, fines and flogging. The punishment for
     corruption  on  earth  included  death,  crucifixion,  amputation   or
     imprisonment, a charge related to "warring against God" in the Iranian
     penal code.

 88. The Swedish Aliens Appeal Board had reported on conditions in Iran  in
     1995 stating that those in Iran  who  converted  from  Islam  did  not
     normally risk the kind of prosecution prescribed in  the  Shari'a  and
     that there was no significant chance that they would be the target  of
     any action from the authorities or serious  harassment.   That  report
     was criticised by this expert.  The Christian church sources who  said
     that there was no real chance of persecution upon return to Iran  were
     speaking at precisely the time when pastors were  being  harassed  and
     killed, spreading  fear  amongst  evangelicals  and  traumatising  the
     community.   HRW  likewise  reported  a  disruption  in  the  flow  of
     information at this time.  There would have been pressure  to  produce
     positive information from the authorities;  it could take  no  account
     of the persecutions from mid 1996 which post dated the report;  it did
     not deal clearly with the position of a person whose  conversion  came
     to the knowledge of the Iranian authorities.  AB's Report  points  out
     that converts must register with the Iranian  authorities,  that  they
     are monitored and that  most  converts  must  make  their  conversions
     known;  the  CIPU  and  US  State  Department  Reports  said  so.   It
     continued: "the issue is not simply how often the law of apostasy  has
     been invoked and a  convert executed.  Christian converts can, as  the
     evidence shows, become the victims of severe  persecution  of  various
     kinds, all sanctioned, in  one  way  or  another  by  legal  framework
     prevailing in  the  Islamic  Republic."   It  was  very  difficult  to
     determine what circumstances specifically determined  risk.   Although
     most cases  concerned  those  who  became  evangelical  Christians  or
     Pastors of those denominations, it was wholly unknown whether  in  the
     case  of  ordinary  members  of  evangelical  Christian  congregations
     "individuals  were  targeted  because  they  were,   as   individuals,
     proselytisers, or simply because they were converts who were (as  most
     converts are likely to be), affiliates  of  a  Protestant  evangelical
     congregation".

 89. The report summarised the factors putting a Muslim convert at risk  in
     Iran as follows:

        1. A legal framework  which  included  apostasy  and  blasphemy  as
           offences punishable by death, and which allowed Muslim  converts
           to be harassed and killed by Muslim  extremists  with  impunity.
           It afforded no protection to them.   We  add  that  the  summary
           could usefully have included the range of  vague  offences  with
           which a convert or suspected convert could be charged.
        2. If a  known  convert  were  to  have  other  problems  with  the
           authorities, of whatever level or type, that fact would lead  to
           worse ill-treatment.
        3. Even if the situation had improved  over  the  last  few  years,
           despite the views of the UNSR, the conservative Guardian Council
           exercised strong political opposition to Khatami and  he  had  a
           very tenuous hold on power;   a  deterioration  in  the  climate
           could very easily occur.
        4. Neighbours, colleagues and others could very easily  denounce  a
           convert, maliciously or for ideological reasons, to any  of  the
           various forms of authority in Iran, state or  religious,  formal
           or informal;  they could lay complaints directly with the courts
           which would trigger a hearing.  This made  generalisations  very
           difficult about what factors would cause a person to  face  such
           problems.  The 7th UNHCR/ACCORD Report on Iran,  which  we  have
           already referred to, supported this point.
        5. The judiciary was active and influential and  in  alliance  with
           other conservative elements had become a source of challenge  to
           the Khatami Government.

 90. A further Report from  AB  was  put  in,  although  it  related  to  a
     different case.  It was dated shortly after the one to which  we  have
     just referred.  It dealt specifically with the Belgium  CEDOCA  Report
     relating to July 2002 and the Danish fact-finding mission of 2000.  AB
     pointed out that the UNSR, in a Report of January 2004 which had  only
     just become available, and an Amnesty International Report of November
     2003, both made the same point that the  fear  induced  by  systematic
     repression of free speech would lead to  self-censorship  rather  than
     frank speaking when the representatives of Western  countries  visited
     Iran and sought information;  once the visitor  had  gone  there  were
     known reprisals of some severity for those seen  as  speaking  out  of
     line.  Those who did included the Bishop, who was Head of the  Council
     of Protestant Churches;  he had been  murdered  as  a  consequence  in
     1994.

 91. It emphasised that there was a vital distinction to be  drawn  between
     those who were converts to Christianity and those  who  were  "ethnic"
     Christians.  Although it was generally agreed  that  the  position  of
     recognised minorities had improved since Khatami came to power, it was
     also generally agreed that the position of the Protestant  communities
     had not improved since 1996 when pressure on them was at its height.

 92. However, the  Report  recognised  that  two  Pastors  of  one  of  the
     Protestant Churches, which had a congregation of which 80 percent were
     Muslim converts, had said  to  a  number  of  interlocutors  that  the
     situation of his church members was good and much better than  six  or
     seven years ago,  from  2003.   Members  were  rarely  picked  up  for
     questioning.  Although it was agreed that there  had  been  no  formal
     charges of apostasy since the first half of the 1990s, there may  have
     been extra-judicial  killings  and  disappearances  later  than  that.
     There was evidence of persecution and harassment although it  appeared
     that even Muslim converts were able to practise their  faith  to  some
     degree but could not actively proselytise without  severe  repression.
     Nonetheless, there was an atmosphere of fear and insecurity because of
     surveillance, spies  in  the  congregation,  negative  attention,  the
     occasional detention and the risk of losing one's job  if  it  were  a
     Government job.

 93. 2003 had, however, seen a deterioration in the political situation  in
     Iran, as Khatami became more exposed with  the  success  of  religious
     conservatives in the recent elections.   The  reformist  MPs  had  had
     limited success in  liberalising  legislation  which  had  often  been
     blocked by the Guardian Council.  The only  legislation  of  note  had
     been the very recent eventual equalisation of blood money  as  between
     Muslims  and  non-Muslims.   There  had  in  fact   been   a   general
     deterioration in the human rights position of many.

 94. Human Rights Watch had reported in 1997 that the religious  minorities
     were among those likely to be the target of abuse and that the  courts
     were not a reliable protection for them regardless of what rights  the
     constitution might afford them in theory.  It contrasted the  position
     of the 10,000-15,000 Protestants with the  ethnically-based  Christian
     Churches as other reports do.  These do not merely hold their services
     in Farsi and seek to disseminate biblical material in Farsi;  they are
     churches built on a nineteenth century Western missionary tradition of
     proselytising in Iran.   This  is  allied  to  continuing  links  with
     Western churches in the USA and Europe which  fuels  suspicions  about
     their true intentions and hostility.   The  Report  asserts  that  not
     merely are they subject to institutionalised  discrimination,  as  are
     all non-Muslims, but they are also subject to persecution  because  of
     their religious activities.  Shortly after the Revolution,  there  was
     extensive persecution of Protestant clergy;  the  persecution  of  the
     evangelical Churches intensified in the 1990s, (although the instances
     cited relate to the early 1990s,  up  to  1994).   It  refers  to  the
     Government forcing Christian leaders to sign  statements  saying  that
     their treatment was satisfactory and the  evangelical  Churches  which
     refused to do so were dealt with severely.  It elaborated on the trial
     of a member of an armed resistance group who was accused of the murder
     of Protestant leaders in 1994;  the suggestion was  that  this  was  a
     show trial of those who were innocent of that crime, in order  to  put
     the regime in  a  better  international  light.   These  killings  had
     resulted in the drying up of information about  religious  persecution
     but there had been sporadic reports of  subsequent  attacks  including
     the killing in 1996 of a Protestant convert Pastor.  Pastors had  been
     intimidated, arrested on false  charges,  and  pressured  to  renounce
     proselytising.  This was contrasted with the position of the  Orthodox
     churches,  which  experienced  a  lower  level  of  discrimination  or
     persecution.

 95. The Report of the Special Rapporteur to the  UN  Commission  on  Human
     Rights, January 2004, followed a visit to Iran in November 2003.  This
     has already been referred to in the Report of the expert relied on  by
     the Appellants.  It confirmed  concerns  about  the  climate  of  fear
     induced by  the  systematic  repression  of  people  expressing  views
     critical of the authorised political and religious  doctrine  and  the
     severe and disproportionate sentences which that  created;   this  had
     led to self-censorship, thus impeding freedom of  expression.   It  is
     clear that that is not a reference to the unwillingness of  people  to
     talk to the Special Rapporteur but rather  is  making  a  wider  point
     about the effect of a repressive regime.  The disruption to  the  free
     expression of opinion was not confined to positive acts of censorship,
     but covered the less readily assessed effect of self-censorship.   The
     Special Rapporteur acknowledged that he had received the assurances of
     the Government that those who spoke to him would not be subject to any
     reprisals but he recorded that one such person, shortly after speaking
     to him had disappeared;  he had been returned to  the  notorious  Evin
     Prison according to the authorities from which he had been briefly  on
     leave.  The Report has little to say about religious freedom  as  such
     and nothing about proselytising Christians.

 96. There were other documents to which we were referred, but they  repeat
     or rely on the material which we have set out above.

 97. The Appellant NS also produced an expert report from Rev  Dr  Dehqani,
     the Commissary to the  Anglican  Bishop  in  Iran,  the  Rt  Rev  Iraj
     Mottahedeh.  She also gave oral evidence.   Her  report  and  evidence
     were based, for the most part, on discussions which she had  had  with
     the Bishop during his recent  visit  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  on
     earlier  occasions.   But  she  was  always  cautious  about  fax  and
     telephone calls from Iran during which people might be  careful  about
     what they said.  Her father had been  the  previous  Bishop,  but  her
     family had been in this country since 1980;  her father's position had
     become unbearable shortly after the revolution.  Her brother had  been
     murdered in 1980 and she did not consider that it would  be  safe  for
     her to return.  She had not been there  since  1980.   She  considered
     that an important factor in the current Bishop's ability to  lead  the
     Church was that he was not a convert from Islam but from Judaism.

 98. She noted the legal difficulties under which the Church  laboured  and
     the difficulties of a Christian convert,  even  such  as  the  Bishop,
     owning  property.   Its   position   was   precarious   and   becoming
     increasingly so.  The Anglican Church accepted  converts  but  did  so
     with care because of the consequences which that could  have  for  the
     convert and for the Church as a whole.

 99. The situation for Muslim converts had  become  more  risky  in  recent
     times, particularly since the summer of 2003 when five key members  of
     the church in Isfahan had been arrested and similar measures had  been
     taken in Shiraz and Teheran.  The Report said nothing about  what  had
     happened to them but Rev Dehqani  added  orally  that  they  had  been
     released, perhaps after  a  few  weeks  detention  if  they  had  been
     detained at all (about which she was uncertain), on several conditions
     which included ceasing  contact  with  the  church  and  moving  to  a
     different town, with re-arrest as the penalty for breach.  She had  no
     further details and could not say if they were converts.  A  statement
     produced for TB's appeal said that what we take to be the same  Church
     leaders in Isfahan and Shiraz had been arrested;  one was charged with
     evangelism and banished; an evangelical centre  in  Teheran  had  been
     closed.  Rev Dehqani was perhaps aware that there  had  been  rioting,
     unconnected with the church in summer 2003 but no-one  knew  what  had
     provoked the arrests of the clergymen.

100. There was no monitoring by the Church of how  converts  were  treated;
     many stayed away from church as a result of threats which were made to
     them.  There had been instances of false charges of eg "espionage"  or
     "immorality".  This was because, as the Church perceived  it,  it  was
     seen as an agent of the West or  as  a  means  used  by  the  West  to
     undermine the state.  Conversion was an affront  to  the  regime.   No
     Muslim convert could function in a leadership  capacity,  ordained  or
     lay.  The Anglican Church was viewed and  treated  rather  differently
     from the local ethnically based Churches.

101. The Church identified as risky activities which could  lead  to  harm,
     albeit unpredictably:  attendance at Church, associating  with  Church
     members, baptism, outward signs  of  devotion,  Bible  study  and  the
     promotion or public approval of Christian values  or  beliefs.   There
     were spies who reported on their activities.  The Church  as  a  whole
     felt  targeted.   There  was  great  fear  and  uncertainty.    Anyone
     returning as a convert would face a risky  future,  and  it  would  be
     dangerous if they were  unable  to  conceal  their  conversion  or  to
     refrain from associating with members of the Church.  Someone who  was
     baptised and attended church faced  risks  of  harassment,  prejudice,
     discrimination, arrest and even death and the fact that  she  did  not
     know of a case involving the death penalty did not mean  that  it  had
     not happened.

102. She disagreed with the view expressed in the DFAT material that it was
     unlikely that people would be checked as they went to and from church;
      she said that to her knowledge that was very common. Any decrease  in
     surveillance had not applied to Muslim  converts,  and  any  perceived
     easing of pressure since 1997 had gone since the summer of 2003;  life
     was now much more difficult for Muslim converts.   Government  actions
     were often arbitrary since the revolution.  She thought that the  DFAT
     interlocutor, being a member of an Assembly of God Church, might  find
     life easier than others because it would be seen as an ethnic minority
     rather than as a Western church.  Baptism was the moment  of  apostasy
     rather than church attendance, and the Anglican Church had always been
     very cautious about baptism because of the risk that the candidate was
     a spy rather than a genuine believer.  She accepted that at  least  in
     the 1990s the Assembly of God Church had been less cautious  than  the
     Anglican Church about baptising converts and proselytising.   She  had
     only spoken to the Bishop for fifteen minutes in her last call and she
     had not raised the DFAT material with him.  She  had  not  appreciated
     that the DFAT conversations related to September  2003.   That  Church
     might have had the motive of encouraging members  in  the  answers  it
     gave and the Belgium CEDOCA Mission, whilst it had  the  advantage  of
     being in Iran, might have not been given full information  because  of
     fear.

103. NS' bundle also included some US news reports of  views  expressed  by
     Christian  groups  in  the  US  which  painted  a  bleaker  but   more
     generalised picture of the position of the Protestant Churches in Iran
     than others.

104. TB produced a report from a Sunderland based "Attorney at  Law,  Legal
     Adviser", Mr Kakhki, of July 2003.  He said that  the  threat  of  the
     death penalty for apostasy was real  as  he  had  personally  defended
     converts charged with that offence and  they  had  been  sentenced  to
     death.  He had witnessed their execution.  He does not say  when  this
     was. They could not get a fair trial, but it was not uncommon for them
     to be released on bail while investigations were  made  and  for  them
     then to leave the country.

105. TB produced a report from Maria O'Shea, a  Research  Fellow  at  SOAS,
     with an interest in Middle East minorities  and  especially  those  of
     Iran.  Her report paints the picture of a repressive society in  which
     human rights are ignored routinely;  torture was common and the  death
     penalty carried out for some offences; trials were not fair.  She  too
     noted the position in law of the crime of apostasy.  Christian leaders
     had been forced to sign statements that they  would  not  proselytise.
     Persecution of evangelical Christians had increased in the 1990s;   an
     organisation of Iranian Christians had estimated that  in  1992  there
     were 6,700 Muslim converts  in  Iran.   She  gave  the  same  figures,
     seemingly from the same Christian paper source, as set out  later  for
     the number of Christians in the Protestant Churches  in  Iran.   There
     was, she concluded, a steady trickle of converts despite the  dangers.
     She recorded the US State Department note of disappearances in 1997 to
     1998, the deaths of eight evangelical Christians in the 1990s, and the
     murders of Pastors, to which we have already referred.   She  referred
     to an ICC press release of 2000 saying  that  pastors  were  regularly
     interrogated, barred from contact with Muslims  or  converts  or  with
     international organisations.  Individual instances of persecution were
     noted; these appear to be the same as those to which we  have  already
     referred.

106. In her assessment, like others, she draws a clear distinction  between
     those who are born Christian as a result of their ethnic identity, who
     are generally tolerated, and those who convert from Islam.  They  were
     limited to attendance in missionary  Churches  which  were  associated
     with imperialist endeavours of the past and foreign influences of  the
     present.   This  opened  up  the  risk  of  charges  of  espionage  or
     unpatriotic activities.  Converts were viewed with  suspicion  at  all
     levels of society, even among those who were not observant Muslims who
     saw such an act as a rejection of social and  religious  values.   She
     found it hard to see how a known convert could  function  in  Iran  as
     they  would  be  victimised,  attacked  and   discriminated   against.
     Although a Muslim could practise another  faith  discreetly,  a  known
     conversion would force the authorities to act against him.   It  would
     be difficult for a convert to remain in Iran as even those with a high
     profile and protection were often forced to leave, or had  disappeared
     or been executed or imprisoned.

107. Dr Spellman, whose doctoral thesis research included  interviews  with
     Iranian converts in this country between 1995 and 2000, said that many
     were worried about the harsh  and  adverse  reaction  of  friends  and
     family  as  well  as  the  government  when  they  learned  of   their
     conversion.  There had been monitoring, threats and detentions by  the
     authorities and vigilante  groups.   A  campaign  against  Pentecostal
     Churches had gathered strength in the first half of  the  1990s,  with
     the gradual eradication of churches under various legal pretexts.  The
     authorities were mainly concerned with the leaders  and  converts  who
     actively proselytised, but converts generally were afraid to  practise
     Christianity because of the likelihood of some  form  of  persecution.
     Charges of apostasy had been brought since the revolution and  several
     converts  reported  being   temporarily   detained,   threatened   and
     discriminated against at their place of work  without  actually  being
     charged or treated violently.

108. Mr Joffe produced a report of July 2003.  It dealt at some length with
     the legal nature of apostasy, the various spheres in which  Christians
     experienced discrimination, and individual acts of persecution,  which
     have been covered in other reports.  He  concluded  that  the  general
     political  situation  in  Iran  was  deteriorating   leaving   Khatami
     powerless.  As a result, he said, TB would face a severe and very real
     danger of arrest, torture, imprisonment and execution were he returned
     to Iran, regardless of any evangelical activities in  which  he  might
     engage.  Killings were also carried out by Hezbollah, who  had  covert
     official authority for their acts.

109. A letter from Mr Roshdi, an Iranian convert who came to  this  country
     in 1994 having held offices in the Assembly of God Church in  Teheran,
     said that Muslim  converts  did  not  systematically  face  the  death
     penalty but were subject to persecutions of a social nature, with  the
     loss of public sector jobs and difficulty finding them in the  private
     sector, educational discrimination and problems in obtaining  official
     forms eg passport, where religion had to be  declared.   An  outspoken
     convert would face  social  problems  and  arrest  and  prison  if  he
     proselytised.  Merely attending church and keeping quiet might lead to
     no problems.   However,  outside  Teheran  and  in  smaller  towns  in
     particular,  all  such  matters  were   dealt   with   more   harshly.
     Proselytising churches were seen  as  potential  spies  through  their
     relationship with foreign countries.  Christian organisations such  as
     study centres were harassed and closed.  Persecution could take  place
     sporadically for reasons which would be  unknown  to  the  persecuted.
     Sometimes members had been summoned to the secret  police,  questioned
     and threatened not to attend church meetings.  But no  physical  abuse
     had been reported from those interrogations.

110. We were also provided with material by Scudamores, solicitors  for  A,
     an Iranian asylum seeker in another case, the facts of which  made  it
     perhaps unsatisfactory to join it with  these  three  cases;    A  had
     experienced the interest of the authorities because of an intention to
     convert expressed before leaving Iran.  We permitted them to make what
     representations they thought would assist us, however,  because  there
     was a clear overlap.  Scudamores wrote to the US Center for  Religious
     Freedom seeking material which would support her case.  It replied  in
     July 2003 saying that Iran continued to arrest and sentence  apostates
     to death;  tremendous pressure from the state often led family members
     to take matters into their own hands to punish apostates but the state
     did not hesitate to imprison or execute those who  deviated  from  the
     prevailing  religious  orthodoxy  including  apostates.    Immigration
     Counsel at the US Commission on  International  Religious  Freedom,  a
     statutory body, took issue with assessments such as those cited  above
     which claimed that Iran no  longer  sought  to  arrest  and  persecute
     apostates;  by contrast it said that  there  continued  to  be  severe
     violations of religious freedom.  Converts continued to be subject  to
     the death  penalty  and  women  who  were  accused  would  have  fewer
     procedural protections than men.  Legislation proposed to prevent  the
     use of torture had not been acceptable to the Council of Guardians but
     even that rejected measure had not prohibited the use  of  torture  on
     apostates.

111. The  Barnabas  Fund,  a  Christian  evangelical  charity,  produced  a
     pamphlet which highlighted the religious and Shari'a law base for  the
     treatment of converts from Islam as apostates and as persons who could
     be killed without the protection of the law, through the Islamic world
     generally.  It produced a further document on Iran, dated 2002,  which
     estimated that about 30,000  Muslims  had  converted  to  Christianity
     since the Islamic Revolution.  It said that the policy of  the  regime
     was that converts were subject to the death penalty and that they were
     particularly targeted.  It gave examples of the increased  persecution
     faced by the Protestant Churches and converts;  but these  related  to
     the early 1990s. A more specific  paper  on  apostasy  in  Islam,  but
     covering Islam generally, noted the many Islamic countries or areas in
     which converts were persecuted or discriminated against  with  varying
     degrees of severity.

112. The World Evangelical Alliance  produced  a  paper  dated  March  2002
     enclosing a Report from the magazine 'Christianity Today'.  It  quoted
     Iranian Christians International (ICI) as saying that  persecution  of
     Christians had increased in Iran.  A number  of  Christians  had  been
     detained, eight had died since 1988 and between  fifteen  and  twenty-
     three had disappeared in 1997 and 1998, presumed dead, and  three  had
     disappeared in 2000.  This has already been referred to.

113. A Bethany World Prayer Center paper on Iran dated 1997 said  that  the
     Protestant Churches claimed about 5,500 communicant members,  although
     the figures were not entirely clear from other material in the  paper.
     More were affiliated.  The largest was the Evangelical Church  (3,000)
     and the Episcopal (1,000 plus 1,000 expatriates).   These  latter  are
     not those abroad but  resident  non-Iranians.   These  are  nineteenth
     century foundations of missionary origin.  There are six other smaller
     denominations with a twentieth century origin with largely  expatriate
     congregations.  Two of the eight  denominations  were  shrinking  fast
     while the rest  were  static.   The  Evangelical  Church  was  largely
     composed of  ethnic  minorities  but  fifteen  per  cent  were  Muslim
     converts; the Episcopal Church  was  fifty  per  cent  expatriate  and
     thirty percent Muslim convert.  The  churches  face  the  problems  of
     discrimination at all levels of life, persecution  of  their  leaders,
     emigration of members and leaders, shortage of religious materials and
     the closing down of churches.  The paper regretted  the  impossibility
     of missionary work in Iran.

114. Christianity Today in 2002 reported  that  in  2001  the  Basijis  had
     detained  and  tortured  a  convert  in  Teheran.  ICI  reported  that
     harassment was no longer confined to the arrest  of  key  leaders  but
     entire house churches of twenty to forty people  were  arrested  at  a
     time and that ordinary Christians were harassed.

The background evidence:  return

115. It is convenient now to turn to the material which deals with risk  on
     the return of failed asylum seekers.  This element cannot  be  treated
     as an entirely different element from risk to converts in Iran.

116. DFAT material of 1996 said that  imprisonment  for  illegal  exit  was
     rare.  The seeking of asylum would lead to no more than  verbal  abuse
     on return, if  it  were  known,  unless  the  individual  had  a  high
     political profile.  Deportations to Iran of failed asylum seekers were
     now routine, and there was no evidence of any  adverse  reaction  from
     the authorities.  The Government was  welcoming  back  those  who  had
     left;  some refugees returned temporarily on refugee travel  documents
     and had no adverse experiences.  Many minor outstanding  matters  were
     dealt with swiftly at the airport on return.  Apostates  would  suffer
     if they declared an intention on return to carry on with the  practise
     of their new religion.  The DFAT Report of 1996 described the  concept
     of "taghieh", which was relevant to  the  way  in  which  the  Iranian
     authorities would view someone who returned as a failed asylum  seeker
     and had asserted that he had converted to  Christianity  in  order  to
     advance his cause.  "It was  justified  to  lie  or  to  conceal  your
     beliefs when circumstances are not favourable for you or to fool  your
     enemy ... even if you were not in physical danger, to mislead  enemies
     or advance your cause."  Taghieh was not a  question  of  denying  the
     faith but went to the degree of plausibility with which answers as  to
     why someone had been abroad and claimed asylum or converted  could  be
     answered.

117. The CIPU Report of October 2003, paragraphs 6.101 to 6.106, says  that
     the penalty for illegal exit, such as on a falsified document,  ranges
     from a fine to between a month  and  three  years  in  prison.   Other
     reports said that a prison sentence was not in practice  imposed.   On
     return from abroad, citizens are searched for certain western products
     and will be more stringently questioned if returning  from  a  western
     country such as the USA, but are unlikely to  be  detained  for  long.
     People  will  be  asked  why  they  went  abroad,  subject   to   what
     documentation exists on the returnee and the practice in the returning
     country, and an answer along the lines that the person simply sought a
     job would be likely to lead to his being allowed  to  go.   Government
     attitudes towards those who returned as failed asylum seekers appeared
     to more pragmatic.  Observers reported that there was no evidence that
     those who exited illegally faced any significant problems  on  return.
     It is not an offence to apply for asylum abroad and the government has
     stated that it would welcome the return of its citizens from abroad.

118. The passport did not show religion although there  was  evidence  that
     the identity cards would.  It was possible  to  marry  in  a  registry
     office without stating religious affiliation;  CIPU 6.81.

119. The US State Department Report on 2002 said that those returning  were
     sometimes searched and subjected to extensive questioning about  anti-
     government activities abroad.  The Danish fact-finding mission of 2000
     said that on return the computer at the airport was  checked  for  any
     "outstanding matters" with the authorities but was not explicit as  to
     what constituted such matters.  Some countries  send  rejected  asylum
     seekers  back  to  Iran.   Thousands  of   Iranian   citizens   return
     voluntarily every year.  In September  2002,  the  Iranian  government
     announced that it would grant  passports  to  those  Iranians  abroad;
     illegal exit would not  lead  to  difficulties;   the  relevant  forms
     should be filled in, the money paid and after a while  the  individual
     would be able to return.

120. Mr Wilken relied in particular on the Iranian Government  announcement
     of 2002 that expatriates would be  given  passports,  and  a  research
     paper from the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board  of  1999  which
     referred to a 1998 document from  Canadian  immigration  officials  in
     Iran saying that they had seen no evidence that failed asylum seekers,
     those who left  illegally,  or  those  who  were  deported  faced  any
     significant problems upon return;  nor were measures taken against the
     family members in Iran of those who claimed asylum  abroad.   He  also
     relied on a September 2002 letter from the British Embassy in  Teheran
     which  stated  that  a  failed  Iranian  asylum  seeker  who  returned
     voluntarily  on  his  own  passport,  was  known  to  have  faced   no
     difficulties.  The  official  had  consulted  the  Australian  Embassy
     because it had returned some one hundred failed  asylum  seekers  over
     the two years to September 2002 and it had had no confirmed reports of
     ill-treatment.  One returnee had complained of ill-treatment but  that
     had not been verified.  Illegal departure resulted  in  a  spot  fine.
     The Dutch did not know of problems whether from voluntary  returns  or
     from the two per month involuntary returns which it  had  made.   They
     had had one report of  a  detention,  but  another  lived  and  traded
     successfully in Teheran.  Many who were returned kept  coming  to  the
     Embassy to plead their case which, the Dutch thought, showed that they
     were not facing serious problems.  Some had  been  returned  on  their
     driving licences and only one had been refused entry  by  the  Iranian
     authorities.  Canadian experience was that  those  who  were  returned
     faced no problems and indeed there were  some  who  had  been  granted
     asylum who had been able to return for  family  or  vacation  purposes
     without difficulty.

121. AB's report for FS said that it was extremely difficult for those  who
     left Iran without the proper papers to conceal that fact when  seeking
     new travel documents from the  Iranian  Consulate  in  London.   Those
     returning on temporary documentation were likely to  face  prosecution
     at least for violation of travel regulations, questioning and a  court
     hearing.  AB reported Amnesty International's evidence that  some  had
     been arrested on return for exit violations in 2002, and denied access
     to their families amid fears of ill treatment  or  torture.   Although
     applying for asylum abroad was not an offence within the  Penal  Code,
     there were other charges which  could  be  brought  were  a  judge  so
     minded.  There was very little practical evidence  about  the  way  in
     which these violations were  in  fact  dealt  with.   There  was  some
     evidence from two who had been returned from Australia that  they  had
     been interrogated and monitored by Iranian authorities.  There was  no
     monitoring by Western countries or international organisations of what
     happened to those returned to Iran.  If there were  detention,  prison
     conditions were harsh, at times abusive of rights;  torture  was  used
     to elicit confessions  and  not  just  on  political  prisoners;   the
     judiciary  lacked  any  structural   independence   whether   in   the
     revolutionary courts or in the public courts.

122. TB  also  produced  a  range  of  background  material.   A  Melbourne
     newspaper, 'The Age', 29th April 2002, reported the arrest in Iran  of
     two failed asylum seekers returned from Australia, one of whom  was  a
     convert to Christianity.  One had made contact with the paper and said
     that Teheran was not  safe  for  returnees  especially  if  they  were
     Christians;  they had been exiled by their families  and  harassed  by
     the authorities.  One was interrogated for six hours  and  ordered  to
     appear before a revolutionary Tribunal because of criticism  which  he
     had made of the regime when  in  Australia.   A  paper  of  1998  from
     Iranian  Refugees  at  Risk  criticised  the  assumption  by   western
     countries, the Netherlands in particular, that they were  able  either
     to monitor or at least verify the fate of those returned; that was not
     possible in Iran:  there were no  independent  NGOs  or  investigatory
     bodies and fear would  prevent  allegations  being  made  against  the
     authorities of human rights violations.  There had been one suspicious
     death in that period.

123. A Farsi newspaper published in London said that refugees  deported  to
     Iran faced arrest at the airport  and  torture.   Converts  faced  the
     greatest danger.  Ms O'Shea's report also commented that as TB was the
     subject of official interest before he left Iran, he could  expect  on
     return that there would be increased interest, perhaps detention while
     enquires were made, during which  time  ill  treatment  was  always  a
     possibility.  Mr  Joffe  said  that  travel  documents  would  require
     investigations in Iran and that would alert the security  services  to
     him and to the outstanding allegations against him.  Returnees who had
     been abroad for more than six months tended to face arrest while  they
     were questioned about any  matters  which  might  touch  upon  Iranian
     security, unless they had good reasons for  having  been  abroad.   Mr
     Joffe points out that the risk to asylum  seekers  on  return  depends
     upon whether they had good objective grounds for seeking  asylum;   if
     so and if they were nonetheless returned they would be  inevitably  of
     interest to the authorities who might take them into custody where ill
     treatment was likely.  There were now few  people  returning  to  live
     permanently in Iran and the assumption in the Netherlands Reports that
     many Iranians returned without difficulty  related  to  a  period  now
     past.  The more uncertain political climate in Iran also made it  more
     difficult to predict what the reaction of the authorities would be  to
     any individual returning;  there was now a stricter  attitude  towards
     those  who  were  seen  as  opponents  of  the  regime.   An   Iranian
     Pentecostal Pastor in Germany in a newsletter of January 2003 referred
     to the danger faced by Iranian Christians deported from  Germany,  and
     by Christians in Iran who were seen as trying to convert Muslims; they
     all faced prison.

Submissions

124. Mr Vokes for TB submitted that the  background  material  showed  that
     there was an important distinction drawn between the  ethnic  and  the
     Protestant or evangelical churches.  Church attendance made someone of
     interest to the authorities;  even  attempting  to  spread  the  faith
     discreetly put one at risk.  TB's Church in the United Kingdom was one
     in which a member would be expected to spread the word of  God.   Even
     if no charge of apostasy was brought,  there  were  other  charges  or
     false charges which could be  brought;   disappearances  could  easily
     recur, even if there had not been any recently.   The  CEDOCA  Mission
     did not cover the Anglican Church.  It showed the  difference  between
     the private and public practice of religion in terms of the  level  of
     risk run.  The pastors of the Armenian Assembly of God Churches  would
     be guarded in what they said.  The Assyrian Assembly of  God  and  the
     Assyrian Church were not active proselytisers among Muslims.  The DFAT
     material was  over-optimistic  and  related  to  just  one  Church  in
     Teheran.  It was a single unnamed source.  The Bishop  from  whom  Rev
     Dehqani obtained her information would have an overall  view  of  what
     was happening in Iran.  Its language showed  continuing  vulnerability
     and there was the risk that the informal  state  forces  such  as  the
     religious police would harass converts or worse.  The evidence  showed
     that only if a person were to keep his religion entirely private would
     he be able to avoid the attention of the authorities.  This would  not
     be possible for someone who converted, the essence of whose belief was
     the need to communicate the good news which his conversion  experience
     had led him to.  That would be a sufficient public  face  to  bring  a
     convert to the attention of the authorities.

125. The basic nature of the regime had  not  changed  over  time  although
     there had been  fluctuations  in  the  way  in  which  Christians  and
     converts had been treated.  There was  now,  as  Rev  Dehqani  showed,
     presently a deterioration in conditions.  The  state  did  not  accept
     conversion and saw it as a threat;  there was a general atmosphere  of
     fear and the past persecutions were  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
     future risk.

126. TB would not and could not be one of those who would keep his  beliefs
     and faith to  himself;   he  would  be  engaged  in  active  Christian
     activity.  It  would  not  just  be  church  attendance,  which  could
     possibly lead to questioning or detention.  Expressing the  good  news
     to friends and relations, his desire to speak of his faith as a  born-
     again Christian, the communication of his  joy,  unable  to  deny  his
     faith, would put him at risk.  A Christian needed to bear witness.  He
     would  not  necessarily  be  distributing  material  on  the  streets,
     although that would lead to more severe repression.   He  would  be  a
     member of the Anglican, evangelical,  Church.   It  appeared  that  Mr
     Vokes' submission was that there was no duty to take the risk of going
     to Iran to evangelise but, if in Iran, there was a duty to  evangelise
     and to run the consequent  risks.   Evangelising  or  bearing  witness
     would be inevitable.

127. Mr Vokes said that  Article  9  ECHR  was  engaged  because  TB  could
     practise his religion here but not in  Iran.   Even  if  he  were  not
     persecuted, he would  be  severely  discriminated  against  if  unable
     openly to proclaim his  faith,  because  he  would  be  restricted  to
     solitary Bible reading.  He accepted that a flagrant violation of  the
     right had to be shown.  Mr Vokes made  a  broader  submission  to  the
     effect that there would be a breach of Article 9 were TB to be removed
     from the United Kingdom where he could practise his faith to one where
     he could not, even if he were not persecuted.  Mr Wilken said that the
     cases did not reach the level of persecution and that was  an  end  to
     it.  Following the decision of the House  of  Lords  in  R  v  Special
     Adjudicator ex parte Ullah and Do v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  26,  17th  June
     2004, it is clear that Article 9 of the ECHR can  be  engaged  by  the
     removal of a foreigner, although it was  pointed  out,  paragraph  21,
     that it was difficult to envisage facts which would not  have  already
     engaged  Article  3  or  the  Geneva   Convention.    Although   these
     submissions preceded the decision of the House  of  Lords,  there  was
     nothing sufficiently new in what their Lordships had to say to warrant
     seeking further submissions on the  point.   The  fact  that  fear  or
     temporary state disruption might  cause  a  convert  to  cease  church
     attendance for a while would  not  lead  to  a  breach  of  Article  9
     sufficiently grave to preclude his return.

128. The submissions by Miss Weston for the other Appellants agreed with Mr
     Vokes, in  large  measure.   She  emphasised  the  way  in  which  the
     persecutor would see those who were members of Western churches  as  a
     threat to the state rather than members of ethnic  minority  Christian
     churches,  although  the  Armenian  Assembly  of   God   Church   also
     proselytised.  Those who were members of  evangelical  Churches  would
     face particular discrimination, though  the  ethnic  Assembly  of  God
     Churches were not targeted as harshly as were Protestant  or  Anglican
     Churches.  She emphasised the self-censorship, and under-reporting  of
     acts of persecution, together with the variability  of  the  political
     climate.  This posed particular problems where  the  religion  was  so
     bound up with the state and there was no system of fair trial.   Women
     in particular had fewer due process rights.  There would be  no  state
     protection against discriminatory  treatment.   There  were  also  the
     activities of those who were permitted  by  the  state  to  abuse  the
     rights of others in the name of religion, such as  the  Basijis.   The
     risk that conversion would become  known  to  the  authorities  on  or
     before return posed a risk at the point of return itself.

129. There was a continuum  of  harm  which  converts  faced:   harassment,
     surveillance of  churches,  discrimination,  living  in  fear,  extra-
     judicial punishments or beatings by para-statals such as the  Basijis,
     adverse attention and ill-treatment from the state,  a  discriminatory
     failure to protect converts, judicial charges of  a  vague  nature  or
     false charges, arbitrary detention in conditions  where  ill-treatment
     was likely to include gender-related violence and possibly death.   It
     was not necessary to proselytise to be at risk.  If the conversion was
     made  public  through  church  attendance  or  through  informants  or
     monitoring, the ordinary expression  of  one's  faith,  in  particular
     through its association via the Protestant tradition  with  the  West,
     would lead to a risk of persecution.  Conversion would be seen  as  an
     anti-state  activity.    Ideological   denunciation   by   neighbours,
     colleagues or even family members was a risk, or exploitation  because
     of it.  The Australian Country assessment of 1996 was  too  optimistic
     because there were widespread abuses in 1996, but  it  was  useful  in
     pointing out that candidates for an  imputed  political  opinion  were
     those converts publicly witnessing their new faith.

130. The later DFAT material relied on by the Secretary of State, from June
     2002 to February 2003 predated the arrests in August 2003 spoken of by
     Rev Dehqani.  It was from a  single  source  and  did  not  cover  the
     position of the western Protestant Churches.  In part it was vague  as
     to the negative attention to  which  individuals  were  subject.   The
     proselytising of the Armenian Assembly of God Churches was directed to
     the more traditional Christians rather than to Muslims.   The  climate
     of tolerance to which it referred was no longer current in  the  light
     of Rev Dehqani's evidence and there had been political changes  since.
     It could not outweigh the position set out in the US State  Department
     Report.  It was not clear what "more complex" meant in the context  of
     those who publicly declared their conversion or  which  converts  were
     being referred to.  The CEDOCA Report did not add to  the  information
     in DFAT because it came from the same limited source and did not cover
     the position of the Anglican  or  Western  Protestant  Churches.   The
     evidence showed that they should be considered differently because the
     Iranian authorities perceived them differently and as a threat to  the
     state because of their western origins and connections.  The risk  was
     not that they would come to attention because  of  proselytising,  but
     from identification as  a  convert  participating  in  the  Protestant
     Church in Iran.

131. NS would engage in  ordinary  church  attendance,  as  a  regular  and
     committed church member, and talking to friends.  The risks on  return
     and those faced by converts there were not discrete;  how she would be
     treated on arrival was unknown,  but  she  faced  a  risk  for  gender
     reasons as well. Her history and associations did not pose  additional
     risks.

132. FS should be seen as  having  an  imputed  political  profile.   Kiani
     [2002] UKIAT 01328 concluded that someone who returned to  Iran  after
     two years abroad would be regarded with suspicion, and would be  at  a
     real risk of detention and ill treatment.  Even  without  that  latter
     ingredient, there  could  be  persecution  for  an  imputed  political
     reason.  The Iranian claimant was granted refugee status. Reliance was
     placed on that case by Appellants.  It had been  followed  in  another
     Tribunal decision in 2003.

133. FS would be under suspicion of being  against  the  state.   His  past
     activities, accepted by the Adjudicator, would be the trigger for  him
     coming to the attention of the authorities  on  return,  being  viewed
     with suspicion, detained and ill-treated.  His past could  affect  his
     treatment should he later be arrested for his  conversion.   He  would
     face the gamut of risks, including extra-judicial  punishment,  unfair
     trial and serious ill treatment in prison.

134. We were referred to a decision of  the  Federal  Court  of  Australia,
     W68/01A v Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural  Affairs  [2002]
     FCA 148, Lee J, paragraph 35.  He noted that it was not just the  risk
     of the death penalty for apostasy which could  constitute  persecution
     but also that the risk of discovery, apprehension and punishment which
     would be a continuing fear could  be  sufficient  to  ground  a  well-
     founded fear of persecution.  Substantial harm through deprivation  of
     liberty,  assaults  and  continuing   harassment   could   amount   to
     persecution.  An  assessment  of  the  degree  of  commitment  to  the
     conversion would not determine the extent of  persecution  because  it
     would not determine necessarily the way  in  which  someone  would  be
     perceived by the various authorities in Iran.

135. Mr Wilken, for the Secretary of State, submitted that in the  case  of
     FS there was no evidence of past persecution in Iran, a finding  which
     he said was unchallenged;  the warrant was irrelevant.   Alternatively
     he argued that the conclusions of the Tribunal in paragraph 9  of  the
     determination (which was overturned  on  appeal  but  not  because  of
     anything in paragraph 9) should be adopted as sound.  This agreed with
     the Adjudicator that there was no evidence of past persecution;  there
     was no evidence as to what was in the alleged warrant issued two years
     after the demonstration to which it presumably related and  there  was
     no  evidence  of  any  adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant  by   the
     authorities in the two years before its issue.  That simply could  not
     establish a real risk of persecution for any  political  opinion.   If
     charged with an offence arising out of it, the trial and treatment  in
     prison would not breach his protected rights.

136. Mr Wilken submitted that TB, on the Adjudicator's findings, could  not
     be said to be one who was active in converting people.  He had already
     been baptised into the Jesus Fellowship Church  when  the  Adjudicator
     reached her conclusions about his likely religious activities.  He had
     never said that he would be active in converting people, and he  could
     manifest  his  joy  through  attending  services.   Accordingly,   the
     question in TB's case was simply whether he would  be  at  risk  as  a
     convert who would not engage in proselytising.

137. Shortly, Mr Wilken argued  that  if  the  Assembly  of  God  Churches'
     membership was not persecuted, the same would apply to those who  were
     members of the Anglican Church. He accepted that there was evidence of
     persecution before 1997 but contended that that had changed  with  the
     election of President Khatami in 1997.   There  was  no  intention  to
     proselytise in any of these cases and where that was so there  was  no
     real risk of persecution;  indeed there was no such risk even if there
     were an  intention  to  proselytise.   It  was  necessary  to  draw  a
     distinction between the theoretically harsh position  in  Iranian  law
     and the actual position which converts would face.

138. He conceded that all three should be regarded as refugees sur place if
     Article 33 of the Geneva Convention would be breached by their  return
     to Iran.  They would constitute a social group consisting of Christian
     converts liable to the death penalty.   No  issue  arose  between  the
     parties on this point.  However, it is worth picking up at this  point
     a comment made by Sedley LJ in his judgment in the  appeal,  paragraph
     19.  He pointed out that a person who is abroad for  a  non-Convention
     reason may  find  that  he  is  nonetheless  outside  his  country  of
     nationality and is unable to return for a Convention reason.  But that
     reason must be at least one reason why he is unable to return;  if  he
     is solely here for other reasons his case  falls  outside  the  Geneva
     Convention altogether and his stay must depend  on  the  ECHR.   Thus,
     there must be a causal link between the Convention  reason  relied  on
     and the claimant's inability or unwillingness to  return.   If  he  is
     unwilling to go back essentially for other reasons then he  is  not  a
     refugee.  This is a causal issue which  should  be  explored  in  such
     cases.  But it is conceded here.

139. Mr Wilken submitted that the terms "Protestant" and "evangelical" were
     used interchangeably in this context, as for example in the HRW  paper
     relied on by FS and NS.  The Protestant Church there referred  to  was
     the Armenian Assembly of God Church.  The distinction  between  ethnic
     and non ethnic churches  was  not  relevant  once  they  were  in  the
     category of Protestant or evangelical.  The relevant  distinction  was
     whether the Church  sought  to  convert  or  not  or  indeed  accepted
     converts.

140. The  Special  Rapporteur's  view  in  2002  that  there  has  been  no
     improvement in the lot of non-ethnic Christians  since  1996  was  not
     borne out by the opinions of others, eg the CEDOCA Report and the DFAT
     material.  The Assembly of God Churches did  attempt  to  convert  and
     would be seen as having a western taint through  their  links  to  the
     USA.  This made the DFAT material very relevant to the position of the
     Anglican Church.

141. The DFAT material was very useful because it  was  from  a  source  in
     Iran, whereas the USA had no diplomatic representation there  and  had
     to rely on others.  The same was true of the Barnabas Fund  relied  on
     by TB.  There was no problem of under-reporting which could affect the
     DFAT material because it was based on private conversations.   It  was
     up to date. Unlike some US sources, it had no interest in expressing a
     particular point of view.  The source was active in  the  Assembly  of
     God Church in Iran, and would know what he was talking about.  He  had
     direct evidence to give.  The leader would know of action against  his
     church members.  The church engaged  in  proselytising  and  had  been
     persecuted in the past and therefore had experience directly  relevant
     to these cases.  The information had  been  obtained  specifically  to
     assist in the assessment of asylum claims and so there was  no  reason
     for the interlocutor to paint an unduly rosy picture.  Persecution did
     not happen now, even though there was  a  high  proportion  of  Muslim
     converts, active distribution of materials,  baptisms  and  increasing
     numbers of Muslims attending service. There  were  no  recent  arrests
     although converts were sensitive to changes in the political  climate.
     The experience of that Church was applicable to other Churches and  if
     not then the Appellants could join the Assembly of God Church.

142. The DFAT material was consistent with the CEDOCA Report and with  what
     Mr Roshdi said;  he had been in Iran for twenty-four years and had not
     been persecuted  and  was  the  indirect  witness  to  only  one  such
     unspecific act.  There was no problem if the convert  kept  quiet  and
     the DFAT material showed that there was no real risk,  even  if  there
     were proselytising, and none of the present cases involved someone who
     would engage in proselytising.  There was no historical evidence  that
     there had been under-reporting in view of the  material  available  in
     the early 1990s which related to that period.  There was  no  evidence
     that those who spoke to the CEDOCA Mission had  been  the  subject  of
     reprisals.  The RRT decision of September 2003 was the best summary of
     the position.

143. There had been no deaths of evangelical Christians since 1998;  direct
     enquiry of the churches had led to no expressed knowledge  of  current
     state persecution of  the  churches  or  their  members;   rather  the
     picture was that they could  practice  undisturbed,  including  weekly
     attendance.

144. He contrasted this with the  Appellants'  experts  who  he  said  were
     remote from the position on the ground in Iran, largely  drew  on  the
     reports of others, notably the US State Department, UNHCR and HRW, and
     much of what they dealt with predated the freer regime after 1997.  AB
     had not been in  Iran  since  1979  and  Rev  Dehqani  left  in  1980.
     Occasional visits, if there had been any, could not  provide  material
     equivalent to that of CEDOCA or DFAT.  Many  reports  simply  repeated
     the same negative information and as Dr Spellman said, some views  may
     have been coloured by adverse experiences or views of the  revolution.
     He rejected the arguments about  the  fluctuating  background,  saying
     that there had been no evidence  of  deaths  or  disappearances  since
     1998, no evidence of a change on the ground since the 2004  elections,
     there was no reason identified for the  arrests  in  Isfahan  and  the
     arrest of five pastors did not show a swing of the  pendulum.   Almost
     all of the incidents relied on by those  experts  predated  1998,  and
     much of what they had to say was  very  general.   The  discussion  of
     proselytising was irrelevant as TB had been found not  to  be  someone
     who would proselytise and there was no evidence that FS or NS would do
     so either.  The figures showed that there had been a  steady  increase
     in the number of Protestant  Christians.   The  material  produced  by
     Scudamores for A was out on a limb and was contradicted by the  expert
     evidence of AB in terms of  the  extent  of  severe  reaction  by  all
     against converts.

145. Treatment would not breach Article 3 if it involved mere distress,  or
     poor economic conditions,  low  level  harassment  or  deprivation  of
     social rights.  Discrimination rarely if ever could by itself  show  a
     breach of Article 3.  The threshold for a  breach  of  Article  3  was
     high.  The Tribunal  determination  in  Fazilat  [2002]  UKIAT  00973,
     paragraph 15, took the view that prison  conditions  in  Iran,  whilst
     harsh, did not cross the threshold for Article 3.
Later material

146. After the close of the hearing,  further  evidence  was  submitted  on
     behalf of the Appellants.  We were asked to postpone our  decision  so
     that it could be received and considered.  There was no reason why the
     material should not have been submitted to the hearing.  It was served
     on the Respondent in early May who objected to its  reception.   Leave
     to adduce it was sought in a letter of 26th May on grounds set out  in
     an earlier letter.  Those were that it reflected growing concern among
     this country's clergy about the position of Christians  in  Iran;   it
     included material from the Archbishop of Canterbury, Mr Clark,  who is
     the Director  -Mission  and  Public  Affairs  -  of  the  Archbishop's
     Council, and other material dated March 2004, the source of which  the
     Appellants asked should not be publicly identified.  The  parties  and
     the Tribunal know the identity.  We  have  not  had  the  Autumn  2003
     letter from  that  same  source  although  we  have  the  Respondent's
     comments on it.  We assume that it is regarded by  the  Appellants  as
     superseded.  The Respondent has had the opportunity of  commenting  on
     the material.

147. We see no advantage in not considering the material, late though it is
     in arriving after the conclusion of the hearing.  If  it  is  of  real
     significance, we  would  be  producing  a  determination  which  would
     shortly thereafter have to be reconsidered and which could  afford  no
     useful guidance.  If it were of no  real  significance,  little  would
     have been lost by its reception.

148.  The  source,  CD  as  we  shall  call  him,  refers  to  threats  and
     intimidation mounting for the Christian congregation in Iran, which he
     sees as increasingly vulnerable.  He  ponders  a  dilemma  as  between
     promoting  the  interests  of  asylum  seekers  and   those   of   the
     congregation in Iran, without explaining why the two  might  conflict.
     He would prefer life not to be made more difficult for those  in  Iran
     but does not explain in what way that would happen were asylum seekers
     to be returned nor does he add to the  material  about  the   specific
     difficulties they would face.  He may fear the impact of more converts
     but it is difficult to see how that creates a dilemma over which group
     should be supported.  It is clear that services continue.

149. Mr Clark supports  Rev  Dehqani's  assessment  and  adds  little  more
     detail, unsourced, of his own.  The five pastors arrested  in  Isfahan
     were accused of proselytising based upon the activities  of  an  agent
     provocateur; one was beaten and banned from Isfahan and feared  death;
     others were banned from  church  attendance.   In  Shiraz  there  were
     similar  pressures  of  surveillance  and   warning;    only   regular
     churchgoers were allowed in to the services by  the  authorities;  one
     recent convert was badly beaten and left the country.  In Teheran,  in
     2003 September, five families were told not to attend church;   others
     lost their jobs, or were warned, questioned or asked to inform.   This
     all creates a climate of fear among what was a congregation of at most
     a  few  hundred.   The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  added  nothing  of
     substance but, drawing on Rev Dehqani and CD, adopted their assessment
     that the situation for those who converted had worsened in Iran  since
     August 2003.

150. We have also examined the April 2004  CIPU  Report.   This  notes  the
     victory of religious conservatives in the February 2004  election  and
     the continuing struggle  between  them  and  supporters  of  the  more
     reforming views of Khatami.  There had  been  demonstrations  in  late
     June  2003  by  students  which  had  been   attacked   by   religious
     conservatives;  several thousand students had been arrested after  the
     demonstrations.  It added  in  comparison  with  the  earlier  Report,
     though relying on the same sources, that intimidation  of  evangelical
     Christians  was  rife.   Dwindling   religious   minorities   remained
     particularly vulnerable.  There was no change in what  it  said  about
     those who returned as failed asylum seekers or who had left illegally.



151. Further late evidence was submitted by TB on 12th  October  2004.   It
     considered first  a  Peyke  Iran  news  agency  report  of  June  2004
     reporting another news agency,  Vox  Dei,  as  saying  that  a  Muslim
     convert who had become a Christian Minister, and his family, had  been
     arrested.  There was concern but no details of  their  treatment,  and
     there is no follow-up information.  Second  was  an  item  dated  10th
     September  2004  from  Compass  Direct,  which  disseminated  news  of
     Christians worldwide, persecuted for their faith.  The annual  general
     conference of the "Assemblies of God Church"  at  its  centre  outside
     Teheran had been broken up by police  who  arrested  at  least  eighty
     Church  leaders  there.   They  were  blindfolded,   disoriented   and
     interrogated individually by security officers, who had very  detailed
     personal information on them.  All but ten were  released  later  that
     day;  the ten were all Pastors.  Those  released  were  forbidden  "to
     attend church services today".  A source said that it was the  biggest
     crisis for evangelical believers since 1994.

Conclusions

152. There are a number of important distinctions to draw between different
     Christian groups and activities.  The first is between those  who  are
     ethnic Christians, ie members of ethnic Churches  which  do  not  seek
     converts or even reject them, carrying on their worship in a  language
     other than Farsi, and  other Christians who are members of  Protestant
     or evangelical Churches.

153. The evidence shows that those Christians who  are  not  converts  from
     Islam and  who  are  members  of  ethnic  minority  Churches  are  not
     persecuted, at least  as  a  general  rule.   They  are  accepted  but
     nonetheless suffer from societal discrimination  and  a  second  class
     status in the eyes of the state and  its  institutions,  such  as  the
     substantive laws and the administration of justice, the Majlis, public
     sector employment and university entrance.  The attitude towards  them
     of the state in its various manifestations may vary over time, as  may
     the attitude  of  Muslims  where  they  live,  but  at  present  those
     Christians do not face a real risk of  persecution  even  though  they
     face real discrimination.  Persecution after the Revolution had  given
     way to discrimination.  The relevant evidence is in  particularly  the
     CEDOCA Report, the UNHCR Reports of  1998  and  2002,  which  contrast
     their position, difficult though it is, with  that  of  Christians  in
     other Churches, the 1996 DFAT Report to the same effect and also  AB's
     Report.   HRW  regards  them  as  the  objects  of   institutionalised
     discrimination  but  not  of  persecution.   They  are  in  this  less
     disfavoured position because they do not proselytise or conduct  their
     services in Farsi which would make them more  accessible  to  Muslims;
     some even refuse converts and resent the proselytising  activities  of
     the other Churches which cause them to lose members.   The  Report  of
     Christmas celebrations in Teheran, relied on by Mr Wilken, may  be  no
     more than a reflection of that less disfavoured position.   Certainly,
     a desire for an  Islamic-Christian  dialogue  is  of  little  help  in
     understanding the degree to which domestic tolerance  for  the  latter
     was a state  objective.   It  reflects  a  desire  to  improve  Iran's
     international standing.

154. The evidence with which we are  concerned  relates  to  the  different
     position of converts, a position which itself embodies differences  of
     degree.   But  the  background  evidence  must  be  read   with   that
     distinction firmly in mind to avoid over-  generalisations  about  the
     position of Christians in Iran.  We now turn to those  Churches  which
     accept converts, to consider whether a  distinction  should  be  drawn
     between ethnic but evangelising Churches, which seek converts, ie  the
     Assemblies of God Churches, and the  Anglican  Church  in  particular.
     Some papers drew no distinction at all of the sort which we refer  to,
     whilst not necessarily denying  it  either.   Rev  Dehqani  drew  this
     distinction but so also did the HRW  Report  of  1997  and  the  UNHCR
     Report of 1998.

155. We consider that there is some force in the Appellants' point that the
     material which relates to the Assembly of God Churches, in  particular
     the DFAT material from 2002-2003, and the CEDOCA Report cannot  simply
     be  applied across to the position of the Anglican Church. Of  course,
     the Assembly  of  God  Churches  are  evangelising  and  proselytising
     Churches and seek Muslim converts as well as others;  Muslim  converts
     may be among those who engage in proselytising in view of their 80 per
     cent proportion of the headquarters membership of one  Church.   Their
     services are in  Farsi.   The  Anglican  Church  in  Iran  is  on  the
     evangelical wing  of  the  Church;   it  includes  30  percent  Muslim
     converts, according to the  Bethany  World  Prayer  Center  paper  and
     plainly is willing to take converts.  But it has  been  more  cautious
     than the Armenian Assembly of God Church in seeking  converts  in  the
     1990s, according to Rev Dehqani, and we assume in  the  light  of  her
     evidence, continues to be.  The  Evangelical  or  Presbyterian  Church
     according to  that  same  paper  included  some  15  per  cent  Muslim
     converts.  Likewise their services are in  Farsi.   These  latter  two
     Churches have a missionary or imperialist past, at least in  the  eyes
     of many of their beholders among the Iranian Muslims and they maintain
     a connection with the United Kingdom and the USA.

156. The comments about the way in which they are perceived with  suspicion
     for those reasons and regarded as a possible source for anti state  or
     anti Islam activities struck us as valid.  Although  the  Assembly  of
     God Churches have connections with the West, they do not appear to  be
     as close as those of the Anglican Church or other "Western"  Churches.
     It means that those who are members of those  "Western"  Churches  are
     likely to be viewed with greater suspicion, targeted more often,  more
     frequently  harassed  or  ill-treated.   They  are  perhaps  the  more
     vulnerable to any false accusations of vague anti-state offences.   It
     is a matter of modest degree because the far greater evil in the  eyes
     of a  theocratic  Islamic  state  is  the  act  of  apostasy  and  the
     proselytising of other Muslims, or support for those who do.

157. All evangelical Churches and their  members  are  likely  to  be  more
     exposed  to  formal  and  informal  harassment  in  smaller  or   more
     conservative towns than in Teheran, where  there  are  more  Christian
     churches; its size may enable a convert to find greater support and to
     keep himself to himself more readily.  There is support  for  that  in
     the CEDOCA Report dealing with the Armenian Assembly  of  God  Church,
     and the latest DFAT material;  and it is a point  which  makes  sense.
     Only NS appears to be from Teheran, though FS was at university there.
      Apostates, whose conversion is  known,  may  find  moving  home  more
     difficult.

158. Turning to the position of the individual convert, plainly  that  will
     be affected to some extent, in the  light  of  those  differences,  by
     which of the Churches he or she  is  a  member  of,  if  any.   It  is
     reasonable, in the light of the evidence about the Orthodox or  ethnic
     but non-evangelical Churches, to suppose  that  the  three  Appellants
     would have to join one of the evangelical Churches.   If  there  is  a
     greater risk associated with the Anglican Church because of its origin
     and connections, or one of the other Churches seen as having "Western"
     connections in the eyes of the Iranian authorities, it is difficult to
     see why the Assembly of God Churches would not provide a  safer  place
     of worship or membership which would enable the Christian faith  still
     to be practised.  Membership of  the  more  cautious  Anglican  Church
     could also inhibit any practices which  might  increase  the  risk  to
     other members of the congregation, and  could  add  to  their  concern
     about accepting one whose unguarded fervour could endanger them.

159. There are obvious gradations of potential risk to converts in  general
     which need to be  considered.   There  will  be  some  converts  whose
     conversion is unknown to the  authorities  or  to  employer,  even  to
     family;  the principal risk to them is what would happen to them after
     discovery.  We regard it as appropriate to assess the  risk  to  these
     Appellants on the basis that their conversion would  become  known  to
     the  authorities,  to  friends,  family  and  colleagues.   They  will
     probably be asked why they  have  been  abroad,  either  when  seeking
     travel documents or on return;  they may be asked  at  some  stage  in
     that process about conversion.  The Secretary of State's  reliance  on
     the concept of "taghieh" is not warranted on the evidence about  these
     Appellants. Were they to lie about their conversion and  say  that  it
     was not genuine, done only for temporal advantage or  to  deceive  the
     United Kingdom authorities, taghieh might well be relevant;  but there
     is no finding that they would so behave, if returned. We do not regard
     it as right or sensible, in the absence of a finding of fact  to  that
     effect upon the evidence, that it should be  assumed  that  a  convert
     would deny his religion to officials when asked.  There are also  many
     later occasions when their  religion  could  well  be  asked  for,  eg
     marriage, civil dispute, or  seeking  employment,  when  the  position
     would be revealed if it had not been revealed before.   CIPU  suggests
     that identity  cards  reveal  the  holder's  declared  religion.   The
     Adjudicators'  determinations  here,  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
     concession in NS, mean that even if their entry to Iran or the  normal
     incidents of life did not lead to the discovery of  their  conversion,
     they would be likely to  seek  to  attend  Protestant  or  evangelical
     Church services.  In the absence of a positive contrary finding,  that
     would be regarded as likely behaviour for a convert to such  a  Church
     in the United Kingdom.  Attendance at such services would be likely to
     be discovered through the monitoring and surveillance which occurs, or
     at least occurs not so infrequently that it can be discounted.  To our
     mind the evidence suggests that the Protestant or evangelical Churches
     are or at least can be subject to such  monitoring,  even  though  the
     degree of intrusiveness or intimidation which  may  accompany  it  may
     vary from time to time;  the CIPU Reports make that point although  it
     is to some degree watered down by  the  CEDOCA  Report  and  the  DFAT
     material which give a rather happier view of  the  current  monitoring
     and surveillance of the Protestant or  evangelical  Churches.   It  is
     accordingly realistic to assess risk on the basis  that  the  fact  of
     conversion  is  likely  to  become  known  sooner  or  later  to   the
     authorities and  hence  to  friends,  family  or  colleagues.   It  is
     possible, but by no means certain, that family and friends would  keep
     it quiet.

160. In the cases of FS  and  NS,  the  findings  and  the  effect  of  the
     Secretary of State's concession  respectively,  do  not  lead  to  the
     conclusion that they would seek to do more than attend Church services
     regularly, associating with fellow Christians and engaging  with  them
     in Bible study.  There is no suggestion that they would  aspire  to  a
     leadership role or to proselytise;   nor  that  they  would  feel  any
     compulsion from the  nature  of  their  conversion  to  discuss  their
     beliefs with friends, family or colleagues.

161. The position of TB was said to be different to a degree  from  FS  and
     NS, because although he would not actively proselytise, his conversion
     experience would impel him to share or expound his beliefs with  those
     who had not yet received the  Gospel.   We  do  not  think  that  this
     argument is open to him on the Adjudicator's findings  as  to  how  he
     would behave.  Paragraph 27 refers to his cautious approach even after
     his membership of the Jesus Fellowship Church.  We do not accept  that
     the submissions as to the nature of his beliefs should lead  us  to  a
     different conclusion.  We do  not  accept  that  the  Adjudicator  has
     failed to understand the difference between proselytising in an active
     sense and the behaviour which  Mr  Vokes  described,  which  might  be
     regarded as "bearing witness in one's daily  life".   That  latter  is
     covered by the Adjudicator's reference to evangelising.  In any event,
     the distinction between proselytising and bearing witness, for want of
     a better expression, is one which is likely to be lost on  the  hearer
     and any suspicious or zealous Muslim.  Both  would  be  likely  to  be
     perceived by those in authority,  the  religious  zealots,  and  those
     Muslims unaware of the distinction which Mr Vokes tried to explain, as
     people who were trying to  persuade  the  hearer  of  the  theological
     correctness of Christianity, and of the joy of adhering to it.  It  is
     but a short step from proclaiming the advantages and joy which it  has
     brought and suggesting that others should likewise  benefit.   Neither
     proselytising nor bearing witness or evangelising, however,  could  be
     regarded as cautious approaches in Iran.  We do not consider that TB's
     subsequent   statement   substantially   alters   matters:    on   the
     Adjudicator's findings, he would still practice cautiously,  privately
     at times and careful in  his  conversations.   The  way  in  which  he
     practises his faith here, is not a sound guide to  the  way  he  would
     practise in Iran, on the evidence.  He would accept the impact on  his
     outward demonstrations of faith of the  repressive  regime,  short  of
     denying or abandoning his faith.  Mr Vokes' eloquence  must  yield  to
     the Adjudicator's findings on the evidence.

162. Accordingly, we have approached the three Appellants on the basis that
     in terms of their religious practices  in  Iran,  there  would  be  no
     significant differences.  All would seek to be Church  attenders,  and
     would associate with Christians, perhaps attending study  groups,  but
     without leadership aspirations or a desire to proselytise, or to  take
     other steps that would  make  their  conversion  ostentatious  to  the
     authorities, formal or informal, such as wearing a crucifix in public.
      All would be cautious.

163. It is clear, as we have said, that even ethnic Christians are  treated
     as second class citizens and can  experience  quite  severe  forms  of
     social, legal  and  economic  discrimination.   Those  who  are  known
     converts, as the Appellants would be, would  experience  all  of  that
     discrimination as well.  They may suffer additional discrimination, eg
     in the form of travel restrictions, as the  Netherlands  CIREA  Report
     suggests.  They are also and importantly subject to a legal regime  in
     which their conversion  is  at  least  theoretically  punishable  with
     death, and the theocratic nature of the state enables conversion to be
     seen as both a religious crime  against  God  and  a  political  crime
     against the very foundations of the state.  There  are  other  related
     crimes with which they can  be  charged,  apart  from  apostasy.   The
     threat of such charges, in particular if they were under investigation
     for another matter, would induce a sense of fear probably absent  from
     those who were members of the  recognised  ethnic  minority  Churches.
     They may also be more liable to be dealt with  unfairly  for  ordinary
     offences.  AB makes a sound point, showing  up  the  vulnerability  of
     converts, that they are liable to be  denounced  by  friends,  family,
     neighbours or colleagues;  even where their conversion has not been  a
     source of trouble with the authorities, such denunciation, which might
     be entirely malicious, could lead to harassment or worse.  The climate
     of fear  which  Rev  Dehqani  spoke  of  is  not  represented  in  any
     measurable way in  the  reports,  but  we  accept  that  the  fear  of
     denunciation, the fear of prosecution by a regime capable  of  grossly
     unfair trials and of inflicting the most severe penalty, the  fear  of
     harassment in its various forms and of random violence, and  the  loss
     of a job, would create such a climate and that it is a relevant factor
     in the assessment of persecution  and  treatment  which  might  breach
     Article 3.  The Appellants are correct to point out that the  prospect
     of persecutory treatment for converts or of a breach of Article 3 must
     be judged in a climate  where  human  rights  in  relation  to  trial,
     punishment and freedom of expression  and  association  are  routinely
     breached.

164. There is no evidence, however, that converts  are  unable  to  survive
     socially, for they have the  support  of  their  Christian  community.
     Societal attitudes towards Christians may be less tolerant of converts
     than  eg  CEDOCA  interlocutors  suggest  ordinary  Muslims   are   of
     Christians  generally.   Economically  they  would  find   life   more
     difficult because of the absence of government and public sector  jobs
     for them, the size of that sector and  the  extent  to  which  similar
     practices are found in the private sector.  But there is  no  evidence
     that converts are forced to live a life of destitution.

165. They are able to practise their religion, "up to a point  "  says  the
     CIPU Report, which draws significantly upon the other sources to which
     we have referred and which do not require separate  enumeration  here.
     Their services may be monitored, there may  be  Church  closures  from
     time to time.  The congregation may be checked with varying  frequency
     and degree of  intimidation.   Bible  study  may  be  limited  by  the
     availability of materials.  We have reflected this by describing  what
     the Appellants would "seek" to do.  There may be times when they might
     have to  cease  attending  Church  and  confine  themselves  to  house
     meetings or private devotions.  This would be in  keeping  with  their
     cautious approach.

166. The UNHCR, UNSR and US State Department  Reports  suggest  a  gloomier
     picture, but they  are  very  generalised  compared  to  the  specific
     material in the reports of those who went to Iran or  have  spoken  to
     those there.  The well-reported refusal  of  evangelical  churches  at
     various times to sign pledges not to proselytise or to admit  converts
     has not led to converts ceasing to  practise at those churches;   they
     undoubtedly do hold services and  have  converts  attending  them,  as
     indeed the US State Department Reports imply.   The  refusal  has  not
     led to the Churches being closed certainly on  any  long  term  basis.
     AB's Report shows that converts do practise although they may do so in
     some fear, and may face harassment at times or even persecution;   but
     there is no analysis of the degree of serious ill-treatment as opposed
     to discrimination and harassment.  Certainly, according to her,  there
     had been an increase in Muslim converts and quite high proportions  of
     congregations were constituted by such converts;   although  this  was
     counterbalanced by the evidence  of  emigration  of  Christians.   The
     CEDOCA Report notes this emigration too, but one Pastor put that  down
     to economic conditions and a desire for a less troubled life;   it  is
     not clear whether those emigrants declared their religion  for  travel
     purposes or whether they maintained their official religious status as
     Muslims, which is often done.

167. The CIPU Reports indicate that members  of  evangelical  congregations
     have to carry identity cards  and  are  subject  to  identity  checks.
     Material such as the CEDOCA Report and other European  missions  shows
     that these are not features of every Church all the time,  but  appear
     to vary with time and place, according to what  may  be  a  particular
     incident or  according  to  local  attitudes.   But  the  authorities'
     concern is chiefly with evangelical activities.  There is evidence  of
     harassment which can include arrest, but there is no evidence that for
     the ordinary convert that is of any  frequency  or  duration  or  that
     serious ill-treatment occurs routinely during such arrest.   There  is
     evidence from AB that torture was used on some of  the  few  who  were
     detained in 1996 and 1997 but there was for example no such allegation
     in respect of the September 2004 arrests.  The evidence  is  scattered
     with references to arrests and detentions but many did not  go  beyond
     serious questioning, which may  have  been  threatening  but  did  not
     involve serious ill-treatment.  For example, CIPU refers  to  converts
     being summoned for an interviews at which they would  be  reprimanded;
     paragraph 6.61.  The US State Department Reports cover a  considerable
     period of time and circumstance and, although a CIPU  source,  do  not
     differentiate enough or provide enough detail to  enable  them  to  be
     regarded as conveying an accurate picture of the position now, because
     of the degree of historical material which they include.  We can  draw
     from them the fact that there are adverse reactions to  some  converts
     and Pastors by the authorities and the vigilante groups but the  scale
     is very difficult to gauge.  It is dangerous to generalise  from  what
     may be isolated incidents.  The International Christian Concern Report
     is an example of individual acts, some of which were persecutory,  but
     from which it cannot be deduced that converts generally  face  a  real
     risk of persecution.

168. The legal position in relation to apostasy is clearly  different  from
     the way in which converts are dealt with  in  reality.   There  is  no
     evidence of any executions for apostasy since 1994, and  the  killings
     then were extra-judicial.  The Report of Mr Kakhki is  too  vague  for
     what he is saying to carry weight:  it says  nothing  about  when  the
     events to which he refers occurred or  what  happened  to  cause  such
     charges to be brought or how representative is his experience,  on  an
     unstated number of occasions, of what was happening.  The CIPU  Report
     quotes a source as saying that a criminal case  is  rare.   We  accept
     that converts may face charges of a vague but serious nature  inspired
     by hostility to their conversion, and may be more  vulnerable  to  the
     harassing effect of arrests for offences which may not lead to charges
     at all or which may be false.  The evidence, however, is that that  is
     not routine, but occasional at worst.  CIPU, paragraph  6.61  suggests
     that there is no current active pursuit of prosecutions for  apostasy;
     UNHCR/ACCORD is its source.  Rather, it is striking that the  evidence
     of vague charges, which we would have expected to have been  available
     if it occurred more than very rarely, is not there.  The UNHCR  Report
     of 2002 contains no time or detail when  it  refers  to  instances  of
     apostasy convictions and the death penalty.   Nor  is  there  evidence
     that in fact Christians are at a real risk of conviction  for  trumped
     up offences.  The evidence suggests that converts may  face  harassing
     arrest and detention at times when the authorities crack down on their
     activities, but it is  chiefly  those  broadly  describable  as  in  a
     leading or very public position who would  be  the  targets  for  such
     conduct by the State;  CIPU paragraph 6.62 draws this  distinction  in
     commenting on the position of those converts who actively proselytise.

169. We accept that the repressive activities of the state have to  include
     those of the vigilante groups such as the Basiji.  These  extend  from
     threats to kidnapping and  beatings,  torture  and  killings.   It  is
     difficult to assess the extent of these activities but they are likely
     to reflect the extent of prevailing hostility to converts in time  and
     place.  The risk of facing their malevolence would be a cause of  real
     and pervasive fear.  There is no effective system of state  protection
     against  those  groups,  because  they   are   implicitly   authorised
     politically or by the sanction of religious authorities.  It cannot be
     said, however, that the evidence shows that their actions are of  such
     an extent that they amount to a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  the
     ordinary convert.  Again it is more  likely  that  it  is  the  higher
     profile convert who would really risk their wrath.

170. There have been isolated  acts  of  killings  in  1994  and  there  is
     evidence that there were disappearances, presumed killed,  in  1997-8.
     Those in 1994 were extra-judicial killings, and  by  their  nature  so
     were those in 1997-8.  We accept that these do not feature in the CIPU
     Report and that there is   evidence in the US State Department Reports
     that they occurred;  we accept that that happened although the Reports
     do not say any more about who they were than that  they  were  Muslims
     who had converted to Christianity.  That  tempers  the  weight  to  be
     given to other comments in the CIPU Report which do not  reflect  that
     continued persecution.  It affects  the  Netherlands  Report  of  1997
     likewise.  There have been other sporadic  acts  of  violence  against
     converts but reports are few.  Although their actions would add  to  a
     climate of apprehension, the evidence is quite clear that converts are
     able to practise their religion.

171. AB suggests, as does HRW, but it is  inherently  difficult  to  prove,
     that the effect of repression is  an  under-reporting  of  persecutory
     incidents.  They attribute such an effect to the killing of the  three
     Pastors in 1994.  There was another killing in 1996  of  a  Protestant
     convert Pastor.  We do not accept that there would  be  a  significant
     pool of unreported incidents of serious ill-treatment, in view of  the
     reports which do come out and which  contain  general  comments  about
     what  is  happening  and  could  readily  be  more  specific   without
     identifying source or individual.  Those Iranians who have come out of
     Iran seeking asylum have not brought with them evidence of  repression
     on a scale not realised before.  There have been  sufficient  missions
     and there is sufficient diplomatic representation and contact for  the
     overall picture to be reasonably clear.  There may be  some  incidents
     which are not reported to anyone through  fear,  but  we  can  see  no
     reason why those reported to church leaders would not find  their  way
     out over time and no reason why significant incidents would  not  come
     to their attention.  Even allowing for a possible chilling  effect  in
     1994 which lasted until after the 1998 disappearances, there have been
     a number of years in which the unreported past events could have  been
     made public, when there are no reported  killings  or  disappearances.
     We note a Report of three disappearances of Christians  in  2000,  but
     with the number and commitment of US based evangelical bodies, we  are
     not persuaded that serious events have  gone  unnoticed,  even  though
     there may be a time lag or a lack of specific details.   We  note  the
     September 2004 arrests were reported quite quickly.

172. AB regards the crucial distinction as that between those who attend an
     evangelical church and those who do not, between the  ethnic  minority
     Churches and the evangelical Churches, rather than between  those  who
     actively proselytise and those who do not.  She says that the fact  of
     membership of such a Church can be the trigger for  the  attention  of
     the authorities, because it is those Churches which are  seen  as  the
     proselytising Churches, and the member is seen therefore as in fact  a
     proselytiser.  She said that the evidence did  not  show  whether  the
     targeting of  individuals  was  because  they  were  proselytisers  or
     because they simply were members of an evangelical Church.

173. This is not in our judgement the crucial distinction on the  evidence.
     This shows that evangelical churches do exist, do hold services,  with
     the attendance of Muslim converts, and ordinary congregants.  They  do
     accept them with greater or lesser degrees of caution  or  enthusiasm.
     Many reports draw a distinction, and it is the one which we regard  as
     the most important, though the degree to which it is  done  explicitly
     varies, between the ordinary convert and those who proselytise.   This
     is reflected already in what we have set  out  above,  eg  CIPU  6.62,
     CEDOCA, UNHCR/ACCORD.  Sometimes it is a matter of emphasis only.   AB
     recognises that there is a greater degree of risk  for  those  who  do
     actively proselytise.  Most of the specific  persecutory  acts,  which
     are referred to by her, are directed  at  Church  leaders  and  active
     proselytisers.  Dr Spellman  draws  attention  to  the  difference  in
     treatment between  the  leaders  or  proselytisers  and  the  ordinary
     convert.   Miss  O'Shea  and  Mr  Joffe's  Reports  do  not  draw  any
     distinction, but are of less value because they  do  not  address  any
     question of whether such a distinction exists  at  all;   and  whether
     crucial or  not,  it  is  clear  on  the  evidence  that  there  is  a
     considerable difference of degree in their treatment.  Granted as  Lee
     J put it, in W68/01A, the degree of commitment  does  not  necessarily
     determine the degree of attention, because it is necessary to look  at
     the way in which  the  authorities  would  perceive  a  convert.   The
     evidence, however, which we have examined looks at how the authorities
     would react to someone manifesting their commitment in  various  ways.
     If the crucial distinction were the one drawn by AB, the  institutions
     carrying on those activities, as well as all the ordinary congregants,
     converts or not, would be  far  more  repressed  than  they  are.   AB
     recognised in one Report, as did CIPU,  that  converts  were  able  to
     practise to some degree but could  not  actively  proselytise  without
     severe repression.  Rev Dehqani pointed out that  there  were  general
     difficulties for the Church;  but the arrests of five key members, who
     it appears were leaders and who were later  released  under  measures,
     strict and prohibitive of their resuming contact  with  their  church,
     illustrates that it is the leaders who are at risk.  The same is  true
     of the September 2004 arrests.  That  is  not  to  say  that  converts
     operate without restraint and are  free  to  practise  their  religion
     without fear.  It is that the point at which there is a real  risk  of
     treatment  at  the  level  of  severity  which  engages  international
     protection obligations is not at the  level  of  treatment  which  the
     ordinary convert is at  a  real  risk  of  facing.   The  evidence  of
     targeting of those  who  were  known  to  be  no  more  than  ordinary
     congregants or converts, not  themselves  actively  proselytising,  is
     thin.  There is for example, evidence from  ICI  that  in  about  2001
     house churches of twenty to  forty  people   were  arrested  and  that
     ordinary Christians were harassed, but the report is silent as to what
     happened to those arrested, or what was an ordinary Christian in  this
     context and what constituted the harassment.  It is far  clearer  that
     leadership and active proselytising have led to greater  targeting  in
     the past.

174. In fact, there is now some evidence that even that level  of  activity
     does not lead to targeting.  It is the Armenian Assembly of God Church
     in the CEDOCA Report, which appears to be the same one as provided the
     DFAT material, which says that not even proselytising converts are  at
     a real risk of persecution.  This is useful evidence but, although  in
     this instance we do not regard the lack of precise  identification  of
     the source as detracting from its weight,  in  view  of  the  reliable
     evidence as to his position and  authority,  it  is  a  single  source
     within a single church. It does not cover the  Anglican  Church  which
     clearly is more cautious about converts, and to a degree  may  face  a
     different attitude from the authorities.  It is more specific than  CD
     in the Appellants' later evidence, and Rev Dehqani's discussions  with
     the Bishop.   However,  with  the  general  tenor  of  all  the  other
     evidence, the other evidence is sufficiently weighty to mean that  the
     full extent of the DFAT material cannot be regarded as a  sound  basis
     for the return of those converts who would proselytise or  evangelise,
     "bearing witness", or who would occupy leadership positions.   In  the
     light of the Appellants' evidence, we are not as confident as the  RRT
     that the DFAT material has not been to  some  extent  contradicted  or
     reduced in the weight which can confidently be put on it.  It  may  be
     that in another case there will be additional  material  dealing  with
     those who proselytise actively as converts, covering  other  Churches.
     But the general weight of the evidence  is  too  strong  to  put  such
     crucial reliance upon  the  DFAT  material.   However,  the  generally
     upbeat tone of what it says about the position of the ordinary convert
     and the Church is generally consistent with much of the other evidence
     and can be given weight to that extent.  A cautious approach allows it
     to  be  given  weight  dealing  with  the  ordinary   convert   whilst
     maintaining reservations about the safety of relying on it for  those,
     fewer and more readily targeted, who would be at the greater risk.

175. On the current state of the evidence,  we  would  draw  a  distinction
     between those converts who would simply attend Church, associate  with
     Christians and study the Bible, and those who  would  become  leaders,
     lay or  ordained,  or  Pastors,  or  who  would  actively  and  openly
     proselytise or who would wear  in  public  outward  manifestations  of
     their faith such as a  visible  crucifix.   We  would  put  into  this
     category those who, whether seen by the Churches as  proselytisers  or
     not, would be so overt  in  their  discussions  of  their  faith  with
     Muslims that they would be likely to be seen as proselytisers  by  the
     various  forms  of  authorities  in  Iran;   these  might  be   called
     evangelists.

176. There is some evidence,  which  we  accept,  that  there  has  been  a
     considerable change in the way in which Christians,  and  particularly
     converts, have  been  treated  or  perceived  in  reality.   This  was
     confirmed by the 1997 election of President Khatami, the  liberalising
     which followed and Iran's desire to improve its international image.

177. This is suggested by paragraphs 6.60 to 6.62 of the October 2002 CIPU,
     and borne out by the CEDOCA Report, which  points  to  Iran's  concern
     about its image.  Although the Assyrian  Assembly  of  God  Church  is
     distinctly less positive than the Armenian  Assembly  of  God  Church,
     they, with the Assyrian-Chaldean Church, put the early 1990s as worse,
     with an improvement subsequently.  The DFAT material, contrasting 1996
     with 2002-3, is along the same lines.  We accept that reservations are
     required about the breadth of knowledge of the DFAT  interlocutor  and
     the applicability of what he says to  all  Protestant  Churches;   the
     differences between what the Churches are recorded as  saying  in  the
     CEDOCA Report bears that out.  But as it  is  by  no  means  the  sole
     support for the change, it  can  legitimately  be  treated  as  adding
     support to it.  It is also supported by what is not now being reported
     in contrast to what previously was reported.  Reports  which  did  not
     differentiate the periods which they are dealing with  are  of  little
     value in this respect as are reports which are too close to  1997  for
     any real change to have been observable.

178. The Appellants' evidence also offers some support for the change;  for
     example, Mr Roshdi.  AB  reported  similar  views  of  two  Protestant
     Pastors, but also said that it was an improvement principally for  the
     recognised ethnic Churches.  It pointed to the fifteen to twenty-three
     disappearances in 1997-8, and to individual incidents  of  torture  or
     serious ill-treatment, in 1996 to 2001.  The  recent  UNHCR  and  UNSR
     also rejected  such  a  change  at  least  so  far  as  converts  were
     concerned.  The US State Department  likewise  drew  no  such  general
     distinction over time.

179. This change has benefited more than simply ethnic  Christians.   There
     has been a degree of liberalising  for  Protestant  Churches  and  for
     Muslim converts, even though there have been isolated reports of  acts
     of individual persecution.  The DFAT material and the CEDOCA Report on
     the Armenian Assembly of God Church (which appear  to  relate  to  the
     same Church) is in the same vein, even  if  the  full  extent  of  its
     optimism for active or convert proselytisers may  be  to  some  extent
     over-stated, or not generally applicable.

180. The Appellants' evidence, notably Rev Dehqani, Maria  O'Shea  and  AB,
     suggested that in any event the situation  had  subsequently  worsened
     again, with the arrests of  Church  leaders  in  Isfahan,  Shiraz  and
     Teheran.  There have been arrests of house  churches  in  about  2001;
     President Khatami, is now less influential;   religious  conservatives
     won a considerable election victory  over  his  reformist  supporters.
     They also pointed out with justification that this theocratic  regime,
     with differing religions and political power structures is  inherently
     unstable  or  volatile,  and  any  predictions  as  to  its  long-term
     behaviour, unless clearly having taken root, is unwise.

181. There is some force in the characterisation of  Iran  as  unstable  or
     volatile.  It certainly cannot be said that the reformist approach  of
     President Khatami is a  change  well-embedded  for  the  longer  term.
     There have been incidents  suggestive  of  a  reverse  of  the  trend,
     although the evidence shows that there have been isolated incidents of
     persecution through the late  1990s.   The  latest  material  from  TB
     continues that reverse;  but however grave a crisis one  source  might
     think it to be, two points stand out.  First, the evangelical Churches
     felt able to hold their AGM  openly.   Second,  all  but  ten  of  the
     leaders were released the same day and it was Pastors who remained  in
     detention, although those released were  forbidden  to  attend  Church
     services for a period which the report leaves unclear.   There  is  no
     evidence, however, of problems for the ordinary congregant, convert or
     not, save those which attend the detention of Pastors and  an  ensuing
     climate of fear and anxiety.

182. Those who would be at particular risk from any  such  reverse  change,
     however, would be  those  converts  with  a  higher  profile,  ie  the
     proselytising convert, the Church leader who had  converted,  and  the
     Protestant  or  evangelical  Church  leaders  or  activists,   whether
     converted from Islam or not.  It is only sensible  to  recognise  that
     there has been a recent retrenchment from the more liberal  atmosphere
     from about 1995/7 to 2003.  Its degree and nature are hard to  assess,
     but it involves sporadic and  seemingly  random  persecutory  acts  on
     evangelical congregants or leaders, and a more concerted repression of
     leaders and Pastors of evangelical Churches.

183. We should make here  some  general  observations  about  some  of  the
     background material.  There is a significant problem over much of  the
     material which emanates from US sources:  the USA  has  no  diplomatic
     representation in Iran, which reduces the number of informed  contacts
     which it can report and so it is more reliant on indirect sources;  it
     is possible  that  an  element  of  political  hostility  affects  the
     religious sources which seem at  times  to  differ  from  every  other
     source.  The material from Scudamores is in that vein;   whatever  may
     be said in that appeal, the  allegation  that  there  continue  to  be
     people sentenced to death for apostasy is not supported by any  detail
     of the sort which  we  would  expect  to  be  available,  and  is  not
     supported by any  other  reliable  material.   Likewise  the  Canadian
     Report of 1997 is too gloomy and general in its comments, at least for
     them to be applicable  now,  for  the  evangelical  churches  do  hold
     services and have not all closed.  It is possible that some  of  those
     to whom western intermediaries have spoken  tried  to  give  a  rosier
     picture than was justified, to avoid official disfavour;  but there is
     no sound  evidence  to  support  that  view  especially  as  the  most
     favourable material was given in confidence  to  DFAT.   There  is  no
     pervasive  evidence  either  of  reprisals  for   talking  to  western
     visitors about religious matters;  there is some very limited evidence
     in relation to political prisoners that that  may  have  occurred  but
     nothing of sufficient clarity to suggest that there has been a bias in
     what was reported.  There is  no  evidence  that  the  September  2004
     disruption of the Assemblies of God AGM was a reprisal  for  the  DFAT
     material.  If it were, the reprisal might  reflect  the  boldness  and
     openness of the  asserted  proselytising  activity,  rather  than  the
     communication of harassment.  That is rather a different point.

184. The evidence on the return of failed asylum seekers is, to  our  mind,
     clear;  there is no real risk on return for someone who  has  been  an
     asylum seeker, on that account alone.  What the evidence is less clear
     about is the position at the point of return of those who are known to
     the authorities  have  converted.   The  evidence  does  not  strongly
     support the view that the Iranian authorities monitor baptisms  abroad
     although there may be some who have left upon  whom  they  keep  tabs.
     Assuming that the fact of conversion becomes known before  or  at  the
     point of return, the evidence does not show that that by itself  would
     lead to ill-treatment.  It may lead to questioning as might attendance
     at a church;  it may lead to warnings.  Family and associates  may  be
     told.  Local police may be informed, even vigilante groups.  There  is
     not very much evidence as to the position of converts  being  returned
     and it is unwise to generalise from the position of those  who  return
     merely as failed asylum  seekers.   There  is  some  rather  uncertain
     general evidence exemplifying family hostility  but  that  depends  on
     each case and does not create persecution, though  it  may  make  life
     more difficult.  TB, his cousin apart, does not  appear  to  have  had
     difficulties with his immediate family;  he kept  Christian  materials
     openly in his room.  NS appears to have had no difficulties  from  her
     family nor FS.

185. The position to us is determined by the way in which  the  authorities
     behave towards those whom they know to be  converts  in  Iran  anyway.
     The Iranian Pentecostal newsletter seemed to adopt that line.  We  can
     see  no  reason  as  to  why  they  should  be  treated  significantly
     differently.  If the person returning is thought to have made contacts
     in the west with anti-Iran forces, it is difficult to  see  that  much
     the same suspicion would not also fall upon anyone who  converted  and
     was a member of an evangelical Church.  We do not therefore regard the
     fact of return as an additional factor  which  leads  to  a  different
     conclusion under either Convention.  Here we  are  dealing  only  with
     those who converted outside Iran, and not with those who converted  in
     Iran and were the subject of persecutory treatment in Iran.

186. We now draw those threads together to  reach  our  conclusion  in  the
     individual cases.  Persecution for Geneva Convention purposes  is  not
     confined to  acts  of  individual  brutality  or  imprisonment.   Some
     discrimination, continuing harassment and a climate of incessant  fear
     are constituent parts as well.  All Christians suffer from significant
     legal, social and economic discrimination.  All known converts live in
     a society where those forms of  discrimination  are  reinforced.   The
     legal regime in theory can be very harsh;  they can be seen as enemies
     of the theocratic  state,  and  their  lives  and  well-being  can  be
     threatened by the apparatus of the state and the violent attentions of
     covertly sanctioned religious zealots.  There is no state  protection.
     There would be a pervasive climate of fear, varying  in  degree,  from
     time to time, and place to place.

187. For the ordinary convert, who is neither a leader,  lay  or  ordained,
     nor a Pastor, nor a proselytiser or evangelist, the actual  degree  of
     risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3 is not sufficient
     to warrant the protection of either Convention.  The reality is that a
     social and economic life  can  be  maintained;   Christianity  can  be
     practised, if necessary, cautiously at times,  by  Church  attendance,
     association with Christians  and  Bible  study.   There  may  well  be
     monitoring of services and identity checks.  They  would  be  able  to
     practise, however, as most Iranian converts do.  It  is  realistic  to
     expect that there may sometimes be questioning, disruption, orders not
     to attend Church, which may require the convert to  stay  away  for  a
     while.  But there is no evidence  of  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment
     during such questioning or of anything more than  a  short  period  of
     detention at worst.  There is evidence of random or sporadic  violence
     by the likes  of  the  Basiji,  but  at  too  infrequent  a  level  to
     constitute a real risk to the ordinary convert.  The  longer  official
     questioning, detentions, and the greater risk of charges,  trumped  up
     or menacingly vague or simply threatened are not a real risk  for  the
     ordinary convert.

188. We would, on the present evidence, regard them as not at a  real  risk
     of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3.   We  allow  in  that
     assessment for some recent worsening in the current climate.

189. We would regard  the  more  active  convert,  Pastor,  church  leader,
     proselytiser or evangelist as being at  a  real  risk.   Their  higher
     profile and role would be more likely to attract  the  malevolence  of
     the  licensed  zealot  and  the  serious  adverse  attention  of   the
     theocratic state when it sought, as it will do on some  occasions,  to
     repress conversions from Islam which  it  sees  as  a  menace  and  an
     affront to the state and God.

190. Where an ordinary individual convert has additional risk factors, they
     too may well be at a real risk.  We have already said that  we  accept
     that the conversions would become known to the authorities,  but  that
     is not  of  itself  an  additional  factor  because  it  is  the  very
     assumption upon which we are assessing risk.  These risk  factors  may
     not relate to religious views at all.  It is the combination which may
     provoke  persecutory  attentions  where,  by  itself,  the  individual
     conversion would have been allowed to pass without undue hindrance.  A
     woman faces additional serious discrimination in Iran, though it falls
     short of being persecutory merely on the grounds of gender.  But for a
     single woman, lacking such  economic  or  social  protection  which  a
     husband or other  immediate  family  or  friends  might  provide,  the
     difficulties she faces as a convert are significantly compounded.  Her
     legal status in any prosecution is much  weaker;   the  risk  of  ill-
     treatment in any questioning  is  increased.   This  factor  tips  the
     overall nature  of  the  treatment  and  risk  into  a  real  risk  of
     persecution.  We would regard NS as falling into that  category;   she
     is at a real risk of persecution for her  religion,  or  of  treatment
     which breaches  Article  3.   The  role  of  family  as  a  source  of
     protection should be examined carefully in individual cases.   Similar
     support might also be provided  by  close  friends  or  colleagues  in
     employment.

191. In FS' case, it is submitted that there would be an increased risk  to
     him of having a political opinion attributed to him  because  of  past
     activities and the arrest warrant;  this led to  reference  to  Kiani.
     We accept the submissions of Mr Wilken as to the  significance  to  be
     attached to that document and do not regard it as an  additional  risk
     factor.  Although the  Adjudicator  makes  no  specific  finding,  she
     appears to have accepted him as credible  and  therefore  his  radical
     theatre  activities  should  be  accepted.   Discounting  the   arrest
     warrant, FS has a past adverse political profile, from his family  and
     his own activities.  It is not one which of  itself  would  cause  any
     significant difficulties, and  it  is  not  contended  that  it  would
     suffice for a great of international  protection.   There  is  a  real
     risk, however,  that  this  would  be  known  to  the  authorities  in
     conjunction with his conversion;  and  that  it  would  lead  them  to
     target him for questioning and a higher level of harassment, more akin
     to that which might be experienced by a  proselytiser  or  evangelist.
     This,  we  have  said,  would  currently  generate  a  real  risk   of
     persecution or treatment breaching Article 3.

192. In TB's case, the Adjudicator  found  that  the  police  raid  on  his
     parents' house while he was away would not  lead  him  to  be  of  any
     continuing interest to the authorities.  It may lead to his conversion
     being discovered earlier than it might have been, perhaps on return at
     the airport, but we do not regard that potential point of discovery as
     a factor which would lead to a greater degree of  risk  to  him.   TB,
     therefore, has no added risk factor.  It appears fairly  clearly  that
     from the openness with which TB displayed Christian materials  in  his
     room at home that his parents were aware of his interest and at  least
     quiescent  about  it.   We  do  not  accept,  in  the  light  of   the
     Adjudicator's findings, and notwithstanding his pledged membership  of
     an evangelical Church,  that  he  would  be  an  evangelist  in  Iran.
     Instead, he would be cautious.  An issue  which  primary  fact-finders
     will need to consider carefully is the likely way in which  a  genuine
     convert would practise if returned.  It does not follow  at  all  that
     the particular practices adopted in the United Kingdom would be  those
     followed in Iran, nor that any inhibitions dictated by the caution  of
     many converts would prove persecution or severe ill-treatment.

193. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's human rights  appeal  in  FS  is
     dismissed.  Insofar as there is no  formal  cross-appeal  against  the
     illogical dismissal of the asylum appeal,  we  consider  that  in  the
     light of all the debate in the Court of Appeal and before us  that  we
     ought to treat there as being a cross appeal from  FS  on  the  asylum
     claim, which we allow.  The appeal of NS is allowed and the appeal  of
     TB is dismissed, in relation to both Conventions.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

                                 Appendix A

This Appendix lists the background material before the  Tribunal  in  March
2004.  It does not include the various expert reports, nor the post-hearing
material, which are all identified  in  the  determination.   It  does  not
include the previous Tribunal determinations which were also before us.

UNHCR, European and Government Reports, Bulletins and Fact Finding Missions

  1. International Religious Freedom Report 2003 released by the Bureau  of
     Democracy, Human Rights  and  Labor,  US  Department  of  State,  18th
     December 2003.

  2. Iran Country Report, Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit,  October
     2003.

  3. US State Department Bureau  of  Democracy,  Human  Rights  and  Labor:
     Country Report on Human Rights Practice for 2002. 31st March 2003.

  4. The Kingdom of Belgium's CEDOCA Report on the Mission  to  Iran,  16th
     May to 6th July 2002. Published September 2002.

  5. The European Country of Origin Information Seminar,  Berlin,  11th  to
     12th June 2001. Final Report UNHCR Vienna and ACCORD, November 2001.

  6. The Danish  fact-finding  mission  to  Iran,  8th  September  to  17th
     September 2000. Sent from the General Secretariat to CIREA,  Brussels,
     16th January 2002.

  7. The Dutch Report - Situation in Iran, August 2000. Sent to the General
     Secretariat to CIREA, Brussels, 26th April 2001.

  8. Freedom of Religion, European Union - 20th July 1998  &  2nd  February
     1999, CIREA 13 & 63.

News Items on Christianity

  9. Khatami Says  Dialogue  Between  Islam  and  Christianity  Inevitable,
     Tehran Times, 13th December 2003.

 10. Vatican minister meets Christian in Iran, BBC News, 7th March 2001.

 11. Iranian Christians celebrate Christmas in the middle of  Ramadan,  The
     Iranian, 24th December 1997.

Commonwealth Caselaw on Christianity

 12. RRT Reference: NOO/36328

 13. RRT Reference: NO1/40938

 14. Y v. Refugee Status Appeals Authority

Source material for the paragraphs on  Christians  and  Apostasy/Conversions
(6.54 to 6.62) from the Iran Country Report, Country Information and  Policy
Unit, October 2003, not cited above.

 15.  Source  2c  -  Documentation,  Information   and   Research   Branch,
     Immigration and Refugee Board, Ottawa, Canada. Human Rights  in  Iran:
     Update on Selected Issues, May 1997. Accessed via UNHCR Web Site. 11th
     September 2003.

 16. Source 3b - UNHCR Centre for Documentation Research: Background  Paper
     on Refugees and Asylum Seekers from Iran, Geneva, October 1995.

 17. Source 10o - United Nations Situation of Human Rights in  the  Islamic
     Republic of Iran. A/56/278. Special Representative of  the  Commission
     on Human Rights, 10th August 2001.

 18. Source 10p - Report on the Situation of Human Rights  in  the  Islamic
     Republic  of  Iran.  E/CN.4/2002/42.  Special  Representative  of  the
     Commission on Human rights, 16th January 2002.

 19. Source 4 l - US State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and
     Labor: International Religious Freedom Report. For 2002,  7th  October
     2002.

 20. Source 1a - Europa Publications. Europa Regional Survey of the  World:
     The Middle East and North Africa 2003.

 21. Source 3a - UNHCR Centre for Documentation  and  Research:  Background
     Paper on Refugees and Asylum  Seekers  from  Iran,  Geneva,  September
     1998.

 22. Source 4h - US State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights  and
     Labor: Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  2000,  23rd
     February 2001.

 23. Source 4g - US State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights  and
     Labor: Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  1999,  23rd
     February 2000.

 24. Source 4j - US State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights  and
     Labor: Background note: Iran. Bureau  of  Near  Eastern  Affairs  June
     2003.

 25.  Source  2s  -  Documentation,  Information   and   Research   Branch,
     Immigration and Refugee Board, Canada:  REINFO,  22nd  December  1998,
     IRN30744E, Armenian Christians and Proselytization.

 26.  Source  2p  -  Documentation,  Information   and   Research   Branch,
     Immigration and Refugee  Board,  Canada:  REFINFO,  17th  April  1998,
     IRN29210.E, Options open to a Muslim accused of being an apostate.


 27.  Source  2q  -  Documentation,  Information   and   Research   Branch,
     Immigration and Refugee Board,  Canada:  REFINFO,  4th  January  1996,
     IRN22544.E, Consequences for converting to, or  showing  intention  to
     convert to, Christianity from Islam.


 28.  Documentation,  Information  and  Research  Branch,  Immigration  and
     Refugee Board, Ottawa, Canada:
     a. IRN22302.E 27/11/95
     b. IRN256268.E 7/10/96
     c. IRN24845.E 24/09/96
     d. IRN32836.E


EIN Search

 29.  EIN  search  on  22nd  December  2003  using  key  words   Iran   and
     Christianity.

 30. Letter from the British Embassy in Tehran dated 5th September 2002.

 31. 'Iran: Foreign  Ministry  official  says  expatriates  will  be  given
     passports', 2nd September 2002, BBC Monitoring ME1 MEPol bg.

 32.  Documentation,  Information  and  Research  Branch,  Immigration  and
     Refugee Board, Ottawa, Canada: IRN32264.E 09/07/99.

Most Recent Australian Jurisprudence and source material cited.

 33. RRT NO2/41315

 34. DFAT  Country  Profile  for  use  in  Refugee  Determination:  Islamic
     Republic of Iran 1996.

 35. DFAT, CIR No. 186/02 19 June 2002 CX65406.

 36. DFAT, CIR No. 294/02 19 August 2002 CX67771.

 37. DFAT, CIR No. 346/02 26 November 2002 CX70351

 38. DFAT, CIR No. 31/03. 11 February 2003 CX73314.

Objective Evidence Served on Home Office by Messrs Scudamores in 'A'


 39. UNHCR: Country of Origin and Legal Information: Iran:  Information  on
     Conversion from Islam to Christianity - November 2002.

 40. International Christian Concern: Iran - Christian Persecution in Iran,
     8th May 2003.

 41. Amnesty International Press Release: AI Index: MDE  13/040/2003.  News
     Service No:263. 19 November 2003.

 42. Letter from Mr K Behbahani, Messrs Scudamores, Solicitors,  dated  8th
     March 2004 enclosing the letter for Mr Justice Ouseley dated 8th March
     2004 with the following enclosures:-

      i. E-mail from Nina Shea of the Centre for Religious Freedom to Messrs
         Scudamores, Solicitors, dated 30th July 2003.

     ii. E-mail from Mark  Hetfield  of  the  United  States  Commission  on
         International Religious Freedom dated 6th August 2003.

    iii. 'Iran: Veto on Torture Bill Condemned', Human  Rights  Watch,  12th
         June 2002, New York.  (Referred to in Mr Hetfield's e-mail).

     iv. 'Japan violating refugee anti-torture conventions'.  Iranmania.com,
         27th
             January 2004, Tokyo, AFP.

 43. Amnesty International: 'Iran' Jan-Dec 2002

 44. Human Rights Watch, 'World Report 2003: Iran' 01/03

 45. Human Rights Watch, 'Briefing to the 59th Session of the UN commission
     on Human Rights: Iran' 27/02/03

 46. Voice of America News, 'Rights Group: US  should  seek  UN  action  on
     Iranian religious persecution' 27/02/03

 47. Human Rights Watch, Iran: UN fails to condemn rights abuses' 2002

 48. Human Rights Watch World Report 2001: Iran, 'harsh  sentences  against
     Iran Reformists condemned' 2001

 49.  Human  Rights  Watch,  'Iran  -  Religious  and  Ethnic   Minorities:
     Discrimination in Law and Practices' 12/11/03

 50. Article: The Guardian: Dan de  Luce  in  Tehran,  'Price  of  Dissent'
     31/05/03

 51. Article: the Washington Times 'Iranian  converts  pray  for  homeland'
     30/12/03

 52. US Dept of State, 'Country Reports on  Human  Rights  Practices  2002:
     Iran' 31/03/03

 53. US Dept of State, 'International Religious Freedom Report 2002:  Iran'
     07/10/02

 54. CIPU IND 'Asylum in the UK' - extract Undated

 55. Commission on Human Rights: Ethnic and Religious groups in the Islamic
     Republic of Iran' 05/05/03

 56. Letter from Scudamores solicitors to IAT with enclosures 08/03/04

 57.  World  News  -  Extract  'Japan   violating   refugee,   anti-torture
     conventions' 27/01/04

 58. Bastanipour v Immigration and Naturalization  Service  1129  (7th  Cir
     1992)

 59. W68-01A v Minister for Immigration and Multi Cultural  Affairs  [2002]
     FCA148

 60. CIPU report - pages 29 and 30

 61. US  Statement  Department,  Human  Rights  Reports  for  2002  -  Iran
     Religious Freedom

 62. Suspicious Death of Iranian Returnee must  stop  further  deportations
     (from Iranian Refugees at Risk Winter 97/Spring 98)

 63. The Age (Melbourne) "Detainees Arrested on return to Iran" 2002

 64. Article - Keyhan Newspaper - August 2002, together with translations

 65. Christus Pro-Orient, dated 8th January 2003

 66. Jubilee Campaign - The Persecution of Christians in Iran

 67. Booklet entitled "Free to Choose" by the Barnabas Fund

 68. Report of Barnabas Fund on Iran, dated May 2002

 69.  Barnabas  Fund  Report   entitled   "Conversation   from   Islam   to
     Christianity, undated

 70. Article entitled "Christianity Solidarity Worldwide", undated

 71. Article - Christianity Solidarity Worldwide entitled "Iran", undated

 72. Iranian Asylum Seekers face  persecution  upon  'returning'  to  Iran,
     dated 5th May 2002

 73. Barnabas Fund Report, Christian life worth only a twelfth  that  of  a
     Muslims, dated 23rd April 2003

 74. Apostacy (Irtidad) in Islam, dated 13th May 2003

 75. Leaflet entitled "no longer my son"

 76. swipnet.se dated 7th October 1999

 77. Christian Iranian documents

 78. peykeiran.com documents and translation

 79. ChristianityToday.com dated 11th March 2002

 80. Case Notes

 81. Journey into Life Leaflet

 82. Jesus Fellowship - Brief Statement of Faith

 83. Jesus Fellowship - Church Alive Booklet

 84. Article - What is an Evangelical

 85. The Alliance Mission and statement of faith

 86. The Evangelical Relationships Commitment

 87. Notes on the Jesus Fellowship Church and Evangelical December 2003


