
AH-LK-V4


                In the Immigration Appellate Authority


  JB ( Protection - Roma - Well founded fear) Czech Republic [2004]  UKIAT
00187

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at                                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th March 2004                            |                             |
|                                              |   19 May 2004               |


                                   Before

                           MR D K ALLEN (CHAIRMAN)
                                MR A R MACKEY
                                 MR P R LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D W Saville
For the Respondent:    Mr S S Symonds, Refugee Legal Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Tribunal  with  permission
      against the determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  Andrew  Wilson,  in
      which he allowed the appeal of the Respondent (hereafter  referred  to
      as the Claimant) against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  6th
      August 2001 issuing directions for his removal from the United Kingdom
      and refusing asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 12th March 2004.  Mr D  W  Saville
      appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State, and Mr S  S  Symonds  of
      the Refugee Legal Centre appeared on behalf of the Claimant.

3.    This appeal was heard together  with  the  appeal  of  the  Claimant's
      brother Milan Bihar (HX/33821/2001), and their claims have essentially
      the same factual basis.  We heard separate submissions however, and as
      a consequence it is clearly appropriate for us to produce two separate
      determinations.  Mr Saville appeared for the  Secretary  of  State  in
      both appeals but Mr Symonds appeared only in the appeal of Jan Bihari,
      Mr M Henderson of Counsel appearing for Milan Bihari.

4.    Both appeals concern  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  to  the  Czech
      Republic of Czech Roma.  This issue was considered in  detail  by  the
      Tribunal in Puzova (01/TH/0416) in which the Tribunal  concluded  that
      any claim that Czech Roma will, by reason of their ethnicity alone, be
      entitled to refugee status was unsustainable, and that it  was  likely
      that those who  could  succeed  in  showing  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason  on  the  basis  of  the
      actions of non state  actors  in  the  Czech  Republic  would  be  the
      exception, since there was currently in place in the Czech Republic  a
      system of criminal law which  offers  effective  protection  to  Czech
      citizens generally, including Czech Roma.  As was stated by the  Court
      of Appeal in ZL and VL v SSHD and LCD [2003] EWCA Civ 25 at  paragraph
      65, the Court of Appeal has subsequently attached considerable  weight
      to the Tribunal's decision in Puzova, and rightly  so  as  was  stated
      there.  We do not understand the submissions before us to  comprise  a
      challenge to the general conclusions of the Tribunal in  Puzova  which
      we have set out above, but rather to be based on the  contention  that
      they comprise exceptional cases as described there  since  they  raise
      issues of specific rather than generalised risks for the reasons  that
      we shall set out below.

5.    We turn to the facts of  the  particular  appeal  before  us  and  the
      submissions of Mr Saville and Mr Symonds.  The particular event  which
      gives rise ultimately to the specific fear of  the  Claimant  concerns
      the murder of his sister Helena Bihariova in 1998.  There had  been  a
      previous incident in 1997 when the Claimant's  wife  was  attacked  by
      skinheads but this was not reported to the police.  The attack on  the
      Claimant's sister took place on 15th February 1998.  She was beaten by
      a gang of three skinheads and thrown into the  River  Elbe  where  she
      drowned.  A passing journalist tried to assist her but was  unable  to
      save her from drowning.  The skinheads were arrested upon the evidence
      of the journalist and prosecuted.  It seems that  one  was  discharged
      but two were convicted and sentenced to six and a half years and eight
      and a half years imprisonment respectively.   In  September  1998  the
      sentence of one of the youths was reduced from six and a half years to
      fifteen months but the sentence upon the other one  was  upheld.   The
      President's wife attended the funeral and it is clearly the case  that
      it was  a  matter  that  received  nationwide  publicity.   The  Prime
      Minister indicated that matters would improve and that they were aware
      of the problems for the Roma.

6.    It is said however at paragraph 13 of the Adjudicator's  determination
      that matters did not improve and in particular the  Claimant  and  his
      wife were attacked at the beginning of 2001 when  he  wished  to  gain
      admission to a bar.  It is said that the police were involved  but  it
      seems he did not complain to them about what had happened,  and  there
      was another incident earlier in 2001  when  he  and  a  group  of  his
      friends were attacked in a bar by a group of skinheads and there was a
      fight during which he was severely assaulted and required stitches  to
      his ear.  The police attended but did not  appear  to  carry  out  any
      action.

7.    The specific matter which triggered the Claimant's departure from  the
      Czech  Republic  was  that  he  started  to  receive  telephone  calls
      containing threats either from the skinhead  who  was  imprisoned  for
      murdering his sister or from  that  person's  friends  giving  precise
      threats that they would be killed.  The Claimant did not report  these
      threats to the police, though his brother did.  The Claimant contended
      that the police would not "stand behind us" and the police would  "not
      protect him".  As regards whether the police  took  any  action  as  a
      consequence of his brother reporting the threats, the Claimant said at
      interview that the police said they were not able to do anything until
      something happened to them in this sense and he did not know what that
      might be.

8.    The Adjudicator found the Claimant to be credible.  He noted the  fact
      that  the  Claimant  had  effectively  not  sought  to  engage   state
      protection within the Czech Republic.  He considered the appeal to  be
      similar in relevant respects to that in Harakel [2001] EWCA  Civ  884,
      and concluded that though the Claimant could, indeed as he  found  it,
      and should have reported the incidents to the police, he was satisfied
      that within the context of the  objective  evidence  it  was  unlikely
      (here we paraphrase the Adjudicator)  that  anything  effective  would
      have been done.

9.    At paragraph 36 of his determination the Adjudicator, noting  that  he
      found the Claimant credible, mentioning  in  particular  the  physical
      attacks upon the Claimant and his wife and that to  some  extent  they
      had suffered discrimination in relation to such matters as housing and
      education of their child, was satisfied that there had been breach  of
      rights  within  the  second  and  third  classification  of  Professor
      Hathaway  and  that   these   were   a   consequence   of   widespread
      institutionalised racist beliefs, attitudes  and  actions  within  the
      Czech population and echoed failures to implement actions  within  the
      Czech Government.  Curiously he did not refer to  the  murder  of  the
      Claimant's sister and the subsequent threats in this paragraph of  his
      determination, concluding as he did that the claim was made out.

10.   In his submissions Mr Saville reminded us of the weight that had  been
      attached by the Court of Appeal to Puzova.  He suggested that  Harakel
      was per incuriam since it did not refer to  Puzova.   He  took  us  to
      Puzova  and  argued  that  paragraph  154  of  that  determination  in
      particular was crucial.  There among other things the  Tribunal  noted
      that regard had to be had to the operational limitations applicable to
      any system of law enforcement.  Whatever the perception  of  the  Roma
      minority that there was little prospect of any positive  action  being
      taken by the police, there was ample evidence that  prosecutions  were
      mounted by the state when they  had  appropriate  evidence  and  if  a
      claimed offence was not reported then the state could do nothing.   He
      referred us also to paragraph 155 and the summary at paragraph 165  in
      Puzova.

11.   Mr Saville also referred us to a  determination  in  the  Tribunal  in
      Byharova (HX/33740/00) in which the Claimant was  an  aunt  of  Helena
      Bihariova who had received numerous  threats  including  threats  from
      skinheads who were supporters of her niece's murderer and  her  appeal
      was unsuccessful.

12.   Mr Saville also mentioned the fact that, with reference  to  paragraph
      151 of Puzova racially motivated crime became an  aggravated  form  of
      general criminal acts already proscribed by the Czech Criminal Code in
      1996; however this did not become a factor in the United Kingdom until
      1998.  It was a serious criminal  offence  under  Czech  law  and  the
      malefactors had been arrested and imprisoned.  A democratic state  had
      a degree of discretion as to how it enforced the criminal law and  the
      state's actions in this case had not shown that it  was  unwilling  to
      provide protection.

13.   As regards the meaning of the term "protection" in Refugee  Convention
      Law, Mr Saville referred us to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
      Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605.  It was clear that  there  was  no
      requirement of an  absolute  guarantee  against  attacks  or  even  an
      obligation to reduce the risk of harm below that of a real risk.  What
      was required was a reasonable standard of protection as could be  seen
      in the summary at paragraph 55(4).  It was true that, as  was  pointed
      out in paragraph 55(5), the effectiveness of the system  provided  was
      to be judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or  prevent
      the form of persecution of which  there  was  a  risk,  and  not  just
      punishment of it after the event, but the fact of punishment  together
      with the likelihood of being caught was an  important  aspect  of  the
      deterrent effect.  A criminal justice mechanism for  apprehension  and
      punishment of offenders would suffice and the deterrent effect met the
      protection criteria.  The fact of the death of the  Claimant's  sister
      did not demonstrate an unwillingness or inability to  protect  to  the
      required standard.

14.   Mr Saville pointed out that the other attacks on the Claimant and  his
      wife had not been reported  to  the  police  although  they  had  been
      involved on the two occasions of attacks in a bar.  Neither  of  these
      incidents could be taken to show a  lack  of  state  protection.   The
      point had been made in Puzova at paragraph 154 about the inability  of
      the authorities to do anything when  offences  were  not  reported  to
      them.  As regards the  third  incident  it  was  not  clear  what  the
      Claimant had told the police and whether he was able to  identify  the
      attackers and there was nothing significant in his dealings  with  the
      police in that case.  Their response to the individual attacks on  him
      did not show that they were unwilling or unable to protect him.

15.   With regard  to  the  threatening  telephone  calls,  these  had  been
      reported to the police by his brother but not  by  the  Claimant.   Mr
      Saville reminded us that it had been said at paragraph 154  in  Puzova
      that a subjective perception that  it  was  not  worthwhile  reporting
      offences did not show a lack of protection given the fact  that  there
      had been arrests and prosecutions when there was evidence.  There  was
      no objective basis for this perception.  Also he had not exhausted all
      the steps reasonably open to him in his home state.   As  regards  the
      risk on return there had been no failure of protection to the required
      standard while he was  in  the  Czech  Republic  and  no  evidence  of
      significant  deterioration  since  they   left.    The   decision   in
      Bagdanavicius did not change the general situation.

16.   Mr Saville also took us to paragraph 18 in Bagdanavicius which  quoted
      a paragraph 116 of the decision of the Court of Human Rights in  Osman
      v UK [1998]  29  EHRR  245,  where  it  was  said  that  the  positive
      obligation on the authorities to take preventive operational  measures
      to protect an individual whose life is at risk from the criminal  acts
      of another individual has to be interpreted in a way  which  does  not
      impose an impossible or disproportionate burden on the authorities and
      that therefore not every claimed risk  to  life  can  entail  for  the
      authorities a Convention requirement to take operational  measures  to
      prevent that risk from materialising.  Mr  Saville  argued  that  this
      case came nowhere near the Osman  test,  as  there  was  no  real  and
      immediate risk  as  referred  to  elsewhere  at  paragraph  116.   The
      authorities would not know of the threats to the Claimant  as  he  had
      not told them.  His brother had, but threatening telephone calls could
      not be taken per se as showing  a  real  and  immediate  risk  of  the
      threats  being  carried  out.   It  was  a  common  form  of  criminal
      intimidation.  The point was made at  paragraph  49  of  Bagdanavicius
      that even where there were unusual circumstances requiring  additional
      protective measures for a claimant, the test should not be taken as  a
      tailor-made guarantee of safety in human rights or asylum claims.  All
      that was required were reasonable steps.

17.   As regards  the  specifics  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  Mr
      Saville adopted the Grounds of Appeal.  The Adjudicator had quoted but
      then in effect ignored Puzova.  The key error by the  Adjudicator  was
      at paragraph 34 of the determination  where  he  had  noted  that  the
      Claimant had not reported the threats to the  police  but  found  this
      excusable  in  the  light  of  the  evidence,  and  this  was  clearly
      incompatible with Puzova.

18.   In his submissions Mr Symonds argued that it was  a  novel  notion  to
      suggest that Harakel was per incuriam as it did not refer  to  Puzova.
      He argued that Harakel was sound.  Puzova had made it  clear  that  it
      was a general case.  Harakel dealt with the kind of case left over  in
      Puzova concerning the particular and not the  generalised  risk.   The
      Adjudicator clearly  considered  Puzova  but  his  findings  were  not
      inconsistent with Mr Symonds argument that this was a specific Harakel
      type case and that Puzova was relevant generally but this was  a  case
      to be considered as exceptional in comparison to the general situation
      discussed in Puzova.

19.   Mr  Symonds  argued  that  the  starting  point  in  this  regard  was
      paragraphs 11-13 of Dr Chirico's report concerning the murder  of  the
      Claimant's sister and how that had been dealt with by the authorities.
       It was the link between that killing and the threats  which  led  the
      Claimant to flee the Czech Republic.  Mr Saville had acknowledged that
      the Claimant's brother Milan  had  sought  protection  and  there  was
      further detail in Milan's witness  statement.   It  was  inconceivable
      given the detail in the fuller statement that could be  seen  at  page
      170 in Milan's bundle, given that the family were by that time  living
      together, that the police would not have been  aware  of  the  threats
      generally.  Milan had not given up on the police and the  police  were
      therefore aware of the threats.  It therefore did not matter  who  had
      told them.

20.   It was of relevance that the authorities had  not  used  the  racially
      motivated crime provision in respect of the murder of  the  Claimant's
      sister.  Dr Chirico dealt with this  point  at  paragraph  13  of  his
      report.  He quoted his sources and authorities.  It  was  not  just  a
      failure of state protection but  also  by  in  effect  saying  to  the
      perpetrators of this very serious crime that they would  not  use  the
      full force of the available law it could only encourage such people in
      persisting in the way that they had in this case with the  threats  to
      harm the Claimant.  Mr Symonds referred us to  his  skeleton  argument
      which was before the Tribunal.  It was not a necessary requirement  to
      seek state protection.  That could be so in a  general  case  such  as
      Puzova but where there was a specific threat it was not a  requirement
      to exhaust all remedies.  In such a case it might be too late  if  one
      had  to  go  through  every  arm  of  the  state  where  there  was  a
      particularised risk that the risk would  materialise  before  anything
      had been done.  He referred us to the decision of the Court of  Appeal
      in Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567 in  this  regard.   The  family  were
      entitled as they had done to see how the protection went and  to  make
      an assessment.

21.   Mr Symonds took us to the Minority Protection in  the  Czech  Republic
      Report from the Open Society Institute dated 2001.  In  particular  he
      referred us to pages 213 onwards, and suggested that it was a  helpful
      commentary which showed that many of the factors designed  to  provide
      protection from racially motivated violence are not operating as  they
      should.  He referred us to Dr  Chirico's  report  on  this  also.   He
      argued that Byharova  did  not  set  a  precedent.   Weight  had  been
      attached in that determination to the effectiveness of the  Ombudsman,
      but this was effectively challenged  by  Dr  Chirico  in  his  report.
      Referring the  matter  to  the  Ombudsman  would  not  have  made  any
      difference at all.

22.   Mr Symonds also referred us to his  short  skeleton  argument  on  the
      Article 3 point.  He contended that this was of  particular  relevance
      to the ability of citizens of the Czech Republic as from 1st May  2004
      to come and seek work in the  United  Kingdom.   Initially  the  Human
      Rights Convention was not intended to apply to immigration control but
      decisions of the Court of Human Rights  such  as  Soering  and  Chahal
      noted the importance of Article 3 and had brought it into the ambit of
      immigration control because of the positive obligation to protect that
      right, and this had been explained in cases  such  as  Osman.  It  was
      subject to broad principles  of  proportionality  and  reasonableness.
      That ordinarily was by reference to the surrogacy  principle  accepted
      by EU states and hence states did not have to negate the real risk  as
      this would impose an excessive obligation on them.   But  on  1st  May
      that changed as the real ambit of Article 3 was to do with the  United
      Kingdom   not   the   Czech   Republic   and    the    principle    of
      extraterritoriality.  If the United Kingdom was shortly to rescind its
      power of immigration control on right of  entry  on  citizens  of  the
      Czech Republic among others then it was no longer enough  to  rely  on
      the surrogacy principle.  If the risk was real then there was no  need
      for the United Kingdom  Authorities  to  take  the  risk.   Hence  the
      sufficiency of protection test had changed.  Mr Symonds referred us to
      the decision in B in this regard.

23.   We raised with Mr Symonds whether it could properly be said  that  the
      Adjudicator had found real risk  on  return  in  connection  with  the
      threats uttered bearing in mind how he expressed himself in  paragraph
      34 of his determination and that it was unclear whether he  said  that
      the threats raised an imminent  risk  to  the  Claimant.   Mr  Symonds
      argued that it was by reference to how the Adjudicator had set out the
      claim earlier in his determination at paragraphs 13 and 14, though  he
      accepted that he would have done better to come  back  to  it  in  the
      later paragraph.

24.   By way of reply Mr Saville argued that if Harakel  were  not  strictly
      per incuriam then it should be restricted to its particular facts  and
      especially at paragraph 8 and it should be  found  that  the  Claimant
      there had exhausted his options for redress before fleeing  the  Czech
      Republic.

25.   As regard the police knowledge, Mr Saville was happy  to  assume  that
      they probably were aware of the threats.  The authorities were however
      entitled to make a judgment as how to investigate an offence  and  the
      circumstances in which they had decided to do what they had done  were
      not known.  What the Claimant's brother Milan said was  credible  from
      his point of view.  He argued also that Byharova was quite relevant as
      it had also concerned a relative  of  Helena  Bihariova.   The  appeal
      there had been dismissed on the question  of  whether  any  complaints
      were made about the lack of police activity and this was a key  point.
      It seemed that  no complaints had  been  made  in  this  case  to  the
      Ombudsman or the Ministry of Interior concerning the  lack  of  police
      response.  The  points  made  in  Byharova  concerning  the  Ombudsman
      concerned the ability to use the existing complaints system  and  this
      was crucial and was relevant to this case also.  The criticism  of  Dr
      Chirico made by the Tribunal in Puzova should be borne in mind, though
      Mr Saville was not criticising  Dr  Chirico's  good  faith.   Even  if
      Byharova were incorrect on the facts as Dr Chirico contended,  it  was
      right on the broader points of complaint to  a  higher  authority  and
      they would have been likely to have had  a  degree  of  success.   The
      Claimant had not exhausted the options in his own state.

26.   As regards the  Article  3  point,  in  N  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
      explained that extending Article  3  to  immigration  and  deportation
      cases was exceptional.  Proportionality did not qualify the Article  3
      principle at all, Mr Saville  contended.   Leeway  was  given  to  the
      authorities in a democratic state as a fundamental part of Article  3.
      Reasonable protection in an Article 3 case was fundamental  given  the
      exceptional nature of the jurisdiction.  As  regards  the  point  made
      concerning  the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  at  paragraph  36  of  his
      determination, his approach was erroneous and it could not properly be
      concluded that the objective situation  for  the  Roma  in  the  Czech
      Republic meant that there would be no  point  in  complaining  to  the
      police.

27.   The essential issue in this case as we see it  is  whether  this  case
      can be  properly  found  to  comprise  an  exception  to  the  general
      principle stated by the Tribunal in Puzova at paragraph 165 that since
      there is currently in place in the Czech Republic a system of criminal
      law which offers effective  protection  to  Czech  citizens  generally
      including Czech Roma, cases where it can be shown that there is a well-
      founded fear on the basis of feared actions of non state  actors  will
      be the exception.  Clearly none of the  conjoined  appeals  in  Puzova
      gave rise to the kind of specific fears  that  the  Claimant  and  the
      appeal before us has.  The attacks and other incidents in those  cases
      involved random unconnected events rather than as in the appeal before
      us threats which are linked to a specific event and which are specific
      to the Claimant (and his brother).

28.   The specific nature of the threats  as  described  in  the  Claimant's
      statement at page 55 of the bundle is  that  a  few  months  ago  they
      started to get threatening phone calls and he did not know who exactly
      it was but thought it was the skinhead who was in prison  for  killing
      his sister or else his family or friends.  He said that he would  kill
      them, that he had to kill them and on each call he  repeated  that  he
      was not going to leave it as it was but was going to get his  revenge.
      As we have noted above, he did not report these threats to the  police
      because he did not think that it would do any good.  The threats  were
      however reported by his brother Milan,  and  Milan  in  his  interview
      stated that the police first  said  "nothing  like  it  was  a  normal
      standard thing it was all the same to them" and they were not prepared
      to give them any help.  At paragraph 14 of his statement at pages  17-
      18 in his appeal bundle he stated that the police wrote a report  with
      them and that was it.  Bearing in mind that the families were by  then
      living together, it is clearly right, and  Mr  Saville  accepted  this
      point, that the police would have known about the  threats  concerning
      Jan the Claimant before us as they would concerning Milan.


29.   We have before us a report of Dr Chirico which is dated  10th  January
      2003.  It is right that we raise the point that we put to Mr Henderson
      in Milan's appeal concerning Dr Chirico that it appears  that  by  the
      time he produced this report he had been called to the Bar and was  at
      that time in pupillage.  It seemed  to  us  right  to  raise  with  Mr
      Henderson the question of the extent  to  which  Dr  Chirico's  report
      would necessarily be as expert or up-to-date as might  otherwise  have
      been the case given his circumstances at that time.  However we accept
      that at least at that stage when the report was  produced  Dr  Chirico
      had only relatively recently completed a three  year  British  Academy
      post doctoral fellowship at the School of Slovanic and  East  European
      Studies at University College,  London  and  that  his  contacts  with
      people in the Czech Republic and the degree of expertise that  he  had
      previously had remained at that level at the time when the report  was
      prepared.

30.   Among other things Dr Chirico notes that Roma  leaders  complained  of
      the inconsistency in the fact that the Ministry of the Interior in the
      case of the murder of Helena Bihariova listed  the  case  as  racially
      motivated yet it was concluded by the Court which heard the  case  and
      also the Supreme Court, supporting the view of  Minister  of  Justice,
      there was no evidence of racial motivation.   We  note  the  point  at
      paragraph 155 in Puzova that  in  the  Bihariova  case  other  reports
      quoted above showed that it was claimed that there was  some  personal
      difference between the victims and the accused which was not referable
      to race.  We have been unable to find  in  Puzova  any  more  specific
      reference to the point made there.  It seems from  paragraph  14.5  of
      the Adjudicator's determination in the case of Milan Bihari  that  one
      of the youths who killed Helena Bihariova claimed that the attack  was
      provoked by the deceased owing money to one of the parties.  We cannot
      take the matter any further.  We do not have  any  transcript  of  the
      case before us, and it is impossible for us to say what the basis  was
      upon which the authorities did not charge the  accused  with  racially
      motivated offences, nor why the charge of murder was replaced  by  one
      of aggravated coercion.  As a consequence we do not think that we  are
      in a position to agree with Mr Symonds' contention that  the  decision
      not to charge with racially motivated offences gave a clear signal  to
      the accused and other likeminded  people  of  a  climate  of  relative
      impunity and in effect gave the go ahead to the making of the  threats
      to the Claimant and his brother.  It is quite possible  that  that  is
      the implication which was  drawn  from  it,  but  whether  it  was  an
      implication that can  properly  be  drawn  as  a  consequence  of  any
      improper motive on the  part  of  the  prosecutors  or  the  court  is
      conclusion to which it is quite impossible for us to come.  It is  not
      irrelevant however to note the point made by the Tribunal in Puzova at
      paragraph 155 which reinforces the points which we have made about the
      difficulty of our coming to any conclusions in this regard.  The point
      is there emphasised that those immediately responsible were  convicted
      and the principal actor received a substantial sentence, and the  fact
      that the Ministry of Justice took the same view as the  prosecutor  as
      to the proper charges to be brought suggests, in view of  the  general
      government concern in relation to such types of crime, that there  was
      sound reasoning in that case for the view which was taken.

  31. With regard to the evidence of  Dr  Chirico  generally,  we  note  the
      comments made by  the  Tribunal  at  paragraph  138  in  Puzova.   The
      Tribunal concluded that some caution was necessary in considering  the
      conclusions which he sought to draw from his selection  of  the  facts
      which he considered relevant.  The Tribunal saw force in  counsel  for
      the Secretary of State's observation that Dr Chirico's focus was  that
      of someone from a non governmental organisation whose specific purpose
      was to provide support to the Czech Roma and that he  was  approaching
      issues on a "counsel of perfection" basis.  In  that  case  it  became
      very clear that he had little or no knowledge of the workings  of  the
      Czech legal system but was nevertheless prepared  to  comment  on  its
      efficacy, that some of  his  information  was  based  on  unattributed
      anecdotal material from the Czech Roma  which  perhaps  received  more
      emphasis than it was strictly entitled to  in  the  face  of  lack  of
      independent statistics, and perhaps most importantly of  all  that  he
      made clear in the  course  of  his  oral  evidence  that  he  did  not
      understand  what  was  meant  by  the  concept  of  a  sufficiency  of
      protection in asylum law and yet felt able to  assert  in  his  report
      that he was not convinced that the legal system of the Czech  Republic
      provided protection of the kind  envisaged  in  the  House  of  Lords'
      judgment in Horvath, with which  he  claimed  to  be  familiar.   With
      regard to the latter point, it is to be hoped that,  bearing  in  mind
      that by the time Dr Chirico wrote his report in this case he had  been
      called to the Bar and was in pupillage, he would have by then acquired
      a  much  clearer  understanding  of  the  concept  of  sufficiency  of
      protection in asylum law and that reservation at least can in our view
      be removed.  In this context however we bear in mind the  comments  by
      the Court of Appeal in ZL and VL [2003] EWCA  Civ  25,  concerning  Dr
      Chirico's evidence in that case.  By that time  Dr  Chirico  had  been
      called to the Bar.  His evidence is  summarised  at  paragraph  71  as
      being in effect a challenge to  the  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in
      Puzova that there is in general in the Czech Republic a sufficiency of
      protection  from  state  agents  against  ill-treatment  of  Roma   by
      skinheads.  Comment was made at paragraph  72  with  regard  to  three
      cases of serious crimes against Roma in relation to which we think  it
      is probably proper to infer that one of them is  the  case  of  Helena
      Bihariova, that in relation to  two  of  them  the  perpetrators  were
      ultimately tried and convicted and that the Ministry of  the  Interior
      has been vigorous in castigating local shortcomings.  It is noted that
      indeed much of the material relied upon by Dr  Chirico  emanates  from
      the Ministry.   At paragraph 74 the Court of Appeal stated that it did
      not find that Dr Chirico's evidence shakes the conclusion of  the  IAT
      that  the  Czech  Republic  provides  in  general  a  sufficiency   of
      protection against racial crime and attacks  on  Roma  in  particular.
      While the skinhead movement appears to be growing in strength, so does
      the determination of the central authorities to crack down  on  racial
      crime.  The Court of Appeal made the point  however  that  Dr  Chirico
      described a volatile situation and one in which there  was  cause  for
      concern at the possibility of localised complicity or sympathy between
      skinheads and the police.

  32.    With regard to that last point, we  do  not  understand  it  to  be
      contended that there is any complicity  between  the  police  and  the
      skinheads in this case.  It may however by implication be argued  that
      the evidence of the Claimant's brother Milan that the  police  did  no
      more than take a report is indicative of sympathy between  the  police
      and the skinheads.

  33.    In this regard however, it is relevant to consider  what  more  the
      police might be expected to do.  On this we  know  very  little  other
      than the fact that Milan stated that "they made a report  with  them".
      We do not know what investigations the police carried out with  regard
      to the threats that were made.  We do not know whether they sought  to
      interview the skinhead (if by that time he had been  released)  and/or
      his family and friends in order to investigate the threats.  It may be
      simply that they took the view that Mr  Saville  expressed  that  such
      types of threats are often made as a form of intimidation  without  it
      being necessary  to  assume  that  they  will  ever  be  carried  out.
      Certainly there is no indication that there was any  increased  police
      presence at their home to provide protection or  any  attempt  to  tap
      their telephones in order to identify the malefactors.

   34. In Byharova, to which we have referred above, the Tribunal concluded
       that the reaction of the police to complaints by the  Appellant  and
       members of her family was mixed but  on  the  whole  unsatisfactory.
       After the death of Helena Bihariova the Claimant's niece, the police
       promised to provide protection but on  most  occasions  when  called
       they  did  not  come.   Following  a  serious  attack  and  repeated
       complaint by the Claimant policemen in a police  car  came  and  sat
       outside the house on two occasions.  There were  other  refusals  of
       help but on another occasion the police came  to  the  home  without
       appearing to take any action against  skinheads  who  were  throwing
       stones at the house.  It seems that the Claimant made a complaint to
       the Chief of Police but there is  no  suggestion  that  she  or  any
       member of her family complained to any higher authority.

   35. The Tribunal went on to consider what else might have been  done  by
       the family.  It seems clear  that  the  Human  Rights  Commissioner,
       established  in  September  1998,  had  no  mandate  to  deal   with
       individual complaints.  The first Ombudsman was elected in  December
       2000.  The Tribunal referred to the Country Assessment which amongst
       other things noted that the Ombudsman was  empowered  to  deal  with
       complaints from individuals concerning the police,  prison  services
       and  medical  facilities  in  addition  to  government   ministries,
       district offices and other state bodies.  Although the Ombudsman had
       no direct power to sanction  the  authorities  his  power  has  been
       limited to notifying a superior organ or the  government,  he  might
       propose  the  instigation  of  disciplinary   action   or   criminal
       proceedings about police or public  officials  and  the  payment  of
       damages  (compensation)  to  aggrieved  individuals.   The  Tribunal
       concluded that in the light of this assessment the  Adjudicator  was
       correct to conclude that the Ombudsman was empowered  to  deal  with
       complaints concerning the police though the Ombudsman did  not  have
       powers to direct the police to take action  in  a  particular  case.
       The Tribunal considered that the powers given to the Ombudsman  were
       such that effective although not necessarily direct action could and
       was likely to be taken.

   36. On the facts of that appeal the Tribunal found that if the  Claimant
       had taken her complaints to higher authority including the Ombudsman
       it was likely that there would have been a reaction to the notoriety
       of the case and regional or central government,  probably  aided  or
       galvanised by the Ombudsman, would have taken steps to  ensure  that
       the local police provided more consistent and  effective  protection
       for the Claimant and  her  family.   The  Tribunal  noted  objective
       evidence which led it to conclude that the situation for the Roma in
       the Czech Republic was improving albeit slowly and that on return if
       the Claimant found herself in a  position  where  police  protection
       were needed it would either be given by the local police or if  they
       displayed any reluctance, complaint to higher authority including if
       necessary the Ombudsman would be likely to ensure the  provision  of
       effective protection.

37.   Dr Chirico deals with the question of complaints to the Ombudsman  and
       other authorities in some detail in his report.   He  describes  the
       police complaints  procedure  in  the  Czech  Republic  as  follows.
       Firstly a  complaint  has  to  be  made  to  the  police  complaints
       department at the appropriate police station which is of course  the
       police station within whose  area  the  alleged  offending  incident
       occurred.  The local complaints department is then obliged to  reach
       a written decision on the complaint, although  in  the  majority  of
       cases that Dr Chirico has followed in the Czech  Republic  this  has
       not happened.  An appeal against a  complaints  department  decision
       lies to the regional Police Authority and a further appeal  lies  to
       the Minister of the Interior.  To the best of Dr Chirico's knowledge
       there has been  no  case  of  which  a  Romany  complaint  has  been
       successful at first instance and he is  unaware  of  any  subsequent
       appeal by a Romany applicant having been heard.  He is however aware
       of a handful of cases in which disciplinary measures  have  resulted
       against offending police officers as a result of internal  inquires.
       Given his regular contact with NGOs in the Czech Republic  and  with
       the Czech Human Rights Commission he would be very surprised if  any
       such complaint had been successful without his knowledge.   Criminal
       investigations against individual police officers  are  carried  out
       directly  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.   The  Human  Rights
       Commission has criticised the procedures as lacking objectivity  and
        credibility.  It is said that it would seem to facilitate  impunity
       for police officers involved in human rights violations.


38.   As regard the Ombudsman, Dr  Chirico  emphasises  the  point  that  we
       refer to above that the Ombudsman has no direct  power  to  sanction
       the authorities, his powers being limited to  notifying  a  superior
       organ or the government.  Monitoring bodies have  pointed  out  that
       the  Ombudsman  is  no  substitute  for   a   properly   functioning
       independent complaint procedure.  The criminal justice process  from
       the moment of the  opening  of  an  investigation  until  the  final
       determination  of  the  charge  by  a  Court  is  removed  from  the
       Ombudsman's jurisdiction.  Dr Chirico  describes  this  as  quite  a
       normal limitation of an Ombudsman's sphere of  activities  and  that
       complaints about the conduct of investigation, prosecution and trial
       are provided for in theory at least by the criminal procedure code.

39.   Dr Chirico spoke on 19th November 2002  with  a  Mr  Vojta  who  is  a
       person working in the Ombudsman's office though the level  at  which
       he is working is not clear.  Mr Vojta was not sure what the position
       would be if a complaint were made that the police had failed to open
       an investigation, and Dr Chirico concludes that that is  the  likely
       category into which  the  applicant's  complaint  about  the  police
       failing to take action would fall.  It is unclear whether as regards
       the death threats an investigation had been opened or  not.   If  it
       had been then it  would  seem  from  Mr  Vojta's  remarks  that  the
       Ombudsman would  not  have  jurisdiction  but  the  evidence  in  Dr
       Chirico's view was equivocal.  Dr  Chirico  concludes  that  if  the
       Ombudsman did consider that he had a jurisdiction to consider any of
       the Claimant's  complaints  then  his  role  would  be  confined  to
       proposing the instigation as appropriate of a complaint procedure by
       the police complaints department  or  a  Ministry  of  the  Interior
       internal investigation and it could oblige neither of  these  bodies
       to open such a procedure nor could it  directly  influence  them  in
       carrying it out.

40.    Elsewhere  in  his  report  Dr  Chirico  concludes  that  levels   of
       discrimination and racial  motivated  violence  remain  unacceptably
       high in  the  Czech  Republic  despite  some  clear  signs  of  good
       intention from the last two governments.  He points to such  matters
       as the establishment of the Commission  for  Human  Rights  and  the
       continuing function of  the  Inter-Ministerial  Commission  for  the
       affairs of the Romany Community as being positive  developments  and
       ones that  have  resulted  in  some  legislative  changes  regarding
       citizenship, education and employment, and the recent appointment of
       the Ombudsman is another positive step.  He concludes  however  that
       in most areas of  day-to-day  life  there  has  been  little  or  no
       practical improvement in the position of  Roma  and  considers  that
       with  regard  to  housing,  discrimination  and  racially  motivated
       violence have continued to worsen.  He attributes this  in  part  to
       the persistence of discriminatory attitudes  and  practices  at  the
       level of local authorities including courts and the police.  The new
       government which took office in June 2002 has stated its  commitment
       to human rights and to the continuation of the bodies instituted  by
       its  predecessor  including  the  Human  Rights  Committee  and  the
       Ombudsman.  Dr Chirico considers  that  its  effectiveness  will  be
       limited by its failure to acquire an overall majority in  Parliament
       and by the opposition of local authorities.   Elsewhere  Dr  Chirico
       refers to Roma fears  of  police  violence  which  he  considers  is
       relevant to the likelihood of obtaining protection for the  Claimant
       on return.  Dr Chirico cites the OSI Report on  the  Czech  Republic
       and the ECRI Report in this regard.  We note and adopt  the  comment
       of the Tribunal at paragraph 139 in Puzova that the  stated  purpose
       of reports such as specifically referred to these the ECRI and  CERD
       Reports of 21st March and 14th August 2000 that they are  very  much
       concerned to consider what steps are necessary from the human rights
       point of view to achieve the elimination of the discrimination which
       the Czech Roma in common with the Roma communities in many parts  of
       Europe suffer, so that their focus is very much fixed on  that  long
       term goal.  The Tribunal also makes the comment that even  in  these
       reports there is no suggestion that the actions of  the  actions  of
       the Czech Government are seen as other  than  seeking  genuinely  to
       address the long term position of the Czech Roma  in  Czech  society
       and  that  the  proposals  are  welcomed  as  being   positive   and
       constructive and with some discernable progress already.

41.   From the State Department report for 2001 at page 41 of the bundle  we
       find the comment that the government generally  respects  the  human
       rights of its citizens in the Czech Republic but  problems  remained
       in some areas.   Discrimination  and  occasional  skinhead  violence
       against the Romany community remained  problems.   Various  examples
       are given at page 54-55 of the bundle of skinhead  violence  against
       Roma and members of other ethnic minorities.  In all  of  the  cases
       cited it appears that charges were brought,  and  we  note  the  two
       instances of convictions involving charges of murder on the one hand
       and damage to property on the other hand with racist motives.

42.   Dr Chirico goes on to refer to the  skinhead  movement  and  concludes
       that it must be considered to be an organised one.  It is said  that
       police  vigilance  and  monitoring  in  controlling  large  skinhead
       gatherings has increased, and the police do not have powers to break
       up demonstrations or concerts until racist activities take place  at
       such events.

43.   As we have stated above, we see the essential issue in  this  case  as
       being whether there is a particular risk to this Claimant on  return
       that  sets  him  apart  from  the  lack  of  generalised  real  risk
       identified by the Tribunal in  Puzova  and,  as  we  understand  the
       position,  this  conclusion  is  not  challenged  before  us.    Our
       assessment of the objective evidence taken as a whole is that  there
       has been no significant difference in the  position  for  the  Czech
       Roma in the Czech Republic since the  very  detailed  and  extremely
       helpful determination by the Tribunal in Puzova.  We agree  entirely
       with the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in  that  determination  and
       associate ourselves with and adopt  the  reasoning  and  conclusions
       contained therein.  Though the matter was not considered  in  detail
       by the Court of Appeal in ZL and VL, we note the point at  paragraph
       74 there to which we have referred above  that  while  the  skinhead
       movement  appears  to  be  growing  in   strength,   so   does   the
       determination of the central authorities to  crack  down  on  racial
       crime.  This is borne out by the examples we have given  above  from
       the State Department report concerning cases of racial violence  and
       subsequent prosecutions.  We do not read the report to which we were
       referred by Mr Symonds from the Open  Society  Institute  concerning
       minority protection in the  Czech  Republic  as  indicative  of  any
       deterioration.  The report comments on a lack of  more  than  a  few
       indications   that   conditions   for   the   Roma   are   improving
       significantly, and we see that as consistent with our conclusions in
       this regard.

44.         We should say something about  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in Harakel [2001] EWCA CIV 884.  Certainly we do not consider
       that it can properly be said that this decision is per incuriam  due
       to its lack of any mention of the Tribunal determination in  Puzova.
        Clearly the Court of Appeal is not bound by any  decisions  of  the
       Tribunal, and it is necessary for us  to  consider  whether  it  can
       properly as described by Mr Symonds be said to be a case that  falls
       within the general range of exceptions envisaged in Puzova.

45.         The Claimant in that case had suffered various problems  over  a
       number of  years  including  wrongful  arrest,  detention  and  ill-
       treatment in 1971 when he was imprisoned for causing  actual  bodily
       harm to a policeman when he came to the defence of a  female  cousin
       who had been the subject of an unprovoked attack by police.  In 1984
       he was detained by a police officer, severely assaulted  and  as  he
       described it "left for dead".  Generally he and his family had  been
       subjected to abuse and  discrimination.   The  particular  incidents
       which caused him to leave the Czech Republic occurred at the end  of
       1998.  In the summer of that year a skinhead was  sent  by  the  Job
       Centre to apply for a  vacancy  at  the  Claimant's  business.   The
       skinhead did not wish to work for the Claimant and simply wished  to
       be given a certificate stating that  the  Claimant  had  refused  to
       employ him.  On the Claimant declining to provide such a certificate
       the man became aggressive,  damaging  furniture  and  attacking  the
       Claimant.  The incident was reported to  the  police  but  he  heard
       nothing and thereafter had real difficulties in employing people and
       he received two threatening letters, one directed  to  this  partner
       and  also  threatening  and  abusive   anonymous   telephone   calls
       threatening to steal his car and set his house alight.  In  November
       of that year he was attacked and beaten by two skinheads but he  did
       not report this incident to the police because he believed that some
       of the policemen were skinheads or skinhead  supporters.   Not  long
       thereafter he received a further letter threatening to take his  son
       or his car and again did not report this.  His car was  subsequently
       stolen  and   found   completely   destroyed.    He   reported   the
       disappearance and the destruction of the car to the police but heard
       nothing other than being provided with an appropriate form  to  fill
       in.  At the beginning of December  his  house  was  broken  into  by
       skinheads one of whom had taken part in the attack in  November  but
       he managed to frighten them off but again they threatened to  abduct
       his son.  The police took some details but they provided him with no
       report nor was he advised what action was being taken.   Accordingly
       he and his partner and son left the Czech Republic and came  to  the
       United Kingdom.

46.   The Court of Appeal considered that the Tribunal which  dismissed  the
       appeal of  the  Claimant  was  in  error  in  concentrating  on  the
       incidents which occurred in the latter part of 1998 and  failing  to
       take account of the objective material available including a  report
       of Dr Chirico.  The Court of Appeal noted the fact that the Claimant
       had a non-Romany wife and a child who was  therefore  of  mixed-race
       and that as a consequence of the  attitude  of  the  authorities  he
       found it difficult to register his residence and as a consequence it
       was impossible for him to marry because the  authorities  would  not
       permit registration of any  marriage.   This  the  Court  of  Appeal
       considered meant that he was liable to be exposed to the  activities
       of those who for envy or whatever other reason  given  his  business
       success  had  feelings  of  antipathy  towards  the  Romanies.   The
       Tribunal was criticised for not recognising that the attack  on  the
       car and the threats to the Claimant's wife and in particular to  his
       son were of particular significance in relation to feelings of  fear
       that he would have,  and  the  background  facts  were  relevant  to
       determining the extent to which it could properly be said  that  the
       reaction  of  the  police  was  an  adequate  reaction  in  all  the
       circumstances to  show  willingness  or  readiness  to  provide  the
       protection to which he was entitled.  Thereafter the Court of Appeal
       went on to criticise the Tribunal's approach  to  the  Adjudicator's
       findings and concluded that the decision of the Adjudicator was  one
       that was open to him on the facts and that  therefore  the  Tribunal
       was in error in allowing the Secretary of State's appeal against the
       Adjudicator's decision.

47.         It is impossible to say what if any  difference  it  would  have
       made to the Court of Appeal's reasoning and conclusions had  it  had
       the determination of the Tribunal in Puzova before it.   However  we
       do see force in Mr  Symonds'  contention  that  the  nature  of  the
       threats and therefore the risk to the Claimant in  that  case  arose
       out of specific problems experienced by him  and  not  simply  as  a
       consequence of being a Roma who from time to time happened to be  in
       the wrong place at the wrong time.  We  do  not  therefore  see  any
       inconsistency, in so far as we have the right to identify one in any
       event, between Harakel and Puzova.

48.         Clearly the Tribunal in Puzova  left  open  the  possibility  of
       there being cases of Czech Roma whose particular histories give rise
       to a real risk on  return  on  account  of  their  history  and  the
       particularised risk that they therefore face.  The  question  before
       us is whether this case is one of those.  We have to be  careful  to
       ensure that we are not simply substituting our own decision for that
       of the Adjudicator without identifying any point of law in  relation
       to which he has erred.  We bear in mind  the  points  we  have  made
       above about the lack as we find it of any significant difference  in
       the situation for the Czech Roma generally as of today  and  at  the
       time when the Tribunal produced its determination in Puzova.  We  do
       not read the Tribunal in Byharova as suggesting that  the  Ombudsman
       is in any sense a panacea for problems of the  kind  that  arose  in
       that case, but rather that the Ombudsman is part of the  package  of
       higher authorities to which complaints can be made.  It  is  unclear
       in our view as to whether the Ombudsman has jurisdiction or not, but
       it is in any event clear, as set out in paragraph 23 of Dr Chirico's
       report, that there is quite  an  elaborate  appeals  procedure  that
       exists with regard to police complaints in the Czech  Republic.   We
       note the criticisms of lack of objectivity and credibility  of  that
       system, and the absence of at least Dr Chirico's  awareness  of  any
       case where a Romany complaint has been successful at first instance.
        Dr Chirico's evidence in this regard is purely  anecdotal  and  not
       based upon any statistical information but rather on the basis  that
       he considers that he would have been told if there  were  any  cases
       involving Romany complaints being successful and we do not  consider
       that that is evidence of particular substance.  We also bear in mind
       the point made at paragraph 14  in  Byharova  that  given  the  high
       profile nature of the murder of Helena Bihariova there  would  be  a
       good  degree  of  likelihood  that  taking  the  complaint  to   the
       authorities  and  emphasising  the  background  against  which   the
       problems arose would be likely to give  rise  to  a  more  energetic
       response than as so far occurred.  The police so  far  have  made  a
       report, and as we have stated above, we know of no other action that
       they may have taken in order to seek to identify the makers  of  the
       threats.  We are far from saying that a person would  have  to  wait
       for threats to be carried out in order for there to be action  taken
       by the authorities, but we do consider that there  is  force  in  Mr
       Saville's point that the making of threats is unfortunately a common
       tactic of the bully and the fact that the intimidation exists by  no
       means entails that it is  going  to  be  followed  up.   It  is  not
       irrelevant to note that in the period of some  2 years between  the
       convictions and  the  departure  from  the  Czech  Republic  of  the
       appellant and his brother there has been a single occasion  when  in
       an attack on  them mention was made of Helena Bihariova,  and  there
       was no follow-up to any of the threats made  which  began  in  March
       2001.

49.   In conclusion therefore  we  consider,  adopting  the  conclusions  in
       Puzova, that there is in the Czech Republic a system of criminal law
       which  offers  effective  protection  to  Czech  citizens  generally
       including Czech Roma.  On the particular facts of this case, bearing
       in  mind  the  Appellant's  history  and  the   objective   evidence
       concerning the availability of complaints procedures  in  the  Czech
       Republic  and  the  general  attitude  of  the   Czech   Authorities
       identified by the Court of Appeal in ZL and VL at paragraph 74, that
       the Claimant does not face a real risk of persecution on  return  to
       the Czech Republic.  We consider that the Adjudicator was in  error,
       as identified by Mr Saville, in concluding as he  did  at  paragraph
       34:


           "I am satisfied however that within the context of the objective
           and country material that it is unlikely that any  consequential
           difference would have occurred to the  Appellant's  history  and
           his ability to subject to discrimination of the Czech Republic".

            As can be seen, that sentence is  not  very  clearly  expressed,
       and we do not consider that it was a proper conclusion to which  the
       Adjudicator was  entitled  to  come  to  on  an  assessment  of  the
       objective evidence and we therefore consider that he erred in law.

50.   We therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

51.   As regards Mr Symonds's separate point concerning Article  3  and  the
       changes as from May 1st in enabling citizens of the  Czech  Republic
       to come to the United Kingdom  to  seek  work  under  the  Accession
       Agreement, we see no merit in this point.  There is  either  a  real
       risk of Article 3 ill-treatment on return or there is  not,  and  we
       see no merit to the suggestion that the surrogacy  principle  is  no
       longer applicable.  The reasons why there has to be a real  risk  as
       identified by  Mr Symonds, in order for  an Article 3  claim  to  be
       made out are not in our view changed in any respect by  the  changes
       in the situation on  1st  May  which  in  any  event  have  not  yet
       occurred.  We therefore, as we have noted above,  see  no  merit  in
       this point and  specifically  we  regard  B  as  being  at  best  of
       peripheral significance. In any  event,  taking  into  consideration
       forthcoming European-based rights is one thing,  basing  a  decision
       on them is quite another.  The Adjudicator made no specific findings
       under the European Convention by virtue of his  decision  under  the
       Refugee Convention, which we do not consider  was  appropriate.   If
       there is an appeal there must be a decision on it.  The Tribunal  is
       empowered by statute to make any determination which the Adjudicator
       could have made.  In the  light  of  our  findings  on  the  Refugee
       Convention appeal and on Mr Symonds' point on Article 3, we  dismiss
       the claimant's Article 3 appeal.




                                                         D K Allen
                                                         Vice President
