
                                           JD (homosexual - MDC supporter -
                   internal relocation ) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00259     | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 2 August 2004
                                      Determination prepared: 13 August 2004
                               Date Determination notified:17 September 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                               Ms C. St Clair
                               Mr  S.S. Percy

Between:
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:           Ms M. Plimmer, counsel instructed by South
                       Manchester Law Centre
For the Respondent:          Mr J. Wyatt, Home Office Presenting Officer


  1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  who  appeals  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D. M. Brunnen, promulgated  on  27
     October 2003, dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
     of the Secretary of State to refuse both her asylum and  human  rights
     claims.

  2. The Appellant was born on 23 October 1980 and is 23  years  old.   She
     arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 January  2002  on  a  flight  from
     South Africa using her own passport and was granted six  months  leave
     to enter as a visitor.  One week before the expiration of  her  leave,
     the Appellant applied for asylum.  The Secretary of State refused  her
     asylum claim and made a decision on  6  September  2002  refusing  her
     application for variation of her  leave  to  enter  or  remain.   This
     decision gave rise to a right of appeal under  section  69(2)  of  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Appellant gave notice of  appeal
     on 10 September 2002.

  3. The Appellant is a lesbian and claimed to fear return to Zimbabwe both
     because of her sexual orientation and as a result of  her  involvement
     with the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC).  The  Appellant  is  an
     only child who, after the separation of her parents and the remarriage
     of  her  mother,  went  to  live  with  her  grandmother.   When   her
     grandmother died in 1998, the Appellant went to live  with  her  uncle
     who  lived  in  Harare.   In  October  2000,  she  formed   a   sexual
     relationship with  another  young  woman,  Ms  Moyo.   A  conversation
     between the two of them was  overheard  and  the  Appellant  was  only
     permitted to remain in her uncle's house under strict supervision.  Ms
     Moyo  was  a  member  of  the  MDC  and  the  Appellant  joined   that
     organisation in November  2000.   The  Appellant  attended  three  MDC
     rallies, two of them in the company of Ms Moyo.   At  a  rally  on  26
     December 2001, supporters of Zanu PF attempted to disrupt the meeting.
      In the ensuing  violence,  the  Appellant  was  assaulted  by  police
     officers, arrested and detained for two  weeks.   She  was  questioned
     about her involvement with the MDC.  Eventually,  her  uncle  arranged
     for her release.  Upon her release, supporters of Zanu PF came to  her
     uncle's house.  A stone was thrown through one of  the  windows.   The
     Appellant was subjected to taunts over her sexuality.

  4. The Appellant went by coach to South Africa on  11  January  2002  and
     flew to the United Kingdom four days later.  On arrival in the  United
     Kingdom, she went to stay with her aunt.

  5. The Adjudicator found the Appellant to be an open and honest  witness.
     Although the Secretary of State  in  his  refusal  letter  had  raised
     doubts  as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility,  those   matters   were
     considered  by  the  Adjudicator  who  concluded  that  the  Appellant
     retained her credibility.  In paragraph 17 of the  determination,  the
     Adjudicator  expressly  finds  that  the  Appellant's   evidence   was
     truthful.

  6. The Adjudicator, however,  examined  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
     claim.  Taken at its highest, he considered the Appellant to be a low-
     level supporter of the MDC.  She could not properly be described as an
     activist or a leader and had only attended three or four rallies.

  7. The Adjudicator had before him  a  report  by  Mr  Matyszak  which  he
     regarded as well researched, well balanced  and  reliable.   He  noted
     that lesbian acts were not regarded as criminal although the political
     leaders have made virulently homophobic remarks.  There is  widespread
     condemnation against homosexuality,  often  viewed  as  a  product  of
     western  values  and,  therefore,  in  opposition  to   the   Zimbabwe
     government.  The Appellant is a Shona.   Homosexuality,  it  is  said,
     undermines traditional kinship, highly valued by the Shona,  rendering
     it impossible for a black rural Zimbabwean woman to  adopt  a  lesbian
     lifestyle.  Even in an urban environment, it would be very difficult.

  8. Having considered the report of Mr Matyszak, the Adjudicator concluded
     that the Appellant was not at  risk  of  ill-treatment  of  sufficient
     severity to amount to persecution or a  violation  of  her  Article  3
     rights. Mr Matyszak had suggested that it was possible for lesbians to
     adopt "a position  of  invisibility";  in  essence,  concealing  their
     sexual orientation to an extent that it remained private,  or  largely
     so.  The Adjudicator did  not  consider  that  a  restriction  on  the
     Appellant's ability to express her  sexual  orientation  in  this  way
     imposed a limitation on the Appellant's freedom sufficiently severe to
     engage Articles 3 or 8 of the European Convention.

  9.  The  Appellant  appealed.   The  grounds  of  appeal  challenge   the
     Adjudicator's assessment that the Appellant's account did not disclose
     persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment sufficient to the  purposes  of
     Article 3 and was in error in his assessment of risk on return both as
     a result of her involvement with the MDC and because she is lesbian.

 10. In his report, Mr Matyszak refers  to  the  homophobic  utterances  by
     members of the Zimbabwe leadership.  He also refers to the  link  that
     is drawn between western standards and homosexuality.  At  page  9  of
     his report, we find:

           "The discourse and the milieu outlined above has exacerbated  an
           already difficult  situation  for  the  lesbians  in  two  ways.
           Firstly, lesbian and gays are held up as the epitome of the evil
           that results from adopting western lifestyles.  They are  people
           who, in the eyes of the present government, show by  their  very
           identity that they have thrown in their lot  with  "the  enemy".
           Homosexuality is portrayed in  the  State  controlled  media  as
           foreign and as non-existent in  unadulterated  Shona  society...
           Being gay or lesbian, to  supporters  of  Mr  Mugabe's  Zanu  PF
           party, immediately connotes that individual as a person  hostile
           to  Mugabe's  Zanu  PF  party,  as  someone  who  represents  an
           incarnation of the intrusion  of  western  values  which  Mugabe
           professes  to  abhor  and  the  embodiment  elements   seen   to
           constitute Zimbabwe's enemies."


 11. This same report speaks of physical violence:

           "Physical violence against gays and lesbians in Zimbabwe is  not
           endemic or systematic.  In this regard, despite  the  homophobic
           environment, instances of physical gay bashing are less frequent
           than in many jurisdictions where  homosexual  relationships  are
           formally recognised.  However, sporadic  instances  of  physical
           violence have been recorded by GALZ and tend to occur when  some
           event has raised the profile of gays and lesbians  in  Zimbabwe.
           Such violence that there has  been  has  largely  been  directed
           against gay men.  This is  most  probably  due  to  the  greater
           invisibility of lesbians.  Several black lesbians  whose  sexual
           orientation has become public have been subjected to violence."


 12. The report concludes:

           "Clearly, a  hostile  climate  exists  in  Zimbabwe  as  far  as
           lesbians are concerned.  The impact of this  hostility  in  some
           cases is specific to the  individual.   An  openly  and  overtly
           lesbian woman is very likely to face some sort of persecution of
           one form or another.  The  government  provides  an  ideological
           structure conducive to persecution and  even  encourages  it  in
           some instances.  However, the extreme hostility of  the  climate
           forces most lesbians to adopt a position of invisibility.  Their
           reduced access to public space, reduced independence and  socio-
           economic status result in few incidents of abuse coming  to  the
           attention of the only lesbian and gay NGO in the country.
           Finally, it is worth  mentioning  that  there  have  not  to  my
           knowledge been any cases of persons, male or female, who  sought
           asylum on the basis of sexuality, facing persecution on  return.
           However, as such asylum cases are rare  no  conclusions  may  be
           drawn  from  this.   I  have  not  been  able  to   locate   any
           jurisprudence on this point in any  common-law  African  country
           apart from South Africa."


 13. The Country Report for  Zimbabwe,  prepared  by  CIPU  in  April  2004
     contains the following material:


           Homosexuals



           6.151  Sex between men is illegal in Zimbabwe, although the  law
           makes no mention of sexual acts between  women.  Zimbabwean  law
           recognises  three  classes  of  'unnatural   offence':   sodomy,
           bestiality, and a group of proscribed acts referred to generally
           as an 'unnatural offence'.  According  to  a  1999  World  Legal
           Survey, High Court  cases  in  Zimbabwe  suggested  that  sexual
           behaviour between men should no longer be punished by  custodial
           sentences,  however,  magistrate's  courts  continued  to  serve
           "harsh custodial sentences" [18a]. There have been no reports of
           the authorities bringing cases on the  grounds  of  sexual  acts
           between females. [28a].


           6.152 Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ)  was  established  in
           1990. GALZ has offices in Harare and Bulawayo and is considering
           forming a group in Mutare. The organisation reports itself to be
           relatively well funded and it owns its premises in  Harare.  The
           ILGA Africa 2000 Report highlighted  GALZ'S  submission  to  the
           Constitutional  Commission  in  that  year,  appealing  for  the
           inclusion  of  a  sexual  orientation  clause   in   the   draft
           constitution. GALZ discussed lesbian and  gay  issues  with  the
           MDC, which stated that it would pursue  a  policy  of  tolerance
           towards gays and lesbians.  [18b].  There  are  reported  to  be
           approximately 600 paid-up members of GALZ, and the organisations
           claims to be in contact with another  5,000  gays  and  lesbians
           nation-wide. [20l].


           6.153 In his New Year address on 1 January 2000 President Mugabe
           criticised homosexuality, describing homosexual relations as  an
           abomination and decadence. In the  mid-1990s,  when  gay  rights
           group  GALZ  applied  to  take  part  in  Harare's   prestigious
           international book fair, President Mugabe described  homosexuals
           in a speech as "worse than pigs and dogs". BBC  reported  on  12
           August 1998 that he called homosexuals "a scourge planted by the
           white man on a pure continent". Although GALZ  had  participated
           in the book fair in 1995, the following  year  their  stand  had
           been attacked and destroyed. [3v][18a]


           6.154 On 12 August 1998  the  BBC  reported  GALZ's  claim  that
           police arrested  members  of  the  organisation  on  "trumped-up
           charges" and that they were pressured at work  and  at  home  to
           renounce their sexual orientation. According to the Los  Angeles
           Times of 27 July 1998, the Government encouraged  the  media  to
           criticise homosexuality and report  it  negatively.  The  state-
           controlled Herald published articles that GALZ headquarters  was
           a "pick-up point" for local and foreign homosexuals  that  offer
           teenage boys for hire, accusations that GALZ denied. [3v][19]


           6.155  More recently, in September  2003,  GALZ  stated  in  the
           Zimbabwe  Standard  that  homosexuality  issues  slid  down  the
           government's agenda as they faced serious economic and political
           problems. Keith Goddard, the director of GALZ, believed that the
           government's stance on homosexuals was just  political  rhetoric
           and  that  it  was  using  the  gay  and  lesbian  community  as
           scapegoats. [20l]. In 2003, GALZ applied to have its  own  stand
           at the Zimbabwe International Book Fair. According to GALZ,  the
           application was "accepted  without  hesitation".  This  was  the
           first time GALZ had a stand of its own since 1996. From 1997  to
           2002, GALZ displayed its literature on the general Human  Rights
           stand at the  fair.  [66].  One  gay  man,  interviewed  by  the
           Zimbabwe Standard, agreed that conditions for gays and  lesbians
           in Zimbabwe has improved over the last few years. He stated that
           it wasn't the  authorities  that  posed  the  real  threat,  but
           traditional culture, particularly in  the  townships  and  rural
           areas. [20l].


           6.156  Societal discrimination against homosexuality is rife  in
           Zimbabwe. Gays and lesbians  often  hide  their  sexuality  from
           their families,  leading  some  to  be  forced  into  marriages.
           According to one gay man, he was evicted from  his  lodgings  by
           his landlord. The same report questioned a lesbian,  who  stated
           that her partner  had  had  stones  thrown  at  her.  Some  have
           suffered "verbal abuse and assault". [20l].


           6.157  GALZ is active in the field of HIV/AIDS and  through  its
           support group, GALZ Positive, provides home-based care  training
           for  members.  According  to  ILGA's  Africa  2000  Report,  six
           workshops on sexual activity within  and  outside  relationships
           were held in Harare and Bulawayo during the year. [18b]

 14. The picture that emerges from this  material  suggests  that  societal
     discrimination against homosexuality in Zimbabwe is deep-rooted  in  a
     way that may have some similarities to the  attitude  adopted  in  the
     United Kingdom some years ago.  As  a  result,  however,  of  cultural
     attitudes amongst the Shona, homosexuality may be perceived  as  being
     particularly  corrosive  of  Shona  values.   Gays  and  lesbians  can
     therefore  become  scapegoats  to  be  targeted  by  government  as  a
     rhetorical enemy, perhaps simply for political purposes.   That  said,
     the  government's  attitude  appears  to  be  largely  rhetorical  and
     hostility waxes and wanes depending upon other political  imperatives.
     There is no compelling evidence that the government  attempts  to  put
     its  rhetoric  into  effect.   Meanwhile,  the  general  attitude   of
     homophobia has resulted in little concrete evidence  of  violence,  or
     even harassment.

 15. Ms Plimmer, who appeared on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitted  that
     the Adjudicator was in error in his conclusion that the Appellant  was
     not  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  on  account  of  her   homosexuality
     sufficient  to  overcome  the  high  threshold  in  both  the  Refugee
     Convention and the ECHR.  She  submitted  that  it  was  difficult  to
     distinguish  between  the   Appellant's   MDC   membership   and   her
     homosexuality and both had become public  knowledge  in  the  area  in
     which she lived.  For these  two  reasons,  taken  together,  she  was
     arrested  and  detained  for  two  weeks.   She  submitted  that   the
     Appellant's  prospective  risk  had  to  be  assessed   against   this
     background.

 16. We have considered the Appellant's evidence in relation to her arrest.
      It arose from her presence at an MDC rally.  Although in paragraph 22
     of her statement, she claims that she was  taunted  about  her  sexual
     orientation by a group of Zanu PF youths who  recognised  her,  it  is
     apparent from paragraph 23 of the statement that she was  hit  in  the
     indiscriminate violence meted out by the police and  directed  towards
     MDC supporters as a whole.  Whilst in detention, she claims  that  she
     was placed in a cell with a male  prisoner.   Although  her  statement
     does not expressly make this point, it was submitted that this  choice
     was a deliberate effort to humiliate her.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
     conclude that this arrest and detention  arose  as  a  result  of  her
     sexual orientation.  It seems to us that this conclusion was  properly
     open to the Adjudicator given the facts that we have set out above.

 17. Ms Plimmer submitted that the risk faced by this Appellant  should  be
     judged by what happened to  her  partner.   In  paragraph  35  of  her
     statement, the Appellant stated that she  received  a  telephone  call
     from an unidentified friend to  the  effect  that  Ms  Moyo  had  been
     abducted by Zanu PF youths.  In our judgment, neither the  Adjudicator
     nor the Tribunal has any means of assessing the  reliability  of  this
     material.   We  do  not  know  whether  the  informant  was  a  direct
     eyewitness or whether she received the information from a more  remote
     source.  Accordingly, it is impossible to make any assessment  of  its
     weight.  Furthermore,  there  is  no  evidence  of  what  subsequently
     occurred.  In our judgment, it would have  been  entirely  speculative
     for the Adjudicator to have  concluded  that  there  is  a  reasonable
     likelihood of history repeating itself, were the Appellant to  return,
     on the basis of this telephone conversation.  We simply  do  not  know
     what happened.

 18. We are not satisfied on the material that has  been  produced  to  us,
     including the helpful report of  Mr  Matyszak,  that  homosexuals  are
     persecuted in Zimbabwe.  Nor  do  we  consider  that  the  Appellant's
     evidence is sufficient to establish that she  will  be  persecuted  or
     subjected to Article 3 mistreatment on return.  It was submitted that,
     no matter how "invisible" she becomes, she is known in  her  community
     and has already been branded as a lesbian.  Ms Plimmer submitted  that
     the option of maintaining a cloak of invisibility is not available  to
     her because she has tried  this  in  the  past  and  it  failed.   She
     conceded that not  all  homosexuals  are  at  risk  but  claimed  this
     Appellant is a marked person and so falls into  a  separate  category.
     Whilst conceding  that  this  does  not  appear  to  happen  to  other
     individuals, she submitted that it was sufficient that the Adjudicator
     accepted the claim that it had happened to her.

 19.  In our judgment, this submission suggests that the Appellant has been
     the victim of hostility felt by some of her immediate  neighbours  who
     are supporters of Zanu PF.  If the level  of  hostility  is  so  great
     that, even after the passage of  nearly  three  years,  the  Appellant
     faces the continued risk of violence on return, it  cannot  reasonably
     be said that the same risk applies wherever she may  settle.   If,  as
     she claims, the hostility is so great that she cannot  return  to  her
     immediate area, no credible reason has been put forward my she  should
     not relocate to another part of Harare.  It was  submitted  that  this
     was not possible because, in the past, she  has  failed  to  keep  her
     homosexuality secret from  the  wider  community.   In  our  judgment,
     however, the background material is  clear  and  suggests  that  if  a
     lesbian or gay couple act with sufficient discretion, they are able to
     attain the invisibility of  which  Mr  Matyszak  speaks.   We  do  not
     consider that the  restraint  that  this  requires  is  sufficient  to
     constitute persecution or a violation of  human  rights.   Nor  do  we
     consider the evidence sufficient to  establish  that  the  Appellant's
     relationship with her partner was conducted  in  any  way  differently
     from  other  similar  relationships.   Her  claim  was  based  on  the
     discovery of her sexuality as a result of her cousin's  overhearing  a
     private telephone conversation she had with Ms Moyo.  It was not  part
     of her case that she intended to  broadcast  her  sexual  orientation.
     Rather the reverse.  The tenor of her evidence was that she wished  to
     keep this part of her private life, private.  Although it was conceded
     that the Appellant would take no  overt  steps  to  inform  the  wider
     public, it was said that the Tribunal should infer that her  sexuality
     is bound to emerge from her everyday life.  It seems to us  that  this
     submission flies in the face of the background material in which it is
     clear that gays and lesbians are able to maintain  relationships  with
     partners without risk of persecution or similar adverse consequences.

 20. For  these  reasons,  we  consider  that  the  Adjudicator  reached  a
     conclusion that was entirely justified by the evidence.   Accordingly,
     this appeal is dismissed.  We reach this decision in spite of the poor
     human rights record displayed by the government of Zimbabwe and  which
     is evidenced in the background material.



Decision: The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.









                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                        Approved for electronic distribution

