
                                             DA (Unsigned interview notes)
Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00104

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing:  22nd April 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                 Date Determination Notified
      14th May 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    HH Judge N Huskinson (Vice President)
                        Mr A Jordan (Vice President)

Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Norton, instructed by YVA Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  D  P
    Herbert, who, in a determination promulgated on the 8th November  2002,
    allowed the Claimant's appeal under both the Geneva and European  Human
    Rights Convention.

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Turkey who left on 7th April 2000 arriving
    in the UK on the 15th April 2000 where he claimed asylum.  He was  born
    in 1976.  The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  Adjudicator's
    determination on three grounds.

 3. First, he submits that the Adjudicator wrongly discounted the interview
    in this consideration of the Claimant's credibility.   The  Adjudicator
    discounted the record and  the  discrepancies  which  it  was  said  to
    expose, because the Claimant had declined to sign the record after  the
    interview had closed.

 4. The second ground of appeal related to the  Adjudicator's  approach  to
    the relatives of the Claimant who had been granted  refugee  status  in
    this country.  He made an assumption as to the basis  upon  which  they
    had been granted indefinite leave to  remain;  that  was  part  of  his
    reasoning that the Claimant was in a category of high risk.

 5. The third ground of appeal related to the risk to  which  the  Claimant
    would be subject upon return to Turkey.  In particular,  the  Secretary
    of State contended that taking the Claimant's case at its highest,  the
    current background material and assessment by the Tribunal  meant  that
    there would be no real risk of persecution or breach of Article 3  upon
    return.

 6. It is not necessary to set out in any detail  the  contentions  of  the
    Claimant in this case.  Briefly, he is an Alevi Kurd who contended that
    on four occasions he had been detained for a number of days, beaten  or
    tortured.   The  Adjudicator,  who  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    Claimant, dealt with the discrepancies which arose between what he  had
    said in his statement and what he had said in the interview in relation
    to those detentions in this way.  He said:

           "The highest point of the matter simply demonstrated that  there
        may have been an error in the date when the appellant left military
        service and it is plausible that he simply got the  date  wrong  as
        there is no document stating that he in fact left military  service
        when he claimed in his witness statement on 30 April 1999.

        In any event the dates of detention and release in my view,  whilst
        of some importance, do not fundamentally undermine the  appellant's
        account as the discrepancy that is referred to by the respondent is
        based upon the account given in interview.  The interview itself in
        essence I discount as this  is  a  record  of  interview  that  the
        appellant himself did not sign and the reason that he did  not  was
        that he was not given the opportunity to have it read back to  him.
        This is clearly stated and recorded by the interviewing officer and
        it is a matter of some surprise that this was not  refuted  on  the
        face of the document if it had indeed been read  back  to  him  and
        this was simply an unwarranted assertion  by  the  appellant.   The
        interview record therefore is not a reliable document upon which  I
        can test the appellant's credibility".

 7. The Secretary of State submits that where the interview  has  not  been
    signed it is nonetheless inadequate for the Claimant to say that it  is
    wrong and for the Adjudicator simply to treat the interview  record  as
    being unreliable on that account.  The Secretary of  State  points  out
    that not merely were the disputed dates the subject matter of  specific
    questions at the interview,  but  that  the  Claimant  had  been  asked
    whether he understood the interpreter, was content to be interviewed in
    Turkey and was, well, and contented to be  interviewed  on  that  date.
    The Claimant answered "yes" to those questions and confirmed at the end
    of the interview that he had understood the  legal  questions  and  the
    interpreter, and declined the opportunity to make any further comments.

 8. He declined to sign the record of the  interview  because  he  was  not
    given the opportunity to have it read back to him.   It  has  been  the
    case for a few years now that it is uncommon for interview  records  to
    be read back before the interviewee is  asked  to  sign  the  interview
    record.  The Claimant was, however,  given  a  copy  of  the  interview
    record and did not submit any further representations relating  to  the
    accuracy of the interview.  Nor, following the refusal of his claim  by
    the Secretary of State, did the Claimant make any complaint  about  the
    record of the interview in his grounds  of  appeal.   He  had  had  the
    interview record for nearly a  month  by  the  time  he  submitted  the
    grounds of appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State in his refusal letter  had  specifically  raised
    the discrepancies between the accounts of the detentions given  in  the
    statement and given in the interview.  It was not until a statement was
    later submitted something over a year later, that nay mention was  made
    of the Claimant's contention that the record of the interview  was  not
    accurate, in respect of these matters, matters which it was plain  were
    of real significance for the  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    Claimant's evidence.

10. The approach of the Adjudicator is not one  which  Adjudicators  should
    adopt.  Adjudicators need to consider the circumstances  in  which  the
    interviews are recorded, the commencement questions and the  concluding
    questions deal with the interpreter, their ability  to  be  interviewed
    and with whether they  have  anything  further  to  add.   It  is  also
    necessary for the Adjudicator when considering a claim that  a  passage
    in an interview is inaccurate, to consider  what  the  questions  were,
    what the answers were, how complex they seem, what the scope of rand of
    the misunderstanding might be, and the extent to which the questioning,
    in the course of the interview, has provided and  opportunity  for  the
    interviewee to correct what has been said, whether such an  opportunity
    is given explicitly or whether such an opportunity arises in the course
    of confirmatory, or other questions which the interviewer may ask.

11. It is necessary then for an Adjudicator to  consider  what  explanation
    may be offered by the Claimant for  the  discrepancy  and  to  consider
    whether or not, in the light of that explanation,  the  credibility  of
    the Claimant is reinforced or made more  doubtful.   What  is  entirely
    inappropriate is for an Adjudicator to say that  because  an  interview
    record has not been signed, and the reason given is  that  it  has  not
    been read back, it is on that account to be disregarded.  It is fair to
    say, that in  this  respect  Mr  Norton-Taylor  who  appeared  for  the
    Claimant did not significantly take issue with the  submission  to  the
    Secretary of State that the Adjudicator's  approach  to  the  interview
    record had been  wrong,  and  that  it  was  of  significance  for  the
    assessment of credibility.

12. The second grounds of appeal which  relates  to  the  approach  of  the
    Adjudicator to family members, depends upon what was said:

        "I form the view that as to the lower  standard  set  out  in  Kaja
        there is sufficient evidence that this appellant originated from  a
        family, several members of whom, have been granted  refugee  status
        presumable on the status [sic]  of  their  political  activity  and
        their ethnic origin.  It is perfectly plausible although the grants
        of asylum do not give the detailed reasons for that  grant,  it  is
        safe in my view to the lower standard set out  in  Kaja  to  assume
        that the fact that the appellant is related to this  family  places
        him in a high category of people at risk,  should  be  returned  to
        Turkey at this time."

13. The Secretary of State submits that the fact that  family  members  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain did not necessarily  mean  that
    they had been granted refugee status on the basis of political activity
    or ethnic origin.  Although  it  is  not  unreasonable  inference  that
    Turkish Kurds who have been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain,  may
    have been granted indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  political
    activity, and ethnic origin., the Adjudicator needed also  to  consider
    in  the  absence  of  any  other  information,  whether  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain may have been on the basis  of  one  of  the
    backlog reduction exercises which the Secretary of  State  engages  in,
    granting  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  not  on  the   basis   of   a
    consideration of the individual merits of their case, but on the  basis
    of the length of time for which they had been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    awaiting a decision on their applications.

14. In any event, what is of real significance is this:  even if a  refugee
    status had been granted on the basis of political activity  and  ethnic
    origin in order for that to be of evidential value for the purposes  of
    this  Claimant's  claim,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have   a   real
    understanding of the individual merits  which  had  been  engaged,  and
    which  had  persuaded  the  Secretary  of  State,  or   the   Appellate
    Authorities to grant refugee status.  They might have been granted  for
    reasons which were significantly at variance with those put forward  by
    the Claimant.  It was an illegitimate assumption for the Adjudicator to
    make that the grant of refugee  status  by  itself,  told  anything  of
    significance for the level of risk which the  Claimant  might  face  on
    return.  Mr Norton-Taylor also accepted that  there  was  substance  in
    this ground and his essential  contention  that  was  that  the  matter
    should be dealt with by a fresh Adjudicator.

15. In relation to the Secretary of State's third ground, which relates  to
    the assessment of risk, however, we have reached the conclusion that it
    would be unwise to take the Claimant's case at its  highest,  with  the
    concerns that there were about the credibility of  the  Claimant  in  a
    number of respects.

16. It is not sufficiently obvious that the Claimant should be returned  in
    the light of that material if his case, which included  allegations  of
    torture and suspicion of PSK activities, was taken at its highest.   It
    will be for a fresh Adjudicator, in the light of the conclusions  which
    he may reach on what the Claimant has to say, to consider the degree of
    risk on return in the light of the current background material  and  in
    particular the appraisal of that material by the Tribunal in the  cases
    of O Turkey [2004] UKIAT  00038,  A  Turkey  [2003]  UKIAT  00044,  and
    further case upon which Mr Parker  placed  reliance,  A  Turkey  [2004]
    UKIAT 00050.

17. For the reasons which we have given, this case is remitted to  a  fresh
    Adjudicator for determination and  to  that  extent  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is successful.

18. This case is reported for what we say about unsigned interview notes.




                                                           MR JUSTICE OUSELY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

                                                                    29.04.04
