

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |ZK (International           |
|                           |        |Reaction-Aydogdu) Turkey CG |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00036          |
|Date:  18 February 2004    |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|2 March 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey (Chairman)                                          |
|Mr M J Griffiths                                                  |
|Mrs E Morton                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the appellant:     Miss N Nnamani, solicitor, Howe & Co.
For the respondent:  Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals  with  permission  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs H S Coleman,  promulgated  in
      March 2003, wherein she dismissed an appeal against  the  decision  of
      the respondent who had refused  a  human  rights  claim  made  by  the
      appellant.

      The Appellant's Determination

2.    The Adjudicator found that the appellant had arrived in  this  country
      in July 1993 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His application had  been
      refused in May 1995.  An appeal against that decision was dismissed in
      January 1997.

3.    It appears that soon after that he was detained  in  this  country  on
      criminal charges and was still in custody at the time of this  hearing
      although he explained  he  would  be  due  for  a  parole  hearing  in
      approximately two months time.

4.    The basis of the appellant's claim was that there would  be  a  breach
      of Articles 3, 6, 8, 10, 11 and 14 of the ECHR if  he  were  returned.
      The nub of his claim was that during the time he had been absent  from
      Turkey he had been  called  up  for  military  service.   He  had  not
      undertaken that service and thus on return,  due  to  his  failure  to
      report, would be treated as an absconder.  He produced documents dated
      November 1998 in support of that.  He also produced a document stating
      that on 6 November 2000 a notice was given to him stripping him of his
      nationality, apparently for failure to complete military service.   He
      had gone on to state that  his  elder  brother  and  mother  had  been
      pressurised to give information about him and as to  his  whereabouts.
      He claimed that his brother had been detained and had gone missing and
      that his father had been killed because of torture.

5.    He explained that he did  not  wish  to  carry  out  military  service
      because he was Kurdish and considered that he would be sent  to  fight
      Kurds and could possibly be killed.  No mention of  his  objection  to
      military  service  had  been  carried  out  when  he   was   initially
      interviewed.  He claimed that he had not been asked.

6.    The Adjudicator had before her relevant objective country  information
      and the leading determination in Sepet  and  Bulbul  as  well  as  the
      determination of this Tribunal in Devaseelan.   In  dealing  with  the
      credibility  of   the   appellant   the   Adjudicator   followed   the
      determination in Devaseelan and did not consider that the 1997  asylum
      decision was too old to be relied on.  Indeed she considered that  the
      first Adjudicator was in a much better position to assess  credibility
      and the concerns relating to  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
      previous interviews were reasonable.  She  noted  therefore  that  the
      applicant was not to be considered as truthful when giving evidence in
      his asylum appeal.  However, the appellant  now  relied  on  documents
      sent to him by his family which resulted from more recent contact with
      them.  However, because of differing stories told as  to  his  contact
      with his family the  Adjudicator  did  not  find  there  was  any  new
      evidence upon which she could overturn the original findings.  Turning
      then to the fear  claimed  by  the  appellant  as  an  absconder  from
      military service the Adjudicator found that  the  appellant  had  been
      identified as someone who had failed to reply to the draft  and  would
      be treated as an absconder.  In regard to the notice  saying  that  he
      had been stripped of his nationality she noted paragraph 5.88  of  the
      November 2002 CIPU Report which specifically stated that it was  clear
      that thousands of Turks  had  forfeited  their  citizenship  over  the
      course of the years, and, paragraph 5.81 which stated  that  according
      to military services within Turkey it had been decided in  the  second
      half of 2001 that Turkish citizenship would  no  longer  be  withdrawn
      from Turks  living  abroad  before  the  age  of  thirty  eight.   The
      Adjudicator however noted that this appellant appeared  to  have  lost
      his nationality long before  that  decision.   She  went  on  to  find
      however that despite  him  being  an  absconder  and  having  had  his
      nationality withdrawn the fact of his apparent statelessness would not
      be a breach of  his  human  rights.   She  found  that  the  objective
      material indicated that it would however be likely that the  appellant
      would be sent off to do his military service on  return  and  that  he
      would not, at that time, undergo cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
      contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.  She noted the CIPU Report did  not
      indicate systemic discrimination against Kurdish conscripts  and  that
      the punishment for the avoidance of military service on the  objective
      evidence before her was not in breach of Article 3.

7.    She therefore concluded that there would not be a breach  of  Articles
      2 or 3 on his return nor would there be a breach of Article 8  of  the
      ECHR.  She therefore dismissed the appeal.

      The Appellant's Submissions.

8.    The prime basis of the appeal to this  Tribunal  was  that  there  had
      been a failure by the Adjudicator to  consider  the  determination  of
      this Tribunal in Aydogdu [2002] UKIAT 06709 which had been included in
      the appellant's bundle before the Adjudicator. Ms Nnamani, who had not
      appeared before the Adjudicator, was unable to advise us as to whether
      the appellant's representative before the Adjudicator had specifically
      raised the issues set out in Aydogdu or submitted that the case should
      be followed.  However, noting  the  conclusions  of  Mr  Latter,  Vice
      President, in that determination, she submitted  that  this  appellant
      was in a similar situation. At the time when he  was  due  to  perform
      military service, the Turkish Army was still pursuing its "civil  war"
      in  south  east  Turkey  against  Kurdish  separatists  in  the   PKK.
      Accordingly the appellant's refusal to undertake military service then
      could be viewed as a valid basis for an asylum claim, given  that  the
      activities of the Turkish Army, at  that  time,  were  internationally
      condemned as contrary  to  basic  laws  of  human  conduct.  Thus  any
      imprisonment of this applicant on return should amount to  persecution
      for a Refugee Convention reason based on actual or  implied  political
      opinion.

9.    Ms Nnamani recognised that in the  determination  of  the  Application
      for permission to appeal to this Tribunal the Vice President had  only
      allowed permission to appeal on the first ground, relating to  Aydogdu
      and  not  on  the  other  ground  relating  to  the   deprivation   of
      citizenship.

      The Respondent's Submissions

10.   Mr Morris submitted that in this case we should look  at  the  current
      threat to the appellant on return and not  the  historic  threats,  as
      appeared to be the situation set out in Aydogdu.  He submitted that we
      were not bound to follow Aydogdu as it was a determination by  another
      Vice President. It should either be distinguished or we should  choose
      not to follow it.  He submitted therefore  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      been correct in following  the  leading  determination  in  Sepet  and
      Bulbul.  At that time it had been a  Court  of  Appeal  determination.
      However, it has since been confirmed by the House  of  Lords  as  good
      law.  In this situation,  on  return,  while  this  appellant  may  be
      recognised as a person who has evaded or avoided military service, the
      objective country information indicated that he  would  be  prosecuted
      and the resultant detention would not constitute a breach of Article 3
      of the ECHR.  Beyond that he would then have  to  serve  his  military
      service under the current Turkish Army regime.

11.   In  reply,  Ms  Nnamani  submitted  that  there  were  risks  to  this
      appellant on return to the airport in Istanbul and that  consideration
      should be given as to whether the risk to the appellant at that  time,
      given his background and profile, would place him in a situation where
      there could be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

      The Issues

12.   We found the issues before us to be:

      a)    was this appellant in a similar situation  to  the  claimant  in
           Aydogdu, and should we follow that determination?  If not,


      b)    noting that the appellant's case is solely based on the risks he
           submits he faces for failure to undertake military service,  are
           there substantial reasons for concluding that there would  be  a
           real risk of a breach of Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR?


      Decision


13.   At the outset we note a crucial difference between  the  situation  of
      this appellant and the claimant in Aydogdu.  At paragraph  20  of  the
      determination in Aydogdu it states,

      "20.  Mr Scannell's submission put at its simplest, is that  any  form
           of imprisonment would be wrong for someone who  has  evaded  the
           draft because he genuinely objects to taking part in  activities
           which were internationally condemned and were  contrary  to  the
           basic laws of conduct.  The Tribunal accept that this is a valid
           proposition and that  in  such  circumstances  punishment  would
           amount to persecution for a  Convention  reason,  an  actual  or
           imputed political opinion.  In the light  of  the  Adjudicator's
           findings on credibility, we are satisfied that the appellant did
           have a genuine objection to this  particular  type  of  military
           service and we are satisfied on  the  evidence  before  us  that
           there was a real risk that he might have been involved  in  such
           activities.  To be punished for a refusal to serve the  military
           in such circumstances, would amount to persecution."

14.   As  can  be  seen  Mr  Latter  relied  on  the  findings  of  positive
      credibility by the Adjudicator in that case.  With this appellant  the
      situation is quite  different.   In  paragraphs  13,  14  and  15  the
      Adjudicator deals with the issues of credibility and finds it correct,
      following Devaseelan (starred), that the evidence of the appellant was
      not truthful and indeed his more recent evidence was also  untruthful.
       This appellant therefore lacked the essential credibility finding  at
      the outset and so this case is clearly distinguishable from Aydogdu.

15.   In addition to this we have doubts that  the  conclusions  in  Aydogdu
      reached by Mr Latter,  with  all  due  respect,  are  correct  in  all
      situations where an applicant has refused to undertake the draft  when
      the  activities  of  the  military  in  which  he   must   serve   are
      internationally condemned as contrary  to  the  basis  laws  of  human
      conduct.  While we would agree that if the activities of that military
      service are still continuing to be so  internationally  condemned,  it
      must be recognised that the risk that is being evaluated, either in an
      Article 3 ECHR or refugee status  claim,  is  at  the  time  when  the
      decision is being made and return is about to be  undertaken.   It  is
      therefore essential to consider the activities of the military service
      to which the appellant is required to undertake service at the time of
      the decision and the period immediately before that.  If the objective
      evidence indicates that the military service, as is the  situation  in
      Turkey, no longer  undertakes  an  internationally  condemned  war  or
      activities, then clearly the applicant will have had  the  opportunity
      to return to his country and undertake military service in a situation
      where breaches of internationally condemned activities are  no  longer
      still continuing.  With this appellant that would certainly appear  to
      be the case.  Since 1999, when the ceasefire with the  PKK  came  into
      force, internationally condemned activities do not appear to have been
      continued by the Turkish  military.   Indeed,  even  with  the  recent
      statement by the PKK (in its current guise), that the ceasefire  would
      no longer be observed by them, they have stated that their  activities
      will not continue in the same manner as previously and in addition the
      Turkish military have certainly given  no  apparent  indications  that
      they intend to carry out activities repugnant to  the  basic  laws  of
      human conduct.  This appellant, therefore, while he may have  been  in
      the situation where at the time when he was initially  called  up  for
      the draft, could have validly objected has clearly been in a situation
      for several years now where that situation no longer prevailed and  he
      could have undertaken military service, as  he  was  required  to  do,
      without placing himself in a situation  of  potentially  carrying  out
      repugnant activities.  The fact that  this  appellant  may  have  been
      serving a criminal sentence in this country for drug related  offences
      we do not consider it is a valid reason for claiming that he could not
      have carried out the military service  as  obviously  he  brought  the
      detention in this  country  upon  himself  through  his  own  criminal
      behaviour.

16.   In summary, therefore, we consider in situations such as  this  it  is
      imperative to give consideration to the risks on return at this  time,
      and the totality of the history of the military service in  which  the
      applicant  has  evaded   service,   before   reaching   a   conclusive
      determination.  With respect to the  determination  in  Aydogdu,  even
      taking into account positive credibility findings,  we  consider  that
      there has been possibly an oversight in this regard.

17.   Accordingly, we find that even though the Adjudicator  may  apparently
      have overlooked the determination in Aydogdu that was before  him,  it
      does not alter the outcome of the appeal and accordingly  the  grounds
      upon which this appeal have been based do not  have  merit.   We  have
      gone on to consider the risks, under Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  on
      return  to  the  Istanbul  Airport  by  this   applicant   and   find,
      particularly following the determination in Sepet and Bulbul that  any
      potential risk to this appellant for his evasion of  military  service
      would  not  constitute  a  breach  of  either  Article  2  or  3.  The
      punishment, on prosecution, that the appellant  would  be  liable  for
      would not go to the extent of  being  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading
      treatment in the manner set out in the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

18.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.
                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President





