
                   SM (Working - Holidaymakers - Age) India [2004] UKIAT
00057


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                 Date of hearing:  18 March 2004
                 Date determination notified:
                 24 March 2004

            Before:

            MR G. WARR Vice President
            DR H H STOREY    Vice President
            MR A JORDAN      Vice President

                 Appellant

            and

            ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUMBAI  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appeals  the  determination  of  an
      adjudicator (Mr D M Brunnen) dismissing  appeal against the refusal of
      the respondent to grant  application  for  an  entry  clearance  as  a
      working holidaymaker.

   2. Before us, the Appellant was represented by Mr S Ahmed, K Ganchi.  Mrs
      Giltrow appeared for the Respondent.

   3. The appellant made his application for an entry clearance on 9 October
      2001. He was interviewed on that  day.  The  application  was  refused
      under paragraph 95 of HC 395 on 30 May 2002, the respondent not  being
      satisfied that the appellant was unmarried, that he intended  to  take
      employment incidental to his holiday nor that the  appellant  intended
      to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  his  working  holiday.  The
      respondent observed in the explanatory statement  that  the  appellant
      appeared older than his claimed age although this  particular  concern
      did not appear to feature in the notice of refusal.

   4. At the adjudicator hearing the respondent  was  not  represented.  The
      adjudicator resolved all matters in dispute in favour of the  claimant
      and accepted that he had been born on  22  October  1974  as  claimed.
      There has been no appeal by  the  respondent  or  respondent's  notice
      challenging the adjudicator's findings.

   5. The  adjudicator  dismissed  the  appeal  because  he  considered  the
      appellant fell outside the age bracket laid down by the rules.

   6. The relevant sub-paragraph of the rule at the relevant time made it  a
      requirement that the applicant "is aged 17-27 inclusive or was so aged
      when first given leave to enter in  this  capacity".  The  adjudicator
      observed: "The appellant has thus far not been given  leave  to  enter
      his application having been refused by the Entry Clearance Officer and
      therefore on a reading of this requirement of the paragraph  he  falls
      outside the age bracket necessary to  qualify  for  entry  under  this
      heading."

   7. Mrs Giltrow could not support the  adjudicator's  reasoning  and  both
      sides requested us to allow the appeal.

   8. There is no doubt that the appellant fell within the correct age range
      at the date of application and at the date of decision.

   9. Paragraph 27 of the rules provides:

         "An application for entry clearance is to be decided in  the  light
         of the circumstances existing at the time of the  decision,  except
         that an applicant will not be  refused  an  entry  clearance  where
         entry is sought in one of the categories  contained  in  paragraphs
         296-316 solely on account of his attaining  the  age  of  18  years
         between receipt of his application and the date of the decision  on
         it."


  10.  The  adjudicator's  analysis  appears  to  be  based  on  an   unduly
      restrictive reading of the rules. Having found the claimant  was  aged
      27 at the date of decision and being satisfied about all other matters
      he should have allowed the appeal. True it is that on arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom an Immigration Officer could technically  refuse  entry
      under paragraph 321 on the basis of a change of circumstances and  the
      Entry Clearance Officer could revoke any entry clearance granted on  a
      similar basis under rule 30A. However, had the  entry  clearance  been
      granted - which on the adjudicator's analysis it should  have  been  -
      the appellant could have entered the United Kingdom promptly and prior
      to his 28th birthday. The rules have been amended to extend the  upper
      age limit to 30 so the appellant can still meet the requirements  even
      today. The part of the rule on which the adjudicator  placed  reliance
      was designed to cover  the  situation  where  a  working  holidaymaker
      returns to the United Kingdom (after a visit  home  for  example).  If
      then aged 29, say, he will not be refused entry provided  he  complied
      with the rules when first given leave to enter. Reading the  rules  in
      the  way  the  adjudicator  did  would  render  the  appeal   useless.
      Incidentally, the problem should not often arise because under section
      88(2)(a) of the 2002 Act (as under section 62(1)(b) of the  1999  Act)
      an individual may not appeal if the refusal is on the ground that  the
      applicant "does not satisfy a requirement as to  age  ...specified  in
      immigration rules."  In this case the notice of the decision does  not
      appear to specify this requirement as a ground. We note the  right  of
      appeal was expressed on the notice of  refusal  to  arise  (we  assume
      incorrectly) under section 13(2) of the 1971 Act. In  any  event,  Mrs
      Giltrow took no point on the  matter  and  as  we  have  observed  the
      appellant meets the current age requirements.

  11. With the agreement of the parties the appeal is allowed.

                                                                     G. Warr
                                                              Vice President
                                                               18 March 2004
