


                     IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




|Heard at : Field House                             |Determination Issued    |
|on : 21 September 2004                             |CG                      |
|Prepared : 24 September  2004                      |30 December 2004        |

                                  Before :

                        Mr P R Moulden Vice President
                         Ms C Jarvis Vice President
                                Mr S S Percy

Between




                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Tyndallwoods
                       Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Morris Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appeals  to  the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal (the Tribunal), with permission, against the  decision
      of an Adjudicator, Mrs C J Lloyd, issued on 16 June  2003,  dismissing
      her appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 1 July 2002,
      to refuse  to  recognize  the  Appellant  as  a  refugee  pursuant  to
      paragraph 336 of HC395, and instead  to  grant  exceptional  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom (UK) until 1 July 2003.  As  this  is  an
      appeal pursuant to Section 69(3) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      1999, (the 1999 Act), it remains a pending appeal, despite  the  grant
      of exceptional leave to remain, by virtue of Section  58  (9)  of  the
      same Act.


   2. The immigration history of the Appellant is that she  claims  to  have
      arrived in the UK, travelling clandestinely, by lorry, on 1 May  2002.
      She claimed asylum on 7 May 2002. She was accompanied by  two  of  her
      three children;                daughter, whose date of birth is  given
      as 24 July 1994, and             , also  a  daughter,  whose  date  of
      birth is given  as  3  January  1996.   These  two  children  are  the
      Appellant's dependants in these proceedings  and  are  not  Appellants
      before the Adjudicator or the Tribunal.

   3. As was found by the Adjudicator, the Appellant's third child,  a  son,
      became separated from her and her  daughters  in  the  course  of  the
      journey from Afghanistan to the UK. He is                , whose  date
      of birth is given as 10 November 1988. He is therefore  fifteen  years
      old now. The Appellant has made enquiries of the Red Cross as  to  his
      whereabouts, but with no news as yet.

   4. The Appellant's appeal to the Immigration Adjudicator was by a  Notice
      of Appeal lodged on 28 November  2002.  Her  Statement  of  Additional
      Grounds pleaded that the Respondent erred in that he  failed  to  have
      regard to the provisions of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
      and Fundamental Freedoms  of  1950  (ECHR)  as  incorporated  into  UK
      domestic law by the Human Rights Act 1998,  and  that  to  return  the
      Appellant to Afghanistan would result in the United Kingdom  breaching
      its obligations under the ECHR, in particular Articles 2, 3, and 5.

   5. The Appellant's case before the Adjudicator was that she had been  and
      would be persecuted in Afghanistan, by members of the Jamiat-e-Islami,
      who had already killed other members of her family,  by  reason  of  a
      political opinion imputed to her because  her  family  was  viewed  as
      Communist.

   6. Further or in the alternative, it was submitted that the Appellant was
      a member of a particular social group of lone Afghan  women  who  have
      suffered sexual assault, have female children and are  without  social
      or family protection.

   7. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant's account as to past  events,
      including ill-treatment, was credible and that the fears she expressed
      were genuinely held. The Adjudicator found that  the  Appellant    had
      been persecuted in the past in Takhar in Afghanistan, and  that  there
      was a real risk that she would be so persecuted again  on  return,  at
      the hands of non-state agents, albeit that those  agents  were  in  de
      facto control of the Province, but that the ill-treatment had not been
      for one of the five reasons enumerated in the 1951 Convention relating
      to the Status of Refugees (the Refugee Convention).

   8. The Adjudicator then considered the allegations under  Section  65  of
      the 1999 Act, and found that there was a real risk of a breach of  the
      Appellant's  right  to  freedom  from  torture,  cruel,  inhuman   and
      degrading treatment, should she return to her home area of  Takhar  in
      Afghanistan. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant could return  to
      live in Kabul without such a breach, although she  went  on  to  state
      that this was a finely balanced issue because  of  the  evidence  that
      lone women may be at risk, as was acknowledged by the Home Office.

   9. At the outset  of  the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal,  we  drew  the
      attention of the parties to the fact that there had been  a  grant  of
      exceptional leave to remain to the Appellant until 1 July 2003, (it is
      not known whether she has applied for any extension  of  that  leave),
      and that the appeal was pursuant to section 69(3)  of  the  1999  Act.
      There being no extant removal directions  and  therefore  no  imminent
      threat of removal to Afghanistan where any alleged breach might occur,
      it was put to the parties, who agreed, that it was difficult to  argue
      that any allegation of breach of human rights pursuant to  Section  65
      of the 1999 Act could succeed, (as has been stated,  for  example,  by
      the Tribunal in RA (Appeals Procedure-Immigration and Asylum Act 1999)
      Eritrea [2003] UKIAT 00063). The understanding of the parties was that
      in the event that the Respondent should issue  removal  directions  in
      respect of the Appellant at some  future  date,  she  would  have  the
      opportunity to raise human rights allegations at that stage,  and,  if
      unsuccessful,  to lodge an appeal in that regard.

   The Grounds of Appeal

  10. The  Grounds  of  Appeal  first  raised  points  in  relation  to  the
      Adjudicator's assessment and findings in relation to Article  3  ECHR.
      It was agreed by the parties that allegations as to breaches of  human
      rights pursuant to the Human Rights Act 1998 are  not  pursued  within
      the ambit of this appeal, for the reasons, and on the basis set out in
      paragraph 9 above.


  11. The Grounds of Appeal then went on to submit that the Adjudicator  had
      erred in her assessment  of  the  risk  to  the  Appellant  in  Kabul,
      including having failed to consider the full  range  of  factors  that
      would render return unduly harsh, and in  particular  that  she  would
      return as a lone woman with two young daughters, aged 9 and  7  years.
      Therefore the Adjudicator had not correctly applied the test  as  laid
      down by the Court of Appeal in the case of Robinson - v - SSHD  [1997]
      Imm AR 554.

  12. Thirdly, it was submitted that the Adjudicator had  erred  in  law  in
      finding that the Appellant was not a member  of  a  particular  social
      group, having misinterpreted the Appellant's case  when  applying  the
      principles laid down by the House of Lords in the case  of  Islam  and
      Shah [1999] INLR 144.

  13. Permission to appeal was granted generally. The  Vice  President,  His
      Honour Judge Ainley took the view that the application of the case  of
      Robinson  should  be  considered,  and  that  the  matter  should   be
      determined at Tribunal level.

  14. We remind  ourselves  that  by  the  provisions  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No 4) (Amendment) (No 2)
      Order 2003, any Adjudicator's determination promulgated after  9  June
      2003 may be appealed to the Tribunal only pursuant to  Section  101(1)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ( the  2002  Act).
      Section 101(1) provides:

           "(1) A party to an appeal to an Adjudicator under Section 82  or
           83 may, with the permission of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,
           appeal to the Tribunal against the  Adjudicator's  determination
           on a point of law."


  15. Following the judgment of the Court of Appeal in CA  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      1165 20 July 2004, it is clear that when hearing an appeal in  respect
      of a determination of an Adjudicator that was promulgated after 9 June
      2003, the Tribunal must first decide whether or not that determination
      discloses a material error of law. It is only where that  question  is
      answered in the affirmative that it is open to the Tribunal to  go  on
      to consider what relief, if any, should be granted, and whether or not
      fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.

  16. We find that the Adjudicator fell  into  material  errors  of  law  in
      arriving at her determination. We find that the Adjudicator  erred  in
      finding that the only reason for the rape of the Appellant  in  Takhar
      was because her assailant found her attractive, and therefore that the
      attack was a purely personal one, and no more than a common crime,  as
      that finding was  not  based  on  the  evidence  before  her  and  was
      therefore not open to her. We find that the Adjudicator further  erred
      in law in that she misdirected herself in her consideration of the law
      in relation to membership of a  particular  social  group,  not  least
      because she proceeded on the basis of the findings referred to earlier
      in this paragraph, which in turn caused her to fail  to  consider  and
      direct herself according to the law in relation to this aspect of  the
      interpretation of Article 1A (2) of the 1951  Convention  relating  to
      the Status of Refugees. In particular, she erred in her application of
      the principles set out by the  House  of  Lords  in  Islam  and  Shah,
      (above).

  17.  Her  extremely  brief  consideration  of  the  question  whether  the
      Appellant was a member of a particular social group is dealt  with  in
      two  sentences  at  paragraph  46  of  her  determination.  Here   the
      Adjudicator erred in her analysis and conclusion  that  the  Appellant
      was not a member of a particular social group because she imposed  the
      wrong test, namely that the Appellant had to show that  she  had  only
      absolutely identical characteristics to all the  other  women  in  the
      group contended for, and that  they  did  not  possess  any  different
      characteristics, even if they shared common features. As a consequence
      of these errors, the  Adjudicator  then  made  the  further  erroneous
      finding that the  Appellant's  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
      Afghanistan was not for one or more of the reasons set out in  Article
      1A (2) of the Refugee Convention.

   The Documentary Evidence

  18. Section 102 (2) of the 2002  Act  permits  the  Tribunal  to  consider
      evidence about  any  matter  thought  relevant  to  the  Adjudicator's
      decision, including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the
      Adjudicator's decision.  The  Appellant  sought  to  produce  evidence
      additional to that which was before the Adjudicator, in  the  form  of
      background reports; news items, and the expert  report  of  Dr  Martin
      Lau, all of which had come  into  existence  after  the  Adjudicator's
      decision. Taking the view that the evidence was relevant,  bearing  in
      mind the provisions of Rule 21 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals
      (Procedure) Rules 2003 (the 2003 Rules), and noting that there was  no
      objection from Mr Morris, who himself wished to lodge  a  new  country
      report, we decided that the evidence  would  assist  the  Tribunal  in
      deciding what, if any, relief should be granted to the  Appellant  and
      the  additional  evidence  was  therefore   admitted,   applying   the
      principles set out in the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  CA
      (above).

  19. We have before us, therefore, all the evidence  that  was  before  the
      Adjudicator, including the   Respondent's  explanatory  statement  and
      attachments; the Appellant's bundle Part A  :  statement,  chronology,
      skeleton argument and medical and psychiatric  reports,  and  Part  B,
      background reports : US State; Human Rights Watch ;Danish  Immigration
      Service, and various media reports.

  20. Before us the parties were permitted  to  lodge  further  evidence  in
      order to bring the background evidence  up  to  date.  The  Presenting
      Officer lodged the April 2004 CIPU Country Assessment and a copy of  a
      UN map of the Afghanistan Region dated January  2002.   The  Appellant
      lodged a bundle of documentary evidence, including skeleton arguments,
      various country reports, and various news items, as well as the expert
      opinion of Dr  Martin  Lao,  as  contained  in  his  report  dated  14
      September 2004. The items in the Appellant's  bundle  of  up  to  date
      evidence include but are not limited to:

           a. Afghanistan: Out of Sight Out of Mind - The  Fate  of  Afghan
              Returnees, Amnesty International 2003;


           b. Rule of the Rapists , The Guardian February 12, 2004;

           c. Afghanistan: Women said still oppressed in Herat , Integrated
              Regional Information Networks News (IRIN), 11 March 2004;

           d. Afghanistan: 'No one listens to us and no one  treats  us  as
              human beings':
              Justice Denied  to  Women,  Amnesty  International,  December
              2003;


           e. Warlords, Crimes : Secrets of an Afghan Grave, Hefferman  and
              Leaning,
              9 February 2004, International Herald Tribune;

           f. "Comment: The New Mullah Omars" Institute for War  and  Peace
              Reporting, 11 March 2004;


           g. Losing the Peace in Afghanistan,  Human  Rights  Watch  March
              2004

           h. Situation of Women  and  Girls  in  Afghanistan,  UN  General
              Assembly, 6 October 2003;

           i. Afghanistan Could Implode: British  Parliamentary  Committee,
              29 July 2004;

           j. Medecins Sans  Frontieres  Pull  out  of  War  Torn  Country,
              www.rawafalse.net, 29 July 2004;

           k. Danish Immigration Service Report March 2003;

           l. Afghanistan, Amnesty International Report May 2004;

           m. Expert Report of Dr  Martin  Lau,  Head  of  Law  Department,
              School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London,
              14 September 2004.

  21.   Mr  Morris  also  lodged  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal:   L
      (Afghanistan) [2003] UKIAT 00092, heard on 24 September 2003. However,
      he did not, in the event, seek to rely on it, as it  was  now  a  year
      old, the situation had changed, and the facts of the Appellant's  case
      were not on all fours with those in the case of L.

The Facts of the Appellant's Case

  22. As we have stated, the credibility of the Appellant and her claim  are
      not in issue. Before turning to consider the  grounds  of  appeal,  it
      will be helpful at this stage to set out the relevant primary facts of
      the Appellant's case, as drawn from all the evidence that  was  before
      the Adjudicator, and which is also before us.

  23. In summary the Appellant's case is this. She was born on 5  June  1968
      in Badakshan, Afghanistan. Her father spent 22 years  working  in  the
      Pamar Department in Makroyan, Kabul, as an engineer. In 1990 he became
      chief of the construction department in Arayana, remaining  until  the
      Najibullah government was overthrown in 1992.  In  1987  she  married.
      Both she and her husband are of Uzbek origin and of the  Sunni  Muslim
      faith. There are three children of  the  marriage,  one  son  and  two
      daughters: Qasim, born on 10 November 1988; Bahishta, born on 24  July
      1994, and Sherwer, born on  3  January  1996.  As  indicated,  Qasim's
      whereabouts are unknown since he became separated from  the  Appellant
      and his sisters en route from Afghanistan to  the  UK.  The  Appellant
      read Persian Literature at Kabul University, completing her studies in
      1989. She then worked as a teacher in Kabul for over two years,  until
      the war started. After the war, schools were shut and women  were  not
      permitted to work.

  24. The Appellant's husband's family also had strong  connections  to  the
      Najibullah government. He was educated in the former USSR. His  father
      was chief of the counsel of  elders  in  Takhar  during  the  time  of
      Najibullah, and a nephew was Chief of the Intelligence Service  during
      that period. The Appellant's husband worked as an  economist  for  the
      Bank of Afghanistan and the family had a home in the Makroyan district
      of Kabul, near the airport.

  25. The family remained in Kabul for about a  year  after  the  Najibullah
      government  was  overthrown  in  1992.  Fighting  in  Kabul  and   the
      destruction of the family home by rocket attack, caused them to  leave
      for Takhar in the north of the country  where  the  family  originated
      from and where they felt it would be more peaceful. They stayed  in  a
      house belonging to the Appellant's father-in-law. Her husband  managed
      his father's landed estate and received income from tenant farmers.

  26. It was not as peaceful in Takhar as the family had hoped.  There  were
      those in the  area  who  were  opposed  to  the  communist  regime  of
      Najibullah and those who had been involved with it  or  supported  it.
      Those opposed to the communist regime included a warlord named  Mamoor
      Hassan. About three years after the Appellant and her  family  arrived
      in Takhar, Mamoor Hassan's men killed the Appellant's husband's uncle,
      on  the  direct  orders  of  Ahmed  Shah  Masood,  who  regarded   the
      Appellant's husband's family as supporters of Najibullah and therefore
      as his enemies, who were to be destroyed. The Appellant  thought  that
      the fact that she and her husband were of Uzbek origin also  played  a
      part in the reasons for targeting them, as well as  their  connections
      to the Communist party (the PDPA).

  27. Mamoor Hassan would send his men to the  Appellant's  home  regularly.
      They would harass the family, demand money and claim  that  they  were
      seeking members of her husband's family. On  one  occasion,  in  about
      1999, these men came and demanded money from the Appellant's  husband.
      When he told them that he  did  not  have  such  a  sum,  he  and  the
      Appellant were beaten, the Appellant sustaining a broken arm.

  28.  The militia took the Appellant's husband away and he was detained  in
      prison at Dasht-E-Ghalah. The Appellant remained at home, in the  hope
      that he would be released. Following his  detention,  the  Appellant's
      parents came to stay with her so that she would not be  alone  in  the
      house with the children. Her sister, who worked as  a  doctor  with  a
      Swedish medical organization, also lived in the house  with  her.  For
      about six months she was able to send clean  clothing  to  the  prison
      with friends, who would bring her husband's dirty clothes to her to be
      washed. Then his friends told her that he was to be  moved  from  that
      prison. Since then, she does not know  his  whereabouts  although  she
      made enquiries when in Afghanistan.

  29. On 28 June 2000, two of Mamoor Hassan's Mujahidin militia men  arrived
      at the Appellant's house.  They demanded that the  Appellant's  sister
      marry one of them. She refused. The Mujahidin then  shot  her  in  the
      legs.  The Appellant was present. Her sister pleaded for her life  but
      they took her aside and shot her several  times  before  leaving.  The
      Appellant found her sister dead in the  next  room.  Her  brains  were
      stuck to the wall.

  30. Following this incident, her parents were in a very  distressed  state
      and decided that they could not stay in the  house  any  longer.  They
      left, and a frail uncle came  to  stay  with  the  Appellant  and  her
      children. A few months later, Mamoor Hassan's nephew,  Qasim,  decided
      that he wished to marry the Appellant and sent women to the  house  to
      inform her of this.  She was angry and deeply offended that he  should
      do this knowing that she was a married woman with three children whose
      husband was detained, but still alive. She said no.

  31. Some time in 2002, Qasim himself came to the house, with a  number  of
      his people, and demanded that the Appellant become  his  fourth  wife.
      She again refused, saying that she did not wish to marry  another  man
      and was a married woman with three children.   Qasim  then  raped  and
      beat the Appellant. Her frail uncle tried to defend her and was killed
      by Qasim and his people, who also beat the  Appellant.  She   suffered
      injury to her face as well as injury in the course of the rape.  After
      the rape, Qasim told her that she must now marry him or he would  kill
      her wherever she went. He left her house and later that day she  tried
      to kill herself but was prevented by her neighbours who told her  that
      she must think of her children and protect them as there  was  no  one
      else to do that.

  32. Shortly after the  incident,  a  friend  of  the  Appellant's  husband
      advised her to leave the country and assisted her to find an agent who
      brought her and the children to the UK, travelling by various  methods
      of transport over a period of  months.  The  family  was  economically
      comfortable and she was able to pay the  agent  herself.  The  journey
      took about two and a half months and the family  arrived  in  the  UK,
      although without Qasim, on 1 May 2002, the Appellant  claiming  asylum
      shortly thereafter.

  33. The Appellant's daughters are attending school in  the  West  Midlands
      where the family now lives .The Appellant's uncle,                   ,
      who worked for the Najibullah government is also in the UK,  where  he
      has been recognized as a refugee and granted status.

  34. The Appellant states that being raped is  a  disgrace  and  she  fears
      return to Afghanistan where she would be regarded as an 'infidel'. She
      fears that as a single woman she would be stoned to death as  she  has
      seen this happen to single women who have children as  it  is  assumed
      that they are committing adultery.

  35. A report dated 11 April 2003 from Mrs Sunanda, Consultant Obstetrician
      and Gynaecologist, states that the Appellant is to undergo surgery  to
      remove a vaginal tag and cervical ectropian on 10 June 2003.

  36. A  report  dated  19  May  2003  from  Dr  Heather  McKee,  Consultant
      Psychiatrist, finds that the Appellant is suffering from chronic  Post
      Traumatic Stress Disorder  (PTSD)  (as  a  result  of  the  series  of
      disturbing events  set  out  above).  She  should  be  assessed  by  a
      psychiatrist or psychologist who is experienced in PTSD  and  any  co-
      morbid disorder such as depression should  be  treated.  PTSD  can  be
      treated psychologically or with medication such as selective serotonin
      reuptake inhibitors, or both. The doctor states that  these  resources
      will probably not be available in Afghanistan and (it) may  require  a
      significant amount of time to achieve improvement. She adds  that  the
      Appellant would also benefit if her son were reunited  with  her.  (We
      note that there  is  no  up  to  date  evidence  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's mental health.)

  37. The report records that the Appellant is the eldest of  six  children.
      Next came her sister who had been murdered, then  a  brother  who  had
      been studying medicine but whose studies had  been  interrupted,  then
      three younger siblings who had been at school , but unable to complete
      their schooling due to events. The Appellant believes that her parents
      are alive but has not been able to have contact with them.

  38. We note that the Appellant also regards her  husband  as  still  being
      alive, although she has had no news of him since he was moved from the
      prison  where  he  was  initially  held  by  the  Jamiat-e-Islami,   a
      predominantly Tajik militia.

  39. The Adjudicator found  that  although  the  Appellant  may  have  male
      relatives in Afghanistan (presumably her husband, father and brother),
      the situation was unclear, given that there had been no  contact.  The
      Adjudicator proceeded on the basis, and it is important to  both  note
      and bear in mind; that  the  Appellant  was  without  male  or  family
      protection.  That,  of  course,  must  also  be  the  basis   of   our
      consideration of her case.

  40. The Adjudicator also found that the Appellant had suffered the  sexual
      assault as explained and could be vulnerable to such an  attack  again
      in the Takhar area as the evidence did not show  that  the  government
      police force functioned in that province. She considered  whether  the
      Appellant, a single woman with two  children,  could  live  elsewhere,
      given that she could not return to the  Takhar  area  in  safety.  She
      found that the only possible alternative place to which the  Appellant
      and her two daughters might relocate is Kabul. Again,  these  findings
      must form the basis of the Tribunal's consideration of her case.

Submissions

  41. In his submission, Mr Vokes  indicated  that  the  Appellant  did  not
      pursue her case on the basis that  she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution by reason of an imputed political opinion. Indeed he  went
      so far as to concede that she did not. Nor is it said that  she  would
      be persecuted by reason of her Uzbek  origin.  Rather,  he  said,  she
      relied upon her membership of a  particular  social  group,  which  he
      defined as follows:


      " Women in Afghanistan without male family or tribal support."

  42.  In support of this submission, Mr Vokes submitted that the  Appellant
      should not be forced to find a male  protector  through  marriage.  He
      submitted that, although it could not be said that it would  not  have
      happened had she a husband or other effective male protector  at  home
      with her; the fact that she had not had an effective male protector in
      her frail uncle had been a significant factor in the course of  events
      that had led to the sexual assault.  Given the mores  in  Afghanistan,
      the level of risk to her as a lone woman with two young daughters, was
      significant enough to constitute a real risk that she would experience
      a similar assault on return to the Takhar area of Afghanistan now.

  43. Mr Vokes further submitted that the Appellant should not be obliged to
      enter into a marriage, whether the forced marriage to  Qasim,  or  any
      other marriage to which she did not freely consent in order to  obtain
      male protection, whether in Takhar or elsewhere. This, he  said  would
      be to breach a primary right of freedom of  conscience.  He  submitted
      that a rights based analysis, applying the hierarchical approach,  was
      an appropriate  approach  in  refugee  appeals.  Forced  marriage  was
      something that occurred quite frequently to women and young  girls  in
      Afghanistan. It would, he submitted amount to persecution. It would be
      a form of sexual slavery. The Appellant  had  a  right  to  marry  the
      person of her choice. The Adjudicator had  found  that  the  Appellant
      could not return in safety to Takhar where she would be persecuted  or
      even killed. It could not be right that she be forced  to  breach  her
      own human rights by being forced into a relationship in Kabul in order
      that she be able to pursue her own life in safety.  That  brought  the
      argument full circle to the issue of discrimination against women. She
      should not in conscience be required to change the  characteristic  of
      her single or lone status.


  44. Mr Vokes did not seek to argue that the basis  of  the  discrimination
      was absolutely identical to that found in Pakistan  as  identified  by
      the House of Lords in Islam and Shah. He submitted that in the case of
      this Appellant, in Afghanistan, there was both  an  inability  and  an
      unwillingness to protect her. There was a difference between what  was
      on the statute book in Pakistan and the fragmented state  of  law  and
      order in Afghanistan. It was not submitted that all women in the group
      contended for would be subjected to persecution, in the same way  that
      it was not the case that all women in Pakistan were persecuted, as was
      found by the House of Lords in Islam and Shah, on which case he relied
      to support the Appellant's claim to be a member of a particular social
      group.

  45. Turning to the background evidence, Mr Vokes accepted that  there  was
      more stability, comparatively speaking, in Kabul city, as  opposed  to
      the provinces outside the city. He also accepted that as a product  of
      some twenty three years of  war,  there  were  many  single  women  in
      Afghanistan. The  key,  he  submitted  to  the  question  whether  the
      Appellant could return in  safety  to  Kabul  was  the  issue  of  the
      existence or otherwise of family networks. It was the case that  women
      were beginning to re-emerge in daily life in Kabul and  that  some  of
      them were again taking up work as teachers. However, they were enabled
      to do so only because of the presence of a supportive family  network,
      including at least one close adult male. Also of importance insofar as
      the characteristics of this Appellant were  concerned,  was  the  fact
      that she is the mother  of  three  children,  two  of  whom  are  girl
      children, who will return to Afghanistan with her. Her  daughters  are
      themselves extremely vulnerable to being forced into marriage, as they
      approach puberty, and vulnerable to other sexual assault and abuse. In
      turn, their vulnerability placed the Appellant at  increased  risk  as
      the sole protector of the girls. Although this aspect  of  the  matter
      had been raised before the Adjudicator  she  had  not  taken  it  into
      consideration. Or if she had, she had made no findings.   He  referred
      us to the Country  Assessment,  the  Danish  Immigration  Report,  the
      Amnesty International Reports and the report of Dr Lau in particular.


  46. Mr Morris accepted that the Adjudicator had concluded at paragraph  65
      of her determination that the Appellant's case was to be considered on
      the  basis  that  she  was  without  male  or  family  protection   in
      Afghanistan. He further accepted that as the Respondent had not lodged
      any cross appeal, the Tribunal would take that finding as  a  starting
      point.

  47. Mr Morris submitted that the Adjudicator had correctly found that  the
      persecution experienced by the Appellant  in  Takhar  was  a  personal
      attack upon her in her home area, for personal reasons  particular  to
      her, by or at the behest of a commander who would not  have  influence
      in Kabul, and that women in Afghanistan who have experienced a  sexual
      assault do not qualify as a social group.

  48. Mr Morris agreed that the security situation was  poor  outside  Kabul
      city. However, this Appellant had lived in Kabul  before  the  Taliban
      came to power, and she had been a teacher there, albeit  that  it  was
      over ten years ago and when she had the support  of  her  husband.  He
      submitted that the background evidence in relation to security  within
      Kabul was contradictory and that it was difficult to take a firm  view
      on safety on return. He noted that the background evidence showed that
      a support network was essential to a woman such as  the  Appellant  in
      order for her to be able to live an ordinary daily life in safety.  He
      said that this evidence spoke for itself, including the report  of  Dr
      Lau, which was very recent. He conceded that the Appellant would  need
      a male support network in order to survive  in  safety  in  Kabul.  He
      further accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in Takhar, on return there today, at the hands of what  he
      described as non-state agents, albeit that he did not accept that such
      persecution would be for one or more of the reasons  set  out  in  the
      Refugee Convention, as had been found by the Adjudicator at  paragraph
      41 of her determination. He  submitted  that  the  discrimination  and
      harassment that the Appellant would, it was accepted,   experience  in
      Kabul, would not amount to persecution . Other human rights  were  not
      in issue before the Tribunal now, and therefore the appeal  should  be
      dismissed.


  49. Mr Vokes in reply, submitted that the  Appellant  had  shown  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution, as a member of a particular social group,
      throughout the whole of Afghanistan. In the  alternative,  she  had  a
      well-founded fear of persecution in Takhar and elsewhere outside Kabul
      city, and it would be unreasonable in  the  sense  that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh to require her to go to Kabul city.


   Consideration and Findings

  50.  Article 1(A)(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention  states  that  the  term
      'refugee' shall apply to any person who owing to a  well-founded  fear
      of being  persecuted  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,
      membership of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is
      outside the country of his nationality, and is  unable  or,  owing  to
      such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of  that
      country; or who, not  having  a  nationality  and  being  outside  the
      country of his former habitual residence is unable or, owing  to  such
      fear, is unwilling to return to it.


   Convention Reason


   51.      In a determination issued on 6 June 2003, the President  of  the
      Tribunal, Ouseley J, conducted a review of  the  law  in  relation  to
      membership of a particular social group.  This  was  the  case  of  ZH
      (Women as a Particular Social Group) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00207.

  52. The President, in starting with a consideration of the case of   Islam
      and Shah (above), begins  with  a  caution  which  we  consider  worth
      repeating here:

            " We emphasise what both Lord Steyn and Lord Hoffmann said:
           everything depends on the evidence and findings of fact in the
            particular case: ' generalisations as to the place of women in
           particular countries are out of place when dealing with issues
                      of refugee status'".

  53. Membership of a social group is a concept that has been the subject of
      considerable litigation. The characteristics of  a  particular  social
      group can be  identified  both  in  negative  and  positive  form.  As
      extracted from the leading case law (including Ward v  Canada[1993]  2
      SCR 689; Shah and Islam [1999] INLR 144,  Montoya - v  -  SSHD  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 620, and SSHD -v- Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567) these can be
      summarised as follows:

        a. There is no requirement for there to be a voluntary,
           associational relationship


        b. Members need not be homogenous nor does the group have to
           exhibit any particular degree of internal cohesion

        c. A particular social group may include large numbers of persons.


        d. The group may not be defined simply on basis of a shared fear of
           being persecuted. The persecution must exist independently of
           and not be used to define the social group.

  54. Following this  three  categories  of  the  "particular  social  group
      concept" can be identified:


        a. Groups defined by  an  innate  or  unchangeable  characteristic;
           whatever the common characteristic that  defines  the  group  it
           must be one that the members of the group either  cannot  change
           or should not be required to change because it is fundamental to
           their individual identities or conscience.


        b. Groups  whose  members  voluntarily  associate  for  reasons  so
           fundamental to their human  dignity  that  they  should  not  be
           forced to forsake the association

        and

        c. Groups associated by a former voluntary status, unalterable  due
           to historical permanence.

  55. The appellant is a woman - an innate and unchangeable  characteristic.
      She is  an  Uzbek,  Afghani  (woman),  also  innate  and  unchangeable
      characteristics. She does not pursue her claim on the basis of a  fear
      by reason of her Uzbek origin.


  56. Mr Vokes submits in relation to the  Appellant's  civil  status  as  a
      lone, or single woman, or as a widow; that however that status may  be
      regarded in Afghan society, she should not be  required  to  marry  in
      order to provide protection for herself. She is,  as  the  Adjudicator
      found, a lone Afghani woman without male or family protection.

  57. Whilst noting that the Appellant is  of  the  Muslim  faith  and  that
      polygamy is practised, within Islamic law, in Afghanistan, it  is  not
      submitted by Mr Vokes that her Muslim faith or  Islamic  law  requires
      her to submit to a marriage against her will.

  58. We find that there are difficulties with the definition of  the  group
      contended for by Mr Vokes, namely :

      "Women in Afghanistan who are without male family or tribal  support."
      This is because her being without male family or tribal  support,  are
      wholly contingent factors. In addition, the argument advanced that  to
      require the Appellant to marry would be to breach a fundamental  human
      right was insufficiently developed before us and we were therefore not
      persuaded that it had been shown that these non-innate characteristics
      of being without male family or tribal support were to be regarded  as
      characteristics beyond that power of the individual to  change  except
      at the cost of renunciation of core human  rights  entitlements.  (See
      Montoya, above). The question whether the  broader  group,  "women  in
      Afghanistan", can qualify as a particular social group remains  to  be
      considered.

Background Evidence Relating to the Situation of Women in Afghanistan


  59. We turn now to  examine  the  background  evidence,  to  include  that
      relating to the situation of women in Afghanistan.

The Constitution



      From the Country Assessment of April 2004 we note that the Bonn
      Agreement of 5 December 2001 restored the Constitution of 1964 to the
      extent that its provisions were not inconsistent with those of the
      Bonn Agreement and with the exception of those provisions relating to
      the monarchy and to the executive and legislative bodies provided for
      in the Constitution. The Bonn agreement stated that "A Constitutional
      Loya Jirga shall be convened within eighteen months of the
      establishment of the Transitional Authority, in order to adopt a new
      constitution for Afghanistan." The preamble of the adopted
      constitution states as one of its aims "For creation of a civil
      society free of oppression, atrocity, discrimination, and violence and
      based on the rule of law, social justice, protection of human rights,
      and dignity, and ensuring the fundamental rights and freedoms of the
      people."

      On 15 January 2004, the UN Secretary-General stated that "The
      Constitution, which has now entered into force, provides a permanent
      foundation for re-establishing the rule of law in Afghanistan. It
      defines a political order through a strong Presidential system of
      government with a bicameral legislature. It establishes a judicial
      system in compliance with Islam. And it includes provisions aimed at
      ensuring full respect for fundamental human rights, including equal
      rights for women...Of course, the Constitution will not, by itself,
      guarantee peace and stability. Afghans - with the necessary support
      from the international community - must now go on to address the
      impediments to the peace process that existed before the Loya Jirga.
      That means tackling the deeply troubling security situation, ensuring
      an inclusive and broadly representative Government, and quickening the
      pace of reconstruction. Indeed, if the next step in the Bonn process -
      elections - is to be credibly achieved, these key challenges demand
      immediate action."

      Commenting on the new constitution in January 2004, Human Rights Watch
      stated that "Despite the democratic shortcomings of the Constitutional
      Loya Jirga, the new Afghan constitution it approved in January 2004
      included significant provisions, notably on women's rights. The
      constitution guarantees women a substantial number of seats in
      Afghanistan's bicameral National Assembly. Approximately 25 percent of
      seats in the Wolesi Jirga (House of the People) are reserved for
      women; the president is obligated to appoint additional women in the
      Meshrano Jirga (House of Elders). Another provision of the
      constitution specifically guarantees equality between men and women
      under law."

      According to the HRW report, "The document contains several provisions
      enunciating basic political, civil, economic, and social rights, but
      little strong language empowering institutions to uphold them. The
      Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission is given a mandate, but
      lacks many of the powers necessary for it to credibly protect basic
      rights. The constitution fails to adequately address the role of
      Islamic law and its relationship to human rights protections. Human
      Rights Watch is concerned that extremist factions could use
      appointments to the new judiciary to implement laws that violate human
      rights standards. The issue of accountability for past atrocities is
      also not addressed in the document. Despite Afghanistan's recent
      history, the charter does not directly address issues of past war
      crimes and serious human rights abuses. The AIHRC may be able to delve
      further into this area, but it lacks any specific constitutional
      mandate to do so."


      The US Department of State reported on 8 January 2004 that "The new
      Constitution [approved on 4 January 2004] affords all "citizens of
      Afghanistan - men and women - equal rights and duties before the law."
      The new Constitution also reserves 25% of its seats in the lower house
      of Parliament for women. More than 200 women participated in the 2002
      Constitutional Loya Jirga that establishes the current government. Two
      of the nine members of the Constitutional Drafting committee and seven
      of the 35 members of the Constitutional Review Commission are women.
      Afghan women will have the right to vote and run for office in the
      Summer 2004 elections."  According to the US Department of State "The
      Minister of Foreign Affairs has created an Office of Human Rights,
      Health and Women's Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to
      monitor women's programs. The Ministry of Commerce set up a department
      to help women establish their own businesses."

      In January 2004, the Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR)
      reported that "The final constitution produced by the Loya Jirga
      provides for better political representation for women in Afghanistan
      than they have had in the past. The document was amended to state
      explicitly that the term "citizen" in the phrase "The citizens of
      Afghanistan have equal rights and duties before the law" applies to
      both men and women, an important revision in a country where women
      have in the past been denied civic rights." According to IWPR it is
      hoped that the new constitution will safeguard women against a number
      of controversial traditional practices.


      A UN Commission on the Status of Women report dated January 2003
      reported that "Afghanistan's emergence from 24 years of conflict has
      led to significant achievements and progress for women who went from
      complete marginalization and denial of rights to participation in
      several key institutions for the reconstruction of their country,
      including the emergency Loya Jirga, the Afghan Transitional
      Administration, the Ministry for Women's Affairs, the Afghan
      Independent Human Rights Commission and Judicial and Constitutional
      Drafting Commissions.  One of the major changes has been the re-
      emergence of women in urban areas with relatively better access to
      employment, healthcare, and education."

      The UN Secretary-General pointed out, however, that women's progress
      was determined by the post-conflict characteristics and complexities
      of Afghan society with its patriarchal values and traditions which are
      deeply ingrained. Women were reported to have restricted their
      participation in public life to avoid being targets of violence by
      armed factions and elements seeking to enforce the repressive edicts
      of the previous regime.  The report stated that "Despite positive
      developments regarding women's rights, intimidation and violence by
      regional and local commanders continue unabated.  In rural areas,
      especially the more conservative tribal belt, the situation of women
      has not changed to any great extent since the removal of the Taliban.
      The prevalence of conservative attitudes limits the full, equal and
      effective participation of women in civil, cultural, economic,
      political and social life throughout the country at all levels of
      society."


Legal Rights/Detention


      Efforts are currently underway to reassemble the legal codes in effect
      prior to Soviet and Taliban rule.  The International Crisis Group
      reported in July 2002 that in Afghanistan no semblance of a
      functioning national judicial system remains.  Three decades of regime
      change have lead to massive alterations of the legal system in content
      and implementation.  Afghanistan's few experts are uncertain which
      laws are actually in force.  In October 2002 UN Special Rapporteur
      Asma Jahangir reported that the judicial system did not seem to follow
      any uniform legal system.  The Law Ministry and Attorney Generals
      office had distributed law books to the judiciary and public
      prosecutors in the entire country.  It appears that some courts are
      following traditional or customary law while others follow different
      interpretations of Sharia law without any form of consistency.

      Amnesty International reported in August 2003 that long-term financial
      assistance is required to ensure the re-establishment of the rule of
      law in Afghanistan. Despite the political and security problems
      undermining the rule of law, courts are operating in some urban
      centres in Afghanistan but with limited capacity. However, in rural
      areas the judicial system is barely functioning. The report noted that
      at present the judiciary does not receive the support necessary to
      ensure that it is free from outside influences. Consequently, the
      independence of the judiciary is being undermined by political
      interference from certain armed groups, persons holding public office
      and private individuals. Furthermore, economic influences have led to
      a widespread problem of corruption.

      In a report on land issues published in September 2003, UNHCR advised
      that "There is a strong and evident lack of faith in the effectiveness
      of the existing judicial system. As such, returnees, similar to other
      Afghans, hardly resort to the local courts when exploring solutions to
      land disputes... In the few cases where returnees have accessed the
      legal channel, they have had to wait for many years before their cases
      were processed.

      In February 2004, a spokesman for UNAMA announced that "In April
      reform of the Afghan Judicial system will receive another boost as
      work will begin to refurbish judicial facilities at the district level
      and train judicial functionaries on gender-sensitive adjudication,
      prosecution and case handling. Public awareness campaigns will also be
      launched focusing on the rights of vulnerable groups. The projects
      will begin in Herat, Balkh, Bamyan and Nangarhar and will be
      implemented by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) through
      a pledge of six million Euros from the European Commission for justice
      sector reform. The aim is to improve access to justice by women,
      children and other vulnerable groups such as returnees. The project is
      expected to expand throughout the country. From 10-29 January this
      year [2004] the European Commission and UNDP visited the four
      provinces to ascertain the state of the justice system in those
      areas."


Death Penalty


      In August 2003, Amnesty International reported that the Criminal Code
      and the Criminal Procedure Code currently provided for the imposition
      of the death penalty in certain circumstances. However, President
      Karzai had imposed a moratorium on the death penalty. But on 28 April
      2004, BBC News reported that the first state execution since the fall
      of the Taliban had been carried out on 20 April 2004.

Police and Prisons

      As local militias are dismantled a reformed national police force will
      have to provide the foundation of law and order in  Afghanistan.   The
      Minister of the Interior Ali Ahmad Jalali appointed on 28 January 2003
      has displayed a readiness to reform the police.  In a report issued in
      March 2003 on police reconstruction Amnesty International reported  on
      the need to rebuild an effective police force in Afghanistan.  Amnesty
      documented a widespread pattern of human rights  violations  committed
      by members of the police,  including  torture  and  arbitrary  arrest.
      Extortion is commonly practiced  by  police  officers.   Much  of  the
      current police force consists of former Mujahideen, who have extensive
      military experience but little or no professional police  training  or
      experience.   Their  loyalties  rest  with   the   powerful   regional
      commanders who have been able to assert control in the provinces.

      The Amnesty International report of July 2003 noted that "Hundreds of
      women and girls are being held in prisons across the country, the
      majority for violating social, behavioural and religious codes. Girls
      from 13 years of age are being held in prison with adults alongside
      elderly women of approximately 70 years of age. The majority of women
      prisoners are from 18 to 25 years of age. Like men and children, they
      are being held for months in prisons across the country before having
      the legality of their detention determined by a judge. Women are being
      held often within a compound in the main prison area rather than in a
      separate compound."  Some of these women and girls appear to have been
      released subsequently by decree of Karzai.

      According to Amnesty International in March 2004, "Conditions in
      prisons and detention facilities in Kabul have seen an improvement but
      there remains an urgent need for the rehabilitation and reconstruction
      of detention facilities elsewhere. Furthermore, prison conditions
      (sanitation, food, overcrowding) and legal rights of prisoners fall
      far short of international standards as laid out in the UN Body of
      Principles for All Persons under Any Forms of Detention or
      Imprisonment and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
      Prisoners... Prisons in the provinces remain non existent. To date,
      the central government has responsibility to administer provincial
      prisons but in reality they remain under the control of various armed
      groups and human rights violations continue to be reported. The prison
      service continues to be plagued by insufficient personnel, inadequate
      training facilities for officers, inconsistent payment of salaries and
      a marked lack of donor interest. Despite a plan drawn up by Italy, the
      lead donor government for justice reform, to tackle this, lack of
      resources hamper reform and development."

Legal Provisions Relating to Women

       A UN Commission on the Status of Women report dated 28 January 2002
      stated that "In January 2002, the Head of the Interim Administration,
      Mr. Karzai,  demonstrated his support for women's rights by signing
      the "Declaration of the Essential Human Rights of Afghan Women", which
      affirmed the right to equality between Afghan men and women." The US
      Department of State Report on Human Rights Practices 2003 reported
      that "In 2002 President Karzai decreed that women have the right to
      choose whether to wear the burqa. However, credible sources reported
      that women and older girls could not go out alone and that, when they
      did go out, they wore a burqa for fear of harassment or violence."

      On 18 March 2003, the Secretary-General reported to the UN General
      Assembly Security Council that on 5 March 2003 Afghanistan had
      ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
      Discrimination against Women [CEDAW]. According to the United Nations
      Division for the Advancement of Women in March 2003, "Consisting of a
      preamble and 30 articles, it [the Convention] defines what constitutes
      discrimination against women and sets up an agenda for national action
      to end such discrimination...Countries that have ratified or acceded
      to the Convention are legally bound to put its provisions into
      practice. They are also committed to submit national reports, at least
      every four years, on measures they have taken to comply with their
      treaty obligations."

       In a report published in October 2003, Amnesty International noted
      that "The ratification of CEDAW was a major development. Afghanistan
      has made a specific commitment to address women's rights in law and
      practice; in public, political, social and cultural life; as well as
      in personal status laws, education, health and work. The ATIA has also
      ratified the Rome Statute for the International Criminal Court (ICC),
      which contains gender sensitive definitions of crimes and procedures
      to protect vulnerable victims and witnesses. This constitutes a model
      for domestic legal reform. Amnesty International recognizes the
      difficulties facing Afghanistan as it seeks to recover from over 23
      years of conflict. However, it is vital that measures to protect the
      rights of women are built into legal and constitutional reform, and
      integrated into policing and criminal justice processes."

      In November 2002, the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ)
      reported that "There appears to exist a large degree of confusion over
      the exact rights of women and their legal status.  In June 2002 there
      were about 30 women confined in Kabul jail.  Some of them were accused
      of criminal offences but the majority were, according to the Law
      Section of the Ministry of Women's Affairs...detained for a variety of
      offences related to family law such as refusing to live with their
      husbands, refusing to marry a husband chosen by their parents, or for
      having run away from either the parental or the matrimonial home. It
      appears that these women have no access to lawyers, have no
      information on their rights, if any, and are generally left in jail
      until their respective relatives intervene." The ICG noted that the
      most surprising finding of their report was the profound uncertainty
      regarding the
      legality of the detention of these women.

      In July 2003, Amnesty International reported that "President Karzai
      issued the first of several Presidential decrees providing for the
      release of women in November 2002. According to the decree, 20 women
      were ordered to be released as part of religious celebrations.
      However, this raised concern amongst members of the international
      community. Many of these women were imprisoned for running away from
      home and could not return to their home on release. As a result of the
      release, one woman was killed by a family member and another had
      nowhere to go to. One woman identified to be released as part of
      President Karzai's decree in November 2002 was somehow overlooked and
      remained in detention. This underlines the need for safe shelter for
      women."

      In March 2004, Amnesty International reported that "Despite
      ratification of United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All
      Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) by the government,
      Afghanistan's obligations under the treaty are not yet reflected in
      domestic legislation. Rape is not yet criminalized nor is the giving
      of girls in marriage as means of dispute resolution or the... forcing
      [of] women and girls to marry against their consent. In the absence of
      effective mechanisms to investigate gender related violence, the vast
      majority of all such violations continue to not be reported to the
      criminal justice system and almost none are subject to investigation
      or prosecution... Legal provisions to protect the rights of women
      remain inadequate. Legal protection despite signing CEDAW is not yet
      reflected in law or practice."

      UNHCR also reported in July 2003 that, despite the encouraging
      developments, the persistence of discrimination and conservative
      cultural practices, at times leading to acts of violence including
      death (honour killing), meant that the following categories of women
      should be considered to be at risk and exposed to possible
      persecution, if they returned to Afghanistan:

     a) "Women without effective male and/or community support; and
     b)   Women perceived as or actually transgressing prevailing social
        mores. This latter group may include 1) Afghan women who have
        married foreign nationals in countries of asylum; this would
        particularly concern women who have married non-Muslims and are
        perceived as having thus violated tenets of Islam; and 2) Afghan
        women who have adopted a Westernised behaviour or way of life which
        (i) would be perceived as transgressing social mores in Afghanistan
        and (ii) has become so fundamental a part of their identity that it
        would be persecutory for them to have to suppress it."   The UNHCR
        report also included women's associations in the category of
        vulnerable groups who may be particularly exposed to acts of
        political intimidation.

      Men and women told Human Rights Watch, as reported in July 2003, that
      women and older girls could not go out alone and that when they did go
      out they had to wear a burqa for fear of harassment or violence,
      regardless of whether they would otherwise choose to wear it. And in
      Jalalabad and Laghman, certain government officials have threatened to
      beat or kill women who do not wear it."

      The UN Secretary-General pointed out, however, that women's progress
      was determined by the post-conflict characteristics and complexities
      of Afghan society with its patriarchal values and traditions which are
      deeply ingrained. Women were reported to have restricted their
      participation in public life to avoid being targets of violence by
      armed factions and elements seeking to enforce the repressive edicts
      of the previous regime.  The report stated that "Despite positive
      developments regarding women's rights, intimidation and violence by
      regional and local commanders continue unabated.  In rural areas,
      especially the more conservative tribal belt, the situation of women
      has not changed to any great extent since the removal of the Taliban.
      The prevalence of conservative attitudes limits the full, equal and
      effective participation of women in civil, cultural, economic,
      political and social life throughout the country at all levels of
      society."

      In April 2003 a Swedish fact finding mission to Afghanistan in
      November 2002 reported that "Most of the sources interviewed
      [including the Deputy Minister of Women's Affairs and the UNAMA Human
      Rights Team] confirmed that the security situation for women is
      difficult. Women that are single head of household without extended
      families to care for them, are vulnerable. Women who are single heads
      of households are at risk because they have no family protection, no
      money and no employment. If they have children, the risk is extended
      to the child." In June 2003, Amnesty International reported that "Many
      unaccompanied returnee women have been forced to beg on the streets of
      Kabul as their only means of survival." Amnesty International advised
      that they had received reports of verbal and physical harassment of
      women returnees to Kabul.

      At year's end, [2003] local custom and practices generally prevailed
      in much of the country. Discrimination against women was widespread.
      However, its severity varied from area to area, depending on the local
      leadership's attitude toward education for girls and employment for
      women and on local attitudes."

      The US Dept of State reported that "Most in the international and
      domestic community noted improvement in the status of women since the
      Taliban's fall from power, despite the persistence of certain areas of
      concern. The central Government named several women to cabinet
      positions and other areas of responsibility. The Ministers of Health
      and Women's Affairs, as well as the Chairwoman of the Afghan
      Independent Human Rights Commission were women. Women in a number of
      places regained some measure of access to public life, education,
      health care, and employment; however, the lack of education
      perpetuated during the Taliban years and limited employment
      possibilities continued to impede the ability of many women to improve
      their situation."

      In October 2003, Amnesty International (AI) published a paper on women
      in Afghanistan, which stated that "Two years after the ending of the
      Taleban regime, the international community and the Afghan
      Transitional Administration (ATA), led by President Hamid Karzai, have
      proved unable to protect women. Amnesty International is gravely
      concerned by the extent of violence faced by women and girls in
      Afghanistan. The risk of rape and sexual violence by members of armed
      factions and former combatants is still high. Forced marriage,
      particularly of girl children, and violence against women in the
      family are widespread in many areas of the country. These crimes of
      violence continue with the active support or passive complicity of
      state agents, armed groups, families and communities. This continuing
      violence against women in Afghanistan causes untold suffering and
      denies women their fundamental human rights."

      The Amnesty International report continued, "The criminal justice
      system is too weak to offer effective protection of women's right to
      life and physical security, and itself subjects them to discrimination
      and abuse. Prosecution for violence against women, and protection for
      women at acute risk of violence is virtually absent. Those women who
      overcome powerful barriers and seek redress are unlikely to have their
      complaints considered, or their rights defended."   According to AI
      "Significant numbers of underage marriages, incidents of physical
      abuse in the family and other forms of violence were reported to
      Amnesty International. The vast majority had not been reported to the
      criminal justice system, and almost none had been subject to
      investigation or prosecution. Women were largely unsupported when
      suffering violence, and had very few means to leave violent
      situations. Amnesty International's research indicates impunity for
      such violence on a vast scale. Such impunity perpetuates violence
      since perpetrators are free to consider their actions as normal and
      acceptable."

      According to the October 2003 report, "Amnesty International research
      indicates a failure on the part of the state to investigate fully
      serious crimes against women and to protect women at risk. Prosecution
      for crimes of violence against women including rape and domestic
      violence is extremely rare. Amnesty International was not informed of
      any instances of prosecution for either forced marriage or the
      exchange of women or girls... Some judges interviewed by Amnesty
      International delegates stated that the practice of using any form of
      physical violence against a woman, violated the Shari'a. However, the
      failure to criminalize the practice or offer any form of support to
      women victims of violence makes it almost impossible for women to
      bring cases before the courts."

       In a report to the UN Economic and Social Council on 19 December
      2003, the Secretary-General advised that "In the two years since the
      fall of the Taliban regime, the Afghan Transitional Administration
      supported by the international community has focused considerable
      attention on the plight of Afghan women and girls. Despite many
      obstacles, women are playing a crucial role in building a new
      Afghanistan both politically and economically. They have participated
      throughout the country in the consultative process in drafting the new
      constitution. Women continue to return to the workforce in modest
      numbers, gain access to education and health services and...are being
      chosen in significant numbers to represent their concerns and
      interests in the Constitutional Loya Jirga."

      The Secretary-General also noted, however, that "In spite of this
      progress, the fact that women in many parts of the country continue to
      face gross violations of their rights, is a matter of concern."  The
      Secretary-General said that "The insecurity and increasing incidence
      of sexual violence threaten to reverse the gains made especially for
      girls and women as many are afraid to venture out of their homes to
      attend school or go to work for fear of abduction or rape by armed
      groups." The Secretary-General noted reports of a wide range of
      violations against women and girls in the name of social norms,
      traditions and protection. These included domestic violence, early and
      forced marriages, death threats against women activists, intimidation,
      restrictions on movement, honour killings and "protective"
      incarceration, particularly in rural areas, where conservative social
      attitudes prevailed. In rural areas women were threatened by local
      commanders who violated women's rights and committed sexual abuse with
      impunity.  It was also noted that "Refugee women and widows also face
      specific risks associated with lack of security, as well as physical
      and psychological hardship."

      On 19 December 2003, the UN Secretary-General reported to the Economic
      and Social Council that the Gender Advisory Group, which was
      established in December 2002 as a support structure to the Ministry of
      Women's Affairs, had established two working groups to assist in
      coordinating women's participation in the on-going constitutional
      reform process and in ensuring that gender perspectives are integrated
      into the 2004 National Development Budget public investment
      programmes. According to the report "It is envisaged to establish a
      policy unit in the Ministry of Women's affairs, with both
      international and national experts. The unit will work closely with
      the gender focal point of the policy management unit in the Office of
      the President."

      According to Amnesty International in March 2004, "Women and girls in
      Afghanistan continue to be threatened with violence in many aspects of
      their lives both in public and private. Violations of the rights of
      women and girls, including physical abuse, underage marriage, exchange
      of girls to settle feuds were widely reported to Amnesty International
      during the recent visit. Amnesty International also received reports
      of several women burning themselves in order to avoid forced marriages
      and physical violence, especially in Herat province... Protection for
      women and girls who have suffered violence to date remains extremely
      limited. In Kabul, the numbers of shelters for victims of violence are
      limited but such facilities do not exist in most areas outside the
      capital. The scale of the problem in the provinces remains largely
      unknown. Despite some international resources being donated to the
      growth of women's civil society groups attempting to combat violence
      against women, women remain largely unsupported with very few means to
      seek community and state support. A select number of both Afghan and
      international non governmental organisations (NGOS) are working to
      address this issue but they remain in need of further international
      and Afghan government support."

  60. This evidence, viewed as a whole, does, we find, show that the rule of
      law has yet to be effectively re-established  in  Afghanistan.  Whilst
      there is clearly willingness on the part of the ATIA,  which  is  very
      much to be welcomed, to take steps to effectively establish  the  rule
      of law, and the new Constitution may be regarded as a  foundation  for
      re-establishing the rule of law, it must be borne in mind that it only
       came into force  earlier in 2004 and the aspirations contained within
      it  to  create  a  society  free   from   oppression,   violence   and
      discrimination, which protects human rights and fundamental  freedoms,
      are at the present  time  just  that.  They  have  yet  to  be  become
      justiciable  rights,  whether  through  incorporation  into   domestic
      legislation or otherwise.


  61. As a consequence, this is a period of transition. Many women are  able
      to enjoy greater freedoms since the fall of the  Taliban,  but  it  is
      necessary to recall the nature and degree of the oppression  of  women
      under the Taliban, and to bear in mind that the changes are  relative.
      This is a period characterized by  both  welcome  steps  such  as  the
      signing by the ATIA of the Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms
      of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
      regrettable failure, on the other, of the authorities  to  take  steps
      necessary to provide protection to women and girl children by enacting
      in domestic legislation, laws to protect women  and  girls,  including
      laws to criminalize rape and the practice of forced marriage.

  62. Whilst it is right that  training  for  the  police,  including  human
      rights and gender awareness training is  underway  or  to  begin  very
      shortly, the evidence does not yet show that in fact  police  services
      are available to women  without  discrimination.  Such  discrimination
      can, at present, include exposing them to actual physical violence  at
      police stations.

  63. It is plain that without a properly trained and accountable police and
      security  service,  without  appropriate  legislation,   and   without
      equality of access to the legal process, including  non-discriminatory
      access to trained, independent, fair and  impartial  judges,  none  of
      which has as yet been achieved, women in  Afghanistan  must,  in  this
      way, be regarded at this  point  in  history  as  exposed  to  serious
      discrimination within the legal system.


  64. Further, the evidence also shows that women in Afghanistan are exposed
      to serious levels of societal discrimination which is condoned by  the
      authorities or which the authorities do nothing to protect them  from.
      Restrictions  on  freedom  of  movement,  education,  employment   and
      generally in relation to participation in public life, for  women  and
      girls continue to be imposed by members of the population, in  general
      by adult males, but also by some local officials, such as  enforcement
      of particular dress codes. Whilst  some  women  are  enjoying  greater
      levels of freedom to participate more fully in society than  they  did
      under what has been called the apartheid regime of the Taliban,  these
      benefits are not available to all women. Even where  some  women  find
      paid employment outside the home, they are able to  do  so  only  when
      they have the support of at least one adult male. Even in Kabul, women
      do not walk the streets alone. To do so would be to  bring  themselves
      into disrepute, lay themselves open to  threats,  accusation,  assault
      including sexual assault, and even being charged with  an  offence  or
      imprisoned ' for their own safety'.  It is also the case that although
      some officials do take some steps to seek to prevent forced  marriages
      of women or girl children, where the  families  in  question  persist,
      then the officials do not prevent  the  forced  marriage  from  taking
      place.


  65. In the light of all the evidence,  we  find  that  the  discrimination
      experienced by women in Afghanistan  does  include  discrimination  in
      law, despite the constitution that has recently come into  force,  not
      least through a lack of protective legislation, and discrimination  in
      access to an impartial,  fair  and  independent  police  and  judicial
      service.  We  further  find  that  the  discrimination  also  includes
      societal discrimination by members of the population, from  which  the
      authorities either cannot or will not provide protection.  As  it  was
      put by the President in the case of ZH, the lack of  state  protection
      is inherent in the discrimination relied on.

   Nexus


  66. Mere membership of a particular social  group  is  not  sufficient  to
      enable a successful claim under the Refugee Convention. There must  be
      some nexus between the persecution and  the  reason  for  persecution,
      that  is,  the  persecution  is  for  reasons  of....membership  of  a
      particular social group.


  67. In Shah and Islam Lord Hoffman  said  "what  is  the  reason  for  the
      persecution which the appellants fear?...important to notice  that  it
      is made up of two elements. First there is  the  threat  of  violence.
      This is a personal  affair,  directed  against  them  as  individuals.
      Secondly, there is the inability or unwillingness of the state  to  do
      anything to protect them. There is nothing personal  about  this.  The
      evidence was that the state would not protect them because  they  were
      women."

  68. We find that the evidence in the case before us tends to show that the
      attacks and harassment of the Appellant and her family by the Jamiat-e-
      Islami militia, took place because of the family's  involvement  with,
      and connections to  the  Communist  Najibullah  regime.  The  credible
      evidence of the Appellant was that  the  warlords  and  their  militia
      wished to destroy her family because of its connections to the  former
      communist regime. The Appellant was a woman alone and exposed  to  the
      persecutory harm because the Jamiat-e-Islami had detained her husband.
      The Afghani authorities in Takhar,  who  were,  and  are,  those  same
      warlords and their militias, would not protect her because she was  an
      unprotected woman from that family. Indeed they attacked and raped her
      for the very same reasons.

  69. As earlier indicated, the Adjudicator's finding that the rape  of  the
      Appellant took place only  because  the  man  in  question  found  her
      attractive is not based in  the  evidence  that  was  before  her.  In
      addition, having made that finding, which was not evidence based,  and
      having found that it was the only reason for the rape, the Adjudicator
      then went on to make a judgment, again not evidence  based,  that  the
      rape was perpetrated in order to intimidate or shame her into becoming
      his wife. Or, in the alternative, to punish her for refusing  him,  or
      for personal gratification. Whilst it is possible that all or  any  of
      these other motives may have played a part  in  the  totality  of  the
      motivation of Qasim, it cannot be said to be  reasonably  likely  that
      the rape would have occurred had it not been for  the  harassment  and
      persecution of the family by reason of its connections to  the  former
      communist regime, including the detention of the Appellant's  husband,
      thereby exposing her to further persecutory harm as  a  woman  without
      effective male or tribal protection. To take as a wife, by force,  the
      wife of one's enemy, after first imprisoning him, is not  an  uncommon
      act in the course of war or other conflict, as an  act  of  aggression
      against the enemy.


  70.  Collins  J  said,  in  the  case  of  R-v-IAT  ex-parte   Yogashanthi
      Subramaniam (CO/3885/97,  February 1999) (as referred to in the Asylum
      Gender Guidelines IAA, November 2000):


           "..... I entirely accept that rape is capable of falling  within
           the Convention.  It would be a question of deciding in any given
           circumstances whether it  does,  just  as  rape  is  capable  of
           amounting to torture; again it would depend on the circumstances
           of any given case whether it is."


  71. As was stated by the Tribunal in Montoya, and subsequently approved by
      the Court of Appeal in that case (above), "the words 'for reasons  of'
      require a causal nexus between actual or perceived membership  of  the
      particular social  group  and  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
      Caution  should  be  exercised  against  applying  a  set  theory   of
      causation. In Islam and Shah, no final choice  was  made  between  the
      'but for' and the 'effective cause' tests, but the 'but for' test  was
      said to require a taking into account of  the  context  in  which  the
      causal question was raised and of the broad policy  of  the  (Refugee)
      Convention ."

  72. Whether ill-treatment amounts to persecution depends upon  the  degree
      of ill-treatment.  A single incident of ill-treatment in the past  may
      constitute persecution, and past persecution is probative of a  future
      risk  of  persecution  unless  there  has  been  a  major  change   of
      circumstances  in  the  feared  country  making   future   persecution
      unlikely.  (see e.g. : Haci Demirkaya-v-SSHD,  [1999] INLR 441, CA).

  73. We refer to the facts in the case  of  this  particular  Appellant  as
      summarized at  paragraphs  22-39  of  our  determination,  and  remind
      ourselves that the Adjudicator found that the  Appellant  was  a  lone
      woman with two young girl children, without adult male protection, who
      had  experienced  serious  harm  and   trauma,   both   physical   and
      psychological, including attempts to force her into  marriage  against
      her will. The Adjudicator found that  the  Appellant  had  experienced
      persecutory harm in Takhar and that she had  a  well-founded  fear  of
      again experiencing such serious harm on return to Takhar or  elsewhere
      outside Kabul.

  74. On the evidence that was before the  Adjudicator,  we  find  that  the
      harassment, ill-treatment, and serious harm that was meted out to  the
      Appellant and her family ,  was  not  simply  common  crime,  but  was
      motivated, to a significant degree, by animosity due to  the  family's
      connections to the former communist regime,  and  that  it  is  to  be
      regarded as a form  of  intentional  destruction  of  the  family,  as
      political enemies who are vulnerable to such harm, after the fall from
      power of the communist regime and the rise in power  of  the  warlords
      once more. Those warlords were, and are, the authorities in  the  area
      of Takhar, and indeed in most of Afghanistan outside Kabul city.

  75. Whilst she does not now pursue her case that  she  was  persecuted  by
      reason of an imputed political opinion, and we do not, therefore, seek
      to examine this aspect of the matter  further,  we  nevertheless  find
      that the evidence does show that the ill-treatment  of  the  Appellant
      and her family was not merely personal, and  that  political  opinion,
      imputed political opinion as far as the  Appellant  was  concerned  as
      opposed to her husband, was at least an effective cause of the serious
      harm to which she was  subjected.  We  further  find  that  after  her
      husband had been detained, it may be said  that  there  were  at  that
      stage at least two Refugee Convention reasons to which a causal  nexus
      has been demonstrated in respect of the serious harm meted out to  the
      Appellant. The first is the imputed political opinion, as before.  The
      second is her status as a woman  who,  at  that  stage,  was  forcibly
      separated from her husband and without effective protection  from  the
      warlords. Whilst it cannot be said that none of the events  that  took
      place after her husband was detained would  have  occurred  had  there
      been at least one adult male to protect her,  who  was  not  frail  or
      otherwise unable to protect her, as were her father and uncle; it  can
      be said that the lack of effective protection from an  adult  male  or
      males was at least an effective cause of the  serious  harm  that  she
      experienced by reason of her status as a woman in Afghanistan.


  76. We find that the past persecution experienced by the Appellant was for
      mixed reasons. As is stated in the IAA  Asylum  Gender  Guidelines  of
      November 2000, (the Gender Guidelines), (at page 3), certain forms  of
      harm are more frequently, or only, used against women or affect  women
      in a manner which is different to men.  These  include,  but  are  not
      limited  to,  for  example,  sexual  violence,  societal   and   legal
      discrimination, forced prostitution, trafficking, refusal of access to
      contraception, bride burning, forced marriage,  forced  sterilization,
      forced  abortion,  (forced)  female   genital   mutilation,   enforced
      nakedness/sexual humiliation.


  77. It follows that to a significant degree,  the  attempt  to  force  the
      Appellant into marriage against  her  will,  including  the  attendant
      abuse,  can  properly  be  regarded  as  having  been   motivated   by
      circumstances demonstrating a  nexus  to  both  an  imputed  political
      opinion, as the wife of a man who was regarded as a political enemy of
      the persecutors (as the Adjudicator found them  to  be),  and  to  the
      Appellant's status as a woman, and therefore a member of a  particular
      social group.  We are reinforced in our findings in this regard by the
      expert opinion of Dr Lau, to  which  we  refer  in  detail  below,  in
      particular at paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 of his report.

  78. In order to show that she is a member of the particular  social  group
      of women in Afghanistan, it is not enough for the  Appellant  to  show
      that she can apparently  bring herself into the  necessary  categories
      as defined by the case law, as referred to at  paragraphs  77  and  78
      above, namely that she is a member of a group defined by an innate  or
      unchangeable characteristic, that of being a woman, and that  she  can
      show a causal nexus between her membership of that  social  group  and
      her well-founded fear of persecution. She must also show,  as  it  was
      put by the President in ZH (above), at paragraph 63 :

        "that the situation of women in  (Afghani)  society  is  such  that
        there is discrimination which includes  legislative,  judicial  and
        police discrimination, in the way in which women could obtain,  and
        indeed suffer from seeking, state protection.  The  lack  of  state
        protection is inherent in the discrimination relied on."

  79. For all the reasons that we have given, we find that the Appellant has
      shown that she is a member  of  a  particular  social  group  for  the
      purposes of the Refugee Convention. She has  shown  that  she  has  an
      immutable characteristic, namely that she is a woman.  She  has  shown
      causal  nexus  of  both  political  opinion  and  her  status  as   an
      unprotected woman, and she has shown that  women  in  Afghanistan  are
      exposed to discrimination of the nature referred to by  the  House  of
      Lords in the case of Islam and Shah. That social group  is  "women  in
      Afghanistan."


   Risk on Return

  80. Mr Vokes submitted that the Adjudicator had found that  the  Appellant
      would be persecuted in the Takhar area and could not return  there  in
      safety. If we were to find that she  was  a  member  of  a  particular
      social group, then it would be for her to show that she would also  be
      persecuted for the same reason in Kabul, or that it  would  be  unduly
      harsh, in accordance with the test laid down in the case of  Robinson,
      to require her to return to Kabul.

  81. For the reasons set out above, we find that the Appellant is a  member
      of a particular social group, "women in  Afghanistan".  We  also  find
      that she has a present  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  that
      reason, if returned  to  Takhar  today  (see  e.g  Demirkaya).  It  is
      reasonably  likely  that  she  would  again  experience  similar  ill-
      treatment to that which she experienced in the past, at the  hands  of
      the warlords, who are the de facto authorities in that area, from whom
      the ATIA authorities cannot or will not protect her. We are reinforced
      in our findings in this regard by the support derived from the  expert
      opinion of Dr Lau, to which we refer  fully  below.  Here  we  mention
      simply an extract.

  82.  Dr Lau in his report of September 2004, noted at paragraph 8 that the
      Appellant may be treated as being available for marriage.  This  would
      be so  even  though  she  continues  to  regard  herself  as  married,
      committed to her husband, whom she still believes  to  be  alive,  and
      even though she does  not  wish  to  marry  another  man.  As  Dr  Lau
      explains, this would be because it is unusual for an  adult  woman  to
      live  without  her  husband.  The  customary  practice  of  polygamous
      marriage endorsed by Islam is justified on the ground that in times of
      war, widows need to be looked after by a new husband, who however, may
      already be married. Further, Islamic law regards the abandonment of  a
      wife as a termination of her marriage which enables her  to  re-marry.
      He is of the expert opinion that given the detention of  her  husband,
      it is quite plausible that she is regarded as available for  marriage.
      He is of the expert opinion  that  the  Appellant's  account  in  this
      regard is plausible and her fears of persecution well-founded.

  83. We therefore turn next to the question whether she has a  well-founded
      fear of persecution in Kabul city, which is the  place  to  which  she
      would physically be returned. We remind ourselves that the Adjudicator
      found that Kabul was the only possible alternative place to which  the
      Appellant  and  her  daughters  might  relocate  Or  whether,  in  the
      alternative, it would be unreasonable in the sense that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh to require her to relocate in Kabul  city,  applying  the
      principles set out in the case of Robinson (above).

  84. Mr Vokes  did  not  draw  our  attention  to  evidence  to  support  a
      contention  that  the  influence  of  the  particular  Jamiat-e-Islami
      warlords who were persecuting  the  Appellant  in  Takhar  would  also
      extend to Kabul. He made no reference to such  evidence.  It  was  not
      argued that the evidence showed that Qasim or Hassan or other  militia
      members acting specifically on their orders, would come to  know  that
      the Appellant was in Kabul and pursue her there or  cause  her  to  be
      pursued there, for the purpose of seeking to force her into a marriage
      or otherwise. Nor did  he  identify  any  other  specific  prospective
      persecutor,   the   recent   decision   of   the   Tribunal   in    AF
      ("warlords/commanders"-evidence  expected)   Afghanistan   CG   [2004]
      refers. We therefore find that the Appellant has not  shown  that  her
      fear of persecution, which is well-founded in Takhar, extends to Kabul
      city, and we move to consider whether it is reasonable to require  her
      to relocate there.

  85. In coming to our determination we have been mindful  of  the  reported
      determination of the Tribunal in  the  case  of  K  (Risk-Sikh  Women)
      Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057, in which it was  found  that  there
      was in general no real risk of serious harm on  return  to  Kabul  and
      that the Appellant in that case, a Sikh woman, could return in safety.
      Mr Morris did not rely on  this  case  before  us.  Perhaps  that  was
      because  the  background  evidence  has  since  changed;  because  the
      Tribunal did not have the benefit of the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Lau
      which is before us; because the content  of  the  April  2003  Country
      Assessment is now out of date in relevant aspects and perhaps  because
      the Sikh woman in that case was regarded as having a Sikh community to
      turn to for protection and a Sikh temple in which to  reside,  whereas
      the Appellant before us has no family and no specific community  group
      to  turn  to.  For  these  reasons  we  consider  that  K  is  to   be
      distinguished from this appeal.

  86. In relation to the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Lau,  we  note  that  the
      Tribunal  in  the  case  of  RS  (Hezbe  Islami  -  expert   evidence)
      Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00278, had the benefit of receiving  evidence
      from Dr Lau, who attended the hearing  to  give  oral  evidence.   The
      Tribunal, a legal panel, said this: "Having read his report, noted his
      qualifications, and heard him give evidence we find Dr Lau  to  be  an
      impressive,  authoritative  and  careful  expert  witness.   We   give
      considerable weight to his opinions.  Indeed,  except  for  one  point
      where Mr Parker suggested we should prefer the Danish Report,  he  did
      not suggest we should give any less weight to Dr Lau's opinions."

  87. Before us, Mr Morris did not make any such suggestion either,  and  he
      raised no criticism of or challenge to the expert  opinions  expressed
      by Dr Lau in his report in relation to this Appellant. Accordingly, we
      find that it is appropriate to also accord considerable weight to  his
      opinions.

  88. For completeness we set out Dr Lau's credentials:

      "Qualifications

            I am a Barrister and the Head  of  the  Law  Department  of  the
           School of Oriental and African Studies,  University  of  London,
           where I teach courses on South Asian law  at  both  postgraduate
           and undergraduate level.  I hold academic qualifications in  law
           and in South Asian history from the University of Heidelberg and
           the University of London.  I am  the  Deputy  Secretary  of  the
           British Association of Pakistan Studies and was the Director  of
           the Centre of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law from April 1995  to
           March 1998.  I am the Chief Examiner  for  Islamic  Law  of  the
           External LLB of the University of London.  My  current  position
           involves intensive research on modern Afghan and Pakistani law.




            I have visited Afghanistan five times in the past two years.  In
           January of this year I visited Heart and Kabul on behalf of  the
           German office in connection with consultations on  Afghanistan's
           new constitution.  In July 2003 I held a series of workshops  on
           the reform of Afghanistan's criminal procedure law on behalf  of
           the US Institute of Peace and the International Resources Group.
           The governmental partners in Afghanistan were  the  Ministry  of
           Interior, the Office of the State  Prosecutor  and  the  Supreme
           Court.  On previous occasions I carried  out  an  evaluation  of
           Afghanistan's  legal  system  on  behalf  of  the  International
           Commission of Jurists, Geneva.  In the course of  my  visits  to
           Afghanistan I  have  met  with  many  judges,  police  officers,
           prosecutors and lawyers as well as with NGOs, UN  officials  and
           government officials.




            In the beginning of May 2003 I organized a conference  on  legal
           education in Afghanistan on behalf of the German government  and
           was able to meet inter alia the Chief Justice of Afghanistan and
           the country's Minister of Justice.




            The opinions expressed in this report are based on my experience
           of working on Afghan legal issues including human rights and the
           assessment of the dynamics of law enforcement.




            I am aware of the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  relating  to  expert
           evidence (SI 1998 No. 3131) and I understand that as  an  expert
           witness I owe an overriding duty to this Court  rather  than  to
           those instructing me.




  89. It is noted that he has both academic  knowledge  and  experience  and
      first hand knowledge and experience, of  Afghanistan,  having  visited
      that country five times in the past  two  years.  He  was  there  most
      recently,  it  seems,  in   July   2003,   after   the   Adjudicator's
      determination was issued on 16 June 2003.

Internal relocation

  90. Dr Lau does not think that the  ATIA  itself  would  have  an  adverse
      interest in the Appellant should she return to Kabul now, by reason of
      her connections to the former communist regime, although he is of  the
      opinion that she would be regarded as a communist by the warlords  and
      their militia in places such as Takhar. He regards the Appellant as  a
      woman who would not be prevented from  re-establishing  herself  as  a
      teacher now in Kabul, by reason of her links to the communist  regime.
      He is personally aware of several women who were trained and  employed
      in the public service under Najibullah, who  have  now  been  able  to
      return to their respective positions in Kabul. Although the Taleban is
      still active in the country  as  are  warlords  belonging  to  various
      Mujahedin factions, to his knowledge, there have not been attacks upon
      women in Kabul, on  account  of  their  association  with  the  former
      communist regime.


  91. However, Dr Lau goes on to express the opinion, which is supported  by
      the other generic background evidence that is before us, and to  which
      we have referred above, that the fact that the Appellant is  a  single
      woman, without male protection, would expose her to considerable risks
      including a real risk of serious physical harm from which she would be
      unable to seek or obtain protection. Whilst the security situation  in
      Afghanistan is such that no reliable statistics  on  the  position  of
      women in society and incidents of harassment are available, he  is  of
      the opinion that there is little doubt that the  state  is  unable  to
      protect women, and that the task of protection of women falls  to  the
      male members of her family, especially their husbands. Women who  find
      themselves without the effective protection of their families are in a
      very vulnerable and dangerous position. It is most unusual for a woman
      to leave the house unaccompanied by a close male relative, and a woman
      who has not such protection of close male relatives is  likely  to  be
      threatened and harassed.

  92. In a report published  in  January  2004,  Human  Rights  Watch  (HRW)
      observed that "There is  no  question  that  ISAF  has  been  modestly
      successful in increasing security in Kabul, hence helping support  the
      remarkable economic development that the city has witnessed  over  the
      last two years, and demonstrating how quickly  Afghans  can  and  will
      work toward creating a civil society if given the space to do so.  But
      even in Kabul and its immediate environs ISAF did not (or  could  not)
      carry out one of its central missions,  which  was  to  rid  Kabul  of
      factional militias. Armed men, particularly those associated with  the
      forces of Defense Minister Marshall Fahim and  fundamentalist  warlord
      Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, still roam  the  streets  by  day  and  engage  in
      robbery and banditry by night."

  93. We find that it follows that this Appellant would not be in a position
      to seek re-establish her teaching or other  career  in  Kabul  without
      exposing herself to a  real  risk  of  threats,  harassment  and  even
      physical assault. It is also to be remembered that she has not  worked
      as a teacher since about 1991, at which time  she  had  a  husband  to
      support and protect her and did not have the  sole  responsibility  of
      having to care for and protect two young girls. She had only about two
      years experience of teaching before she and her family were obliged to
      flee Kabul. The fact that she would also need  to  find  and  pay  for
      child care to enable her to be in a position to begin to seek work  is
      an added obstacle.

  94. Although her husband had established a home  for  the  family  in  the
      Makroyan area of Kabul, it is highly unlikely that the house is empty.
      It is possible that it will  have  been  destroyed.  If  it  is  still
      habitable, it is reasonably likely that it will have been occupied  by
      others. Even assuming that the Appellant has any legal right  to   own
      or occupy the house in  question,  which  has  not  been  shown,   the
      background evidence shows that the procedures for seeking  restoration
      of land or other property are beset by very long delays, a corrupt and
      unfair system, and very  poor  success  rates.  It  follows  that  the
      Appellant and her two daughters, as homeless returnees, are reasonably
      likely to find themselves in serious difficulties, as a lone woman and
      two female children, in finding accommodation and  they  may  have  to
      reside in tents or other temporary accommodation, in poor  conditions,
      as winter approaches. We note from Dr Lau's report that there  are  no
      women's shelters in Afghanistan and that a single woman  would  be  at
      very real and serious risk of sexual assault.

  95. It is noted that Dr Lau visited the women's wing of  Kabul  prison  in
      July 2003. There he observed that many women appeared  to  be  in  the
      prison for their own protection rather than because they had committed
      any offence recognized by Afghan law. According to Dr Lau, women avoid
      coming into contact with the police since the  largely  untrained  and
      uneducated force  is  unlikely  to  protect  a  single  woman  against
      harassment.  For a lone woman to be seen, even in  the  company  of  a
      policeman, tarnishes her reputation and exposes her to allegations  of
      immorality. It is further noted that an unaccompanied woman presenting
      herself at a police station at night would risk  harassment  or  worse
      from  the  police  themselves.  We  find  that  the  Appellant   would
      effectively be prevented from even reporting any alleged crime.

  96. We remind ourselves that the Appellant before us has not only  herself
      to protect, but also her two young  daughters.  We  find  that  it  is
      reasonably likely that she would be exposed to further risk to herself
      in efforts  to  protect  them  from  sexual  and  other  assaults  and
      harassment, and her efforts to provide for their needs generally.  The
      difficulties that she would face in seeking  to  provide  shelter  and
      food and clothing, for herself and her children, all of  which  affect
      her ability to protect them and herself  from  serious  harm  such  as
      sexual assault, and forced marriage, must not be  underestimated.   It
      follows that the Appellant's two daughters are themselves  exposed  to
      similar risks and that as they approach puberty, they too may face the
      risk of forced marriage. The Appellant faces the  task  of  trying  to
      protect them from that fate as well as the other forms of harm already
      referred to. We remind ourselves that neither serious  sexual  assault
      nor forced marriage have been placed on the statute book  as  criminal
      offences and that the Appellant  would not even have  a  mechanism  by
      which to seek redress for herself or her daughters in the  event  that
      they or any of them should experience such serious harm.


  97. We also note that her mental health has  been  seriously  compromised.
      The evidence shows that she was suffering from  chronic  PTSD  at  the
      time of the hearing before the Adjudicator. She was  found  to  be  in
      need of treatment in the form of medication and / or  psychologically,
      which would probably not be available in Afghanistan. Dr McKee was  of
      the expert opinion that it may require a significant amount of time to
      achieve improvement. As indicated, there is no  up  to  date  evidence
      before us in relation to  the  Appellant's  mental  health,  but  even
      supposing that she has by now achieved the improvement anticipated  by
      Dr McKee, she must nevertheless be regarded  as  an  individual  whose
      mental health is not robust, because of the series of traumatic events
      that she experienced in  the  past  in  Afghanistan.  Her  compromised
      mental health is a further factor  to  be  taken  into  consideration,
      which increases the difficulties faced by her, on return to Kabul, and
      which renders her less able than a woman who is  not  recovering  from
      PTSD, to withstand the demands of daily life in Kabul city, in seeking
      to protect herself and her children.


  98. It was submitted by Mr Vokes  and  accepted  by  Mr  Morris  that  the
      Appellant needed a protective support network in order to be  able  to
      live in Kabul in safety and dignity (Mrs Roosevelt, USA 4UNGAOR (264th
      plen,mtg.) at 473, December 2, 1949), and that the Appellant  did  not
      have such a network. Dr Lau refers to accounts given to him  by  women
      during his visits to  Afghanistan  indicating  that  many  women  will
      eventually agree to a marriage just in order to gain  male  protection
      even if this does not accord with their desires. Whilst it may be  the
      case that this Appellant would be  able  to  re-establish  herself  in
      Kabul with her two young daughters, and find work again as a  teacher,
      if she had the protection of a husband, she should not be expected  to
      find a man and marry, in Kabul.

  99. In the light of all the  circumstances  we  have  referred  to  above,
      viewed cumulatively, it is, we find, unreasonable, within the  meaning
      given to that term by the court in the case of  Robinson,  to  require
      her to return to Kabul city.

   Summary


 100. For all the foregoing reasons, we disagree  with  the  Adjudicator  in
      that we find that the Appellant has shown that she had in the past and
      continues to have to day, a well-founded fear of persecution in Takhar
      and elsewhere in Afghanistan outside  Kabul  city,  at  the  hands  of
      warlords and their militia of the Jamiat-e-Islami,  against  whom  the
      authorities of the ATIA did not and will  not  protect  her.  She  has
      shown that her claim is grounded in one of the reasons  adumbrated  in
      Article 1 A2 of the Refugee Convention, namely, her  membership  of  a
      particular social group. That group is "women in Afghanistan."


 101. We find that the Appellant  has  not  shown  that  her  fear  of  that
      persecution for the reasons given, is well-founded to day, should  she
      return to Kabul city. In order to be recognized as a refugee  it  must
      be shown that there is no part of Afghanistan to which  the  Appellant
      could go where she could live without such a well-founded fear. We  do
      find, however, that the evidence before us, viewed  in  its  totality,
      shows, for all the reasons given, that it would be  unreasonable,  and
      unduly harsh, to require this Appellant to go to Kabul  city.   It  is
      not to be regarded as an alternative  place  of  safety  for  her.  We
      disagree with the Adjudicator in this respect also. The Appellant  has
      therefore made good her claim and we find that she is a refugee.

 102. We report  this  decision  given  our  findings  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's membership of a particular social group. It  is  important
      to note that the finding that women in Afghanistan  are  a  particular
      social group is based on the situation in that country as it  now  is,
      in its state of transition, and upon the intensity and nature  of  the
      discrimination faced  by  women  at  this  point  in  history.  It  is
      possible, and we look  forward  to  that  time,  that  there  will  be
      material, durable change for the better, not only for  women  but  for
      all the people of Afghanistan. It is also important to note  that  the
      facts of the Appellant's case which are personal to her are just that,
      and that each case is to be considered on its facts, and  those  facts
      applied to the relevant law at the time in question.

 103. For all the foregoing reasons Appellant's appeal is allowed.








Catriona Jarvis
Vice President
