
H-TW-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 28 July 2004            |        |                            |
|Prepared                   |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|DM (Kosovo - Lesbians - Sufficiency of Protection.) Serbia and    |
|Montenegro [2004] UKIAT 00288                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........12/08/2004..........                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr R Chalkley - Vice President                                    |
|Mr N H Goldstein - Vice President                                 |
|Ms V S Street                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr R Arkhurst, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo)  has  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Tribunal against the decision of an
    Adjudicator (Mrs Manjit K Obhi) who, in a Determination promulgated  on
    2 January 2004 dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

2.    The parties' representatives agreed with us that the sole  issue  for
    the Tribunal's consideration was whether or not, in the  light  of  the
    Adjudicator's positive  findings  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  state
    protection available to the Appellant in Kosovo.

3.    In that  regard  the  Adjudicator  having  considered  the  objective
    evidence made the following findings:

    (i)    The Adjudicator was "in no doubt" that there was  discrimination
         directed at women in Kosovo.


    (ii)   The Adjudicator accepted that as  an  homosexual  the  Appellant
         belonged to a particular social group.


    (iii)  The Adjudicator  found  there  to  be  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood  that  the  Appellant  "may  suffer   an   element   of
         discrimination and harassment".


    (iv)   That because the state laws provided a sufficiency of protection
         against the actions of individuals who might pose a threat to  the
         Appellant,  "the  only  obstacle  is  her  taking  the   step   of
         complaining to the authorities and I accept that to do so  may  be
         difficult, but the facility to do so exists".


4.    The Tribunal had before them the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567.

5.    We have decided to dismiss the appeal.

6.    We begin by reference to the Court of Appeal decision in Skenderaj.

7.    The Court observed that Lord Clyde had pointed out in  Horvath,  that
    there were two alternative parts of the lack of protection limb of  the
    definition of a refugee and that each case had to be considered on  its
    own facts.  Satisfaction of either alternative would meet it.

8.    The first alternative was an Appellant's inability to  avail  herself
    of state protection which might be  because  it  was  non  existent  or
    insufficient or it might be because she  was  in  some  way  personally
    disabled from seeking it.

9.    The second limb was her unwillingness to avail herself of it  because
    of fear of persecution for a Convention reason.  Such fear had to be  a
    well-founded fear of persecution and not just  an  expectation  however
    well founded that the police could not or would not do  anything  about
    it.

10.   Lord Justice J Auld in Skenderaj continued as follows:

      "Thus, if the state cannot or  will  not  provide  a  sufficiency  of
         protection if sought, the failure to seek it is irrelevant.   That
         is so whether the failure results  from  fear  of  persecution  or
         simply an acceptance that to do so would be futile.


      ... the sufficiency of protection has  to  be  measured  against  the
         practical limitations of a state  to  protect  its  citizens  from
         violence or threats of violence to which it is not alerted and its
         protection is deliberately not sought.  To stigmatise a  state  so
         hampered as providing insufficient protection would wrongly impose
         on it a duty of guarantee.  Effective policing depends heavily  on
         policing by consent.  If the state can provide  a  sufficiency  of
         protection which the appellant is not disabled  from  seeking,  he
         can only rely on his unwillingness to do so, if it  flows  from  a
         well-founded  fear  of  persecution,   e.g.   collusion   of   the
         authorities with his persecutors... in effect an insufficiency  of
         protection rendering him unable to avail himself of it".


11.   Lord Hope in Horvath stated:

      "The standard to be applied is therefore not  that  which  eliminates
         all risk and would thus amount to a guarantee of protection in the
         home state.  Rather it is a practical standard which takes  proper
         account  of  the  duty  which  the  state  owes  to  all  its  own
         nationals".



12.   It is with such guidance in mind, that we consider the  circumstances
    of this Appellant as indeed found by the Adjudicator.

13.   She came to the United Kingdom with her husband and children in  1998
    claiming asylum as his dependant.  She then separated from her  husband
    and began living with [          ] from 21 May 2001.

14.   The Appellant returned to Kosovo on 31 May 2003 as described  by  the
    Adjudicator:

      ".. realising that her claim for asylum  on  the  grounds  previously
         claimed was unlikely to succeed on appeal.  She says that she  and
         her daughters attempted to  settle  in  Kosovo  but  faced  severe
         discrimination on the grounds of  her  sexuality.   She  quotes  a
         number of examples of this, but in particular her market stall was
         vandalised, a stone was thrown at her window, causing her daughter
         to cut herself on the broken glass and she was generally subjected
         to name calling and ridicule.  The aim had been for her partner to
         join her there but she advises [            ] against  that.   She
         returned to the United Kingdom fearing that she would be attacked,
         physically or sexually, or  possibly  killed  as  a  result.   She
         claims this amounts to persecution because she  has  no  effective
         source of  protection.  She  believes  that  to  complain  to  the
         authorities would mark her out further and  that  the  police  are
         made up of Kosovans with traditional values  that  would  pay  lip
         service to the aims of UNMIK but will continue to abuse homosexual
         individuals".


      We have referred above to the Adjudicator's findings in  relation  to
    that account and her conclusion that a sufficiency  of  protection  was
    available to the Appellant.

15.   In this regard the Adjudicator had conducted a careful examination of
    the objective material.   She was mindful of reports of:

      "Kosovo's antipathy towards gays by  looking  to  the  Code  of  Leka
         Dukagjini, the law that has guided Albanian clans since  the  15th
         century.   Although  the  code  makes   no   direct   mention   of
         homosexuals, it heavily emphasises masculine honour.  To this  day
         men who deviate from their customary role as husbands and  fathers
         are accused of bringing shame and stigma upon the entire family if
         not the clan".


16.   The Adjudicator was "in no doubt there is discrimination directed  at
    women as well but believe that it is probably not to the same level  of
    severity as that directed at men.  There is no reference to any similar
    attitude towards women" (Our emphasis).

17.   The Adjudicator took account of the material within  the  Appellant's
    bundle and the  October  2003  CIPU  Report  and  noted  the  following
    extract:

      "UNMIK Regulations prohibit discrimination on  the  basis  of  sexual
         orientation.   Until  September  2002  there  were   no   recorded
         incidents of violence directed against homosexuals during the time
         since UNMIK has been in authority in the province.   In  September
         2002, an article was  published  in  the  newspaper  Epoka  E  Re,
         raising homosexuality as 'dangerous ways and behaviour brought  by
         the foreigners' which purportedly stirred up traditional  societal
         homophobic prejudice.  The article was implicated in a  subsequent
         attack on three members of the Kosovo gay and lesbian association,
         according to an IWPR article published in May 2000."


18.   The Adjudicator continued, that based on this objective  information,
    she found there to be  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant might suffer an element  of  discrimination  and  harassment.
    The Adjudicator continued:

      "However, I am also satisfied that if she approaches the  authorities
         that she will be offered protection.  I also  note  that  she  has
         left her daughters in the country and believe that she  would  not
         have done so, had the situation been so severe as to place them in
         danger.  I also believe that being aware of the  attitude  of  her
         fellow Albanians towards homosexual relationships it  is  unlikely
         that she would have made her sexuality known to her community.

      I conclude that the Appellant does not have a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  because  the  state  laws  provide   sufficiency   of
         protection against the actions  of  individuals  who  may  pose  a
         threat to her.  The only  obstacle  is  her  taking  the  step  of
         complaining to the authorities and I accept that to do so  may  be
         difficult "but the facility to do so exists" (our emphasis).

19.   It was particularly significant  that  Mr  Arkhurst  in  opening  his
    submissions to us accepted that  the  objective  evidence  pointing  to
    discrimination, in particular lack of state protection for homosexuals,
    notably lesbians in Kosovo was "not overwhelming".  Indeed Mr  Arkhurst
    could only but rely on a passage in the CIPU Country  Report  of  April
    2004 at paragraph S6.96 that states as follows:

      "Homosexuality is not mentioned in any law or in the Constitution  of
         Serbia except where the  age  of  consent  is  concerned  (18  for
         homosexuals and 14 for heterosexuals).  Despite  this,  there  was
         widespread discrimination under the previous regime.  There is  no
         clear   evidence   of   this   continuing   under   the    current
         administration,  although  a   1998   survey   reported   by   the
         International Lesbian and Gay Association indicated that there  is
         a high level of homophobia in Serbian society" (Our emphasis).


20.   It was noteworthy that Mr  Arkhurst  accepted  that  the  passage  in
    itself did not particularly assist his cause and  that  to  the  extent
    that reference was made to "a high level of homophobia" it related to a
    past situation in terms of Serbian society.  Mr Arkhurst  realistically
    accepted that in present  day  Kosovo,  Serbians  were  in  a  distinct
    minority.

21.   Notably, Mr Arkhurst continued:

      "I cannot point to anything  concrete  or  any  evidence  that  would
         demonstrate that if the Appellant wanted to go to the  police  for
         help,  they  would  not  discuss  it   because   of   her   sexual
         orientation".


    Mr Arkhurst continued:


      "I accept there is no evidence to support a lack of protection merely
         because of sexual orientation".


  22. Mr Arkhurst explained that  he  could  only  rely  on  the  objective
      material that revealed,  "given the conservative society, it  can  be
      inferred that the authorities are more likely not to assist someone".




  23. It was noteworthy that at this point in his  submission  Mr  Arkhurst
      suggested that the Tribunal might consider remitting this appeal back
      to the Adjudicator to deal more fully with the  issue  of  protection
      but was unable to raise any clear argument to persuade  us  this  was
      not a matter that the Tribunal could not consider for themselves.

  24. When we asked Mr Arkhurst for the avoidance of any doubt, if he could
      refer  us  to  any  other  objective  material  which  supported  his
      contentions as to a lack of sufficiency of protection for homosexuals
      and notably lesbians in Kosovo, he accepted that  there  was  nothing
      further to which he could point to other than the passage in the CIPU
      to which we have above referred.

  25. In the circumstances we did not consider it necessary to  trouble  Mr
      Saville.



26.   Upon our own consideration of the  objective  material  there  is  no
    evidence to show that the laws relating to homosexuality as they  stood
    prior to March 1989 have been applied in any way. There is no  evidence
    of criminal prosecutions against homosexuals.

27.   The UNMIK regulations explicitly recognise the European Convention on
    Human Rights as applicable to Kosovo.

28.   Whilst the report from the International Lesbian and Gay  Association
    above referred, shows some discrimination,  it  does  not  establish  a
    reasonable likelihood of a  level  of  risk  which  would  entitle  the
    Appellant to succeed on Refugee Convention or Human Rights grounds.

29.   It follows on the evidence that the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  were
    properly open to her and we agree with those conclusions.

30.   The appeal is therefore dismissed.



            N H GOLDSTEIN
Approved for electronic distribution.   VICE PRESIDENT
