
ar               AM (Use of Sharif name) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 00110




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing: 22 April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 18 May 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)
                               Mrs L Freestone




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant: Mr J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr S.Winter, Counsel, instructed  by  Hamilton  Burns  &
Co.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals the determination of Mr J.G. Macdonald,
      who allowed the appeal of a citizen of Somalia  (hereinafter  referred
      to as the claimant) from the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
      refuse his application for asylum.


2.    The only issue before the Adjudicator was whether or not the  claimant
      was from the minority Ashraf clan in Somalia.  If  that  was  accepted
      then the appeal should succeed.  The issue in the appeal concerns  the
      use of the title Sharif. In this case the title was not  indicated  by
      the appellant during the course of his interview with the Home Office.
       While the point did not feature in the letter dated 3  October  2002,
      giving reasons for refusing the claimant's application for asylum, the
      appellant was cross-examined on the matter before the Adjudicator.

3.    Mr Gulvin, before opening his submissions, drew our attention  to  the
      fact that the claimant had dependants who, at least at some stage, had
      been represented by  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service.   Mr  Winter
      stated he was instructed by the claimant and not by any other  person.
      It  appears  to  us  that  the  claimant's  children  appear  only  as
      dependants in these proceedings. The outcome of the claimant's  appeal
      determines the position of his dependants.

4.    Mr Gulvin submitted that the issue in the appeal  was  a  narrow  one.
      The claimant had never used the name Sharif at any stage of the asylum
      process and the omission was significant in the view of the  Secretary
      of State.  Mr Gulvin referred to the  report  on  minority  groups  in
      Somalia. The report was compiled by a Joint British, Danish and  Dutch
      Fact Finding Mission to Kenya  in  September  2000.   The  report  was
      finalised on 24 November 2000.    It  is  often  referred  to  as  the
      Minority Report. Although the report is a lengthy  one  we  were  only
      referred to the following  extract  at  page  164  of  the  claimant's
      bundle:

             'The Ashraf elders trace their origin to the Prophet Mohammed,
             whose daughter Fatima had two sons with Ali, named Hassan  and
             Hussein.  Any member of the Ashraf community belongs to one of
             these two lines of descent, from Hassan or  Hussein,  and  any
             Ashraf (both females and males from the age of two) is able to
             identify her or himself as  belonging  to  one  of  these  two
             lines. The Prophet Mohammed conferred the title "Sharif"  upon
             Hassan and Hussein. Since that  time,  all  their  descendants
             have the name Sharif as part  of  their  name,  added  to  the
             personal   name   and   the   father's   and   sometimes   the
             grandfather's, name. From this comes the name  of  the  group,
             Ashraf being the plural of Sharif.  Ali had children by  other
             wives after the death of Fatima, but they were not "Sharif".'

5.    Mr Gulvin stated that the  Adjudicator  had  wrongly  found  that  the
      claimant's explanation why the name Sharif did not appear in his  name
      was not contradicted by the objective evidence.  Mr  Gulvin  submitted
      that if the claimant was Ashraf he would have used that  title  during
      the course of the asylum process.

6.    Mr Gulvin referred to a report that had been lodged  by  the  claimant
      after the Adjudicator hearing on 9 February 2004 prepared by Dr Martin
      Orwin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. It may be helpful
      if we set out this report in full:

             'The word ashraf is of Arabic origin and is the plural of  the
             word sharif, meaning "distinguished, high  born,  celebrated".
             The word is also used as a  title  by  people  throughout  the
             Muslim world who trace their descent to two grandsons  of  the
             Prophet Mohammed, Hussein and Hassan, both of whom  were  sons
             of the Prophet's daughter Fatima.  Among the Somalis there are
             certain lineages  which  claim  this  descent  and  hence  are
             referred to as Ashraf. Of the two  major  branches  of  Ashraf
             lineages, the  Hussein  branch  lives  in  the  towns  of  the
             southern coast of Somalia and  forms  part  of  the  group  of
             communities referred to as  the Benaadiri. The smaller  Hassan
             branch lives mainly inland particularly, around  the  town  of
             Baydhabo. Having said this, it must be  borne  in  mind  that,
             given the upheavals of the last fifteen  years  or  so,  there
             have been great movements  of  people,  particularly  of  such
             minority lineages who have suffered persecution.


             With regard to naming, the  members  of  the  Ashraf  lineages
             follow the same practice as other mainstream Somali  lineages.
             When an individual is born they are given their own name.  The
             rest of their name then  consists  of  their  lineage  on  the
             father's side. So a man with the name Mahmoud  Ali  Saeed  was
             given the name Mahmoud on his birth, his father was called Ali
             and his grandfather was called Saeed.  The majority of Somalis
             will then also be able to continue the chain  of  names  right
             back to eponymous lineage founders, although for  day  to  day
             use they generally only go back to  grandfather.     The  same
             also holds for women: Jawahir Cilmi Rooble has her  own  name,
             Jawahir, her father's name was  Cilmi  and  her  grandfather's
             Rooble.    She too would be able to recite the lineage.  Women
             do not  change  their  names  or  their  lineage  identity  on
             marrying.


             Among the Ashraf this name practice is also followed. However,
             since members of this lineage hold the honour of descent  from
             the Prophet, they use the title Sharif along with their  name.
             So a man born into an Ashraf lineage, who is  given  the  name
             Mohammed, may refer to himself as Sharif Mohammed, followed by
             the names of his father and grandfather to which Sharif may or
             may not be added.  It must be born in mind that Sharif is  not
             a proper  name,  but  a  title,  indicating  the  individual's
             descent from the Prophet as explained above.  The use  of  the
             title Sharif varies. Firstly, as far as I understand it, it is
             only men who may use the title. Secondly,  the  title  is  not
             always used.  This seems particularly to be the case among the
             younger generations who will simply use their  personal  names
             in the manner mentioned above.   The fact that a man does  not
             use the title Sharif in his personal name does not necessarily
             indicate that he is not from  an  Ashraf  lineage.   In  other
             words, a man who does not use the title  Sharif  in  his  name
             could still be a member of an Ashraf lineage.  If asked, a man
             from an Ashraf lineage would generally state that he could use
             the title Sharif even though he does not use  it  on  a  daily
             basis. It is likely that someone from an Ashraf  lineage,  who
             is asked to recite his full lineage, would include  the  names
             with the title Sharif for some of his ancestors,  even  though
             he does not use it for his own  name,  his  father's  and  his
             grandfather's names.'

7.    Mr Gulvin submitted notwithstanding this report it  was  inconceivable
      that the claimant would not have used his name at some  stage  of  the
      asylum  process.  The  Adjudicator  had  been  wrong  to  accept   the
      claimant's explanation without better reasoning.

8.    However, Mr Gulvin added, the  Secretary  of  State  did  accept  that
      Sharif was a title and that the use of the title varied.

9.    Reference was made to  the  Waltham  Forest  Somali  Community  letter
      dated 22 January 2004 confirming that the  claimant  belonged  to  the
      Ashraf clan. Mr Gulvin submitted that this did not take  matters  much
      further. He did not wish to press the other grounds in the grounds  of
      appeal.

10.   Mr Winter submitted that the expert's  report  should  be  taken  into
      account.  There had been another letter from the Waltham Forest Somali
      Community before the Adjudicator. Taking the evidence as a whole,  the
      claimant had demonstrated that he was from the Ashraf clan and he  had
      displayed a good knowledge about the clan during his interview.

11.   In reply Mr Gulvin accepted that the claimant had not  been  asked  at
      interview questions relating to the use of the title Sharif.

12.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      In the refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  disputed  that  the
      claimant was  Somali  at  all.   Paragraph  72  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination reads as follows:

             'I have no difficulty in deciding that the appellant was  from
             Somalia and [the Home Office Presenting Officer] made it clear
             at the hearing that this particular part  of  the  appellant's
             claim was not challenged.   In  his  interview  the  appellant
             named all thirteen districts in Mogadishu. I am satisfied that
             he is a Somalian who lives in Mogadishu.'

13.   The Adjudicator then explored the  only  issue  in  the  case  -  i.e.
      whether or not the claimant was from the minority Ashraf clan.  If  he
      was, it was conceded that there was a real risk  that  he  would  face
      persecution  in  the  future  as  he  had  done  in  the   past.   The
      Adjudicator's determination concluded as follows:

            '74. The appellant says he was a storekeeper in Mogadishu.


            75.  The Benadiri  work  primarily  in  commercial  occupations
                 including business.


            76.  I conclude from the fact that the appellant claims to have
                 been a storekeeper  that  this  is  consistent  with  being
                 Benadiri even if he worked  for  someone  who  was  from  a
                 majority clan.


            77.  As mentioned in answer 20 the appellant named all thirteen
                 districts in Mogadishu.


            78.  At a later stage in the interview commencing  at  question
                 59 he gives more detail about the clans  and  explain  that
                 Ashraf is part of the Benadiri. He explains that  his  clan
                 is descended from the prophet Hassan.


            79.  He did not know the answer to question 64 or  question  67
                 but still provided considerable information about the clans
                 and festivals. Those answers were  not  challenged  in  the
                 refusal letter and  I  therefore  take  it  that  they  are
                 correct.


            80.  All the information provided by the appellant suggests  to
                 me that he is, as he claims, from a minority clan.


            81.  In his oral evidence he gave full answers to the questions
                 he was asked.


            82.  In particular his explanation why the  name  "Sharif"  did
                 not appear in his name does not appear to be to be directly
                 contradicted by the objective evidence. The  appellant  did
                 not say that he did not have the name Sharif.


            83.  He explained, in plausible terms, why the attempt to  rape
                 his wife was not successful.


            84.  He explained why he was able to sell  the  house.  It  was
                 understandable that in paragraph  8 of the  refusal  letter
                 that the Secretary of State was sceptical  about  this  but
                 the appellant's explanation that the buyer was a  good  man
                 and that the price arranged was about half the value of the
                 true price appears to me to be plausible.


            85.  While it might have been  expected  that  the  appellant's
                 wife would give evidence to  supply  corroboration  of  the
                 fact that the appellant is  from  a  minority  clan  I  am,
                 nevertheless,  satisfied  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
                 appellant.  I  conclude  that  his  evidence  is   entirely
                 consistent and consistent with the objective evidence.


            86.  I consider there  is  therefore  a  reasonable  degree  of
                 likelihood that he is from the Ashraf minority clan  as  he
                 claims.'

14.   The claimant's evidence in cross-examination is recorded in  paragraph
      32 of the determination as follows:

             'In cross-examination he said that all the incidents that  had
             occurred to him were because he was a  member  of  a  minority
             Ashraf clan. He was descended from  the  Hassan  side  of  the
             clan. With reference to Country Information (page 139  of  the
             respondent's bundle) that all the descendants  of  Hassan  had
             "Sharif" in their name, the appellant said that this was not a
             name given to a child when the child was born. It was  a  name
             that society conferred upon you. As such Sharif  was  included
             in his name.  It was the name of his father.   But he did  not
             use the name Sharif in his name.'

15.   Mr Gulvin's essential submission is  that  it  is  remarkable  that  a
      person claiming asylum would not use the name or title  Sharif  during
      the course of the interview process. He accepted that the claimant had
      not been asked questions probing this issue, but the claimant had,  he
      pointed out, been invited to state his full name at the start  of  the
      interview as well as any other names.  However, bearing in  mind  that
      Sharif is a title rather than a name, it is not perhaps surprising  if
      it does not feature.  More difficult questions might  arise  where  an
      interviewer  asks  the  claimant  whether  he,  his  father   or   his
      grandfather had any other names  or  titles.  However,  as  Mr  Gulvin
      accepts, the issue was not explored in any other way at the claimant's
      interview.   It is also to be remarked that the point was  not  raised
      in the refusal letter although it was dealt with  at  the  hearing  in
      cross-examination.

16.   Once it is accepted that Sharif is a title and that  the  use  of  the
      title varies then it cannot be right in our view to treat the lack  of
      the use of the title  at  interview  as  of  itself  determinative  of
      ethnicity.  The use of the title varies, according to  Dr  Orwin,  and
      the younger generation simply use their personal names.  The  claimant
      before us was born in October 1971.

17.   The Adjudicator did not have the benefit of the expert's report.   The
      claimant's explanation is consonant with the opinion of Dr Orwin.

18.   The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from the claimant and  appears  to
      have explored the issues before him satisfactorily.  He noted that the
      claimant had displayed significant knowledge of Ashraf related matters
      at interview and had  answered  most  of  the  questions  put  to  him
      adequately.  Although paragraph 82 of the  determination  is  somewhat
      short, it does appear to us  that  the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
      accept the claimant's explanation. We reject  Mr  Gulvin's  submission
      that the lack of reference to the title during the asylum process is a
      feature which ought to have led to the appeal being dealt  with  in  a
      different way. We note, as we have said before, that the objection did
      not feature in the refusal letter.  If the point was  a  determinative
      one, then one would have expected to see a reference to it  there.  In
      the refusal letter  the  Secretary  of  State  acknowledges  that  the
      claimant was able to provide some  information  regarding  the  Ashraf
      clan but he  was  not  satisfied  that  this  outweighed  the  general
      implausibility of the claimant's story.

19.   We feel that the Adjudicator adopted  the  correct  approach  in  this
      case, and looked at all the evidence in the round. We need only say  a
      few words of general guidance in all the circumstances of  this  case,
      the issues being so narrow.

20.   Firstly, the absence of a reference to the  title  Sharif  during  the
      asylum process will not necessarily be determinative one  way  or  the
      other. That is partly because it is a title and not a name and  partly
      because the usage of the title varies. However,  in  a  case  where  a
      claimant is asked about the matter and is ignorant of the usage of the
      title, that may well have a bearing on the outcome.  Let us  take  the
      example of a claimant who is asked at interview  whether  he  has  any
      other names or titles and who replies in the negative and who, when he
      is further asked about any other  names  or  titles  for  his  father,
      grandfather or more distant ancestors, again replies in the  negative.
      In such a case his negative answers may  well  pose  difficulties  for
      him. On the  other  hand,  particularly  in  the  case  of  a  younger
      claimant, an explanation of the type provided by the claimant in  this
      case may - and it will depend upon the  circumstances  -  persuade  an
      Adjudicator that the claimant is Ashraf as claimed.  The matter  needs
      to be looked at in the round. The Adjudicator will need to examine the
      credibility of the claimant's  account  generally  together  with  the
      claimant's performance at interview when asked questions  relevant  to
      establishing his true ethnicity.

21.   For the reasons we have given, the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State
      is dismissed.



                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT



6 May 2004
-----------------------
      1


