
ar
       FF (Single woman - Illegal exit - Iran) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00191


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of hearing: 21 May 2004
                                                 Date Determination notified
                                                        ...13th July 2004...

                                   Before:

                       Mr D K Allen  (Vice President)
                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                               Mr G F Sandall



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who appeals to  the  Tribunal  with
      permission against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mrs  J.E.
      Nichols,  in which she dismissed her appeal against  the  respondent's
      decision of 1 December 2000 issuing directions for  her  removal  from
      the United Kingdom and refusing asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 21 May 2004.   Mr R.  Khubber  for
      Switalski's solicitors appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr  M.
      Blundell appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    This appeal has a somewhat complicated  history.   Mrs  Nichols  heard
      the appeal in  February  2001  and,  finding  the  appellant  to  lack
      credibility, dismissed her appeal and also  upheld  the  Secretary  of
      State's certification of the claim under paragraph 9(6)(c) of Schedule
      4 to the Immigration Act 1999.   The appellant was apparently  granted
      permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  with  regard  to  the
      certification issue.  The outcome of this was  that the  human  rights
      issues remained before the Tribunal and permission was granted by  the
      Tribunal. The grounds for leave to appeal in  that  regard  noted  the
      Adjudicator's rejection of the applicant's credibility and went on  to
      contend that even if her findings on credibility were correct, she was
      in error with regard to her findings on the Human  Rights  Convention.
      This was premised, as set out at paragraph 2.1 and thereafter in those
       grounds of appeal, on the basis that she would return  as an  Iranian
      woman who had left the country illegally, or as somebody who  did  not
      prescribe to the Hijab (modest dress code)   and  that  she  would  be
      questioned as to the reasons for her departure from Iran and there was
      a real possibility that she would be discovered to be a failed  asylum
      seeker.  These three points were amplified thereafter in  the  grounds
      of appeal.  Initially the Tribunal refused to consider an  application
      for leave to appeal but that refusal was quashed by Order of the  High
      Court and permission was subsequently granted by the Deputy  President
      on 4 June 2003.

4.    The appeal came before Mr Rapinet and Mr Thursby on 21 November  2003.
       It became necessary to adjourn as further evidence had  been  put  in
      later and the Home Office had had no opportunity to consider it.    Mr
      Rapinet's record of proceedings notes that he had  made  it  clear  to
      counsel who was Mr Khubber  then as now, that the appeal  was  limited
      to human rights issues and  to  the  extent  that  it  was  sought  to
      overturn the Adjudicator's findings of fact and was  not  prepared  to
      consider such submissions.  It seems that at that time there  was  put
      before Mr Rapinet  a  document  headed  'Outline  Submissions  of  the
      appellant' which essentially  reiterates  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
      respect of which permission has been granted and  also  raises  issues
      concerning credibility.  As we say, Mr Rapinet  was  not  prepared  to
      entertain these points. We also note that at no stage was a  variation
      of the  grounds  of  appeal  sought  but  rather  that  the  issue  of
      credibility was raised in the outline submissions before the  Tribunal
      on that date.

5.    The  matter  was  listed  for  hearing  before  us  on  21  May  2004.
      Additional grounds of appeal dated 17 May 2004  were  provided  by  Mr
      Khubber in which for the first time he formally  sought  to  vary  his
      grounds so as to include a challenge to the Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings.

6.    Before us, Mr Khubber argued that the original  grounds  were  drafted
      when the other proceedings were ongoing and awaiting  resolution.   He
      referred to the expert report of Ms Enayat which had been put in  with
      the grounds which  dealt  with  the  Adjudicator's  points  concerning
      credibility.  He argued that the critical point of relevance was  that
      the appellant argued that the Adjudicator's  findings  on  asylum  and
      human rights were significantly undermined by her appreciation of  the
      evidence.   It was clear from the nature of the original  grounds  and
      the context of the report that it was relevant  to  these  issues  and
      should be considered.  He drew our attention to the recent decision of
      the Court of Appeal in E and R [2003] EWCA Civ 49, where the issue  of
      relevant evidence was not being ignored if it was only raised  in  the
      Court of Appeal.  He accepted that evidence had not been  specifically
      referred to in the grounds of appeal but argued that it  was  now  and
      that it was an issue of fairness.    It was  not  a  matter  of  fresh
      evidence but of fresh grounds.  The Adjudicator had relied  mainly  on
      the Country Assessment concerning the appellant's  circumstances.   He
      also referred us to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Haile
      [2001] EWCA Civ 663 concerning fresh evidence.

7.    Mr Blundell noted that the challenge  to  credibility  had  been  made
      just four days previously. It had been made clear by Mr  Rapinet  that
      credibility    points  would  not  be  entertained  by  a   subsequent
      tribunal. While it might be  the  case  that  the  expert  report  was
      annexed to the original grounds, there was no explicit mention of  the
      challenge to credibility then and the Tribunal  was  entitled  to  act
      upon the premise that those findings were correct.  It was  very  late
      to pursue the matter now on the basis of evidence that had existed for
      two years. He also argued, with reference to the decision of the Court
      of Appeal in the instant case [2002] EWCA Civ 1535 that  the  findings
      could have been challenged at that stage also. Mr Blundell  also  made
      the point that the  outline  submissions  which  contained  the  first
      challenge  to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  and   the   only   formal
      application before the Tribunal had arrived  four  days  ago  and  was
      grossly inadequate in providing no detail at all as to the  nature  of
      the challenge  and  this  was  sufficient  by  itself  to  justify  in
      rejecting  variation.   The  outline  submission  was  not  a   formal
      application to vary the grounds and  even  if  sustainable  it  was  a
      challenge to  but  one  facet  of  a  number  of  adverse  credibility
      findings. On the basis as in E and R i.e.  whether  the  new  evidence
      would make any difference to the Adjudicator's findings,  Mr  Blundell
      argued that it still did not go near affecting the cumulative  effects
      of the Adjudicator's credibility findings and the  only  challenge  to
      her other findings was the general challenge of 17 May 2004.

8.    By way of reply, Mr Khubber  argued  that  Mr  Blundell's  submissions
      were essentially  artificial,  and  it  was  not  a  matter  of  fresh
      evidence.   He  reminded  us  of  the  history  of   the   application
      challenging the Adjudicator's decision which had initially been  ruled
      to be out of time but this had  been  settled  on  a  judicial  review
      application. It was at that stage that the expert report had been  put
      in, and permission had been granted by the Deputy President. That  was
      the history of the document that was with the Tribunal  and  was  also
      with the bundle before Mr Rapinet.

9.    The issue  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been  a  narrow  issue  of
      construction of certification and was not  concerned  with  issues  of
      credibility and the two issues were separate.   The  point  concerning
      credibility had been made at the previous hearing  and  not  initially
      four days before this hearing.  He had told Mr Rapinet  that  he  took
      issue with his conclusions and Mr Rapinet had said that if  that   was
      his view it was up to him whether he raised it again.

10.   It was necessary to see within the global  perspective  taken  by  the
      courts as to whether it was relevant evidence to the  extent  that  it
      should be considered and the relevance was the essential  point.  This
      case was stronger in its circumstances than those in Haile.    It  was
      not   late evidence, but an articulation of the argument  arising  out
      of the evidence and the issues that so arose could not be ignored  and
      it would be unfair if this were done.

11.   As regards the other point raised  in  his  grounds  of  appeal,  that
      concerning the relationship  between  the  human  rights  and  Refugee
      Convention issue in the case, Mr Khubber  accepted  that  this  was  a
      human rights appeal and that the Tribunal was a creature  of  statute,
      but argued that in this case it was  clear  that  the  Article  3  and
      Article 8 aspects overlapped with the asylum issue. It  was  suggested
      that the Tribunal could give guidance as to the impact of its decision
      on the asylum point albeit that that  had  already  been  dealt  with.
      Alternatively, if the appeal were remitted then a fresh claim could be
      made. The matter had been considered in Dube [2003] EWCA Civ 114.

12.   In response to this point Mr Blundell argued that in Dube Simon  Brown
      LJ had gone no further than to say that it would be rather  convenient
      for the Tribunal in such a case if minded  to  allow  a  human  rights
      appeal to be able also to allow  an  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
      asylum, but that was a long way from concluding  that  there  was  any
      real need for such a power.  Paragraph  29  of  Dube  was  clear.  The
      certificate could not be withdrawn after the  Adjudicator  had  upheld
      it.

13.   By way of reply Mr Khubber stated that the situation was delicate  for
      the Tribunal.  It could not say that it could not  hear  the  relevant
      points on the asylum claim. Simon Brown LJ had not said that the issue
      could not be considered by a tribunal. It was implicit  that  the  two
      claims overlapped.

14.   We considered first the question  of  whether  Mr  Khubber  should  be
      permitted to vary his grounds of appeal.   Rule 20 of the  Immigration
      and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003 states as follows:

           '20(1) A party may vary his grounds  of  appeal  only  with  the
                 permission of the Tribunal.

                 (2) Where the Tribunal has refused permission to appeal on
                 any ground, it  must  not  grant  permission  to  vary  the
                 grounds of appeal to  include  that  ground  unless  it  is
                 satisfied that, because of special circumstances, it  would
                 be unjust not to allow the variation.'

15.   As can be seen, the Rule provides no guidance for the exercise of  the
      Tribunal's discretion to grant permission  to  a  party  to  vary  his
      grounds of appeal save in  the  circumstances  of  sub-paragraph  (2),
      which  is not the issue before us, since the Tribunal did  not  refuse
      permission to appeal the credibility findings as  there  was  no  such
      application before it.

16.   In considering this issue we bear in mind the overriding objective  of
      the Rules, as described in paragraph 4 of those Rules  to  secure  the
      just, timely and effective disposal of appeals and applications in the
      interests of the parties to the proceedings and in  the  wider  public
      interest.

17.   We stated at the hearing that we did not give  Mr  Khubber  permission
      to vary his grounds of appeal, and though we gave brief  reasons  then
      we said that we would amplify these in a written  determination  which
      we now do.  The original grounds of appeal in this case  are  dated  4
      April 2002.  Those grounds clearly acknowledge the  rejection  by  the
      Adjudicator of the applicant's credibility and there is  no  challenge
      to those findings in those grounds, as we have  stated  above.  Though
      there was a sense in which, as Mr  Khubber  contended,  those  grounds
      were holding grounds since at the time concentration was being focused
      on the certification issue which  ultimately  went  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal, there is a degree of detail in those  grounds  concerning  the
      claimed risk on return to Iran for the applicant, as she was then,  on
      the basis of having left the country  illegally,  being  somebody  who
      does not subscribe to the Hijab and being at risk of being found to be
       a failed asylum seeker.  The  opportunity  clearly  existed  for  the
      credibility findings to be challenged.  As it is, anything that  could
      be at all regarded as a challenge to those findings is not to be found
      until the outline submissions that  were  before  Mr  Rapinet  at  the
      hearing on 21 November 2003 and which  are  dated  20  November  2003.
      Clearly those arguments would have been  likely  to  have  placed  the
      Presenting Officer at that hearing in some  difficulty,  and  we  have
      already quoted Mr Rapinet's record of proceedings in this regard.   He
      made  it  entirely  clear  that  he  was  not  prepared  to   consider
      submissions seeking to  overturn the Adjudicator's findings  of  fact.
      The challenge in that regard, referring  as  it  did  to  Ms  Enayat's
      report, argued that the Adjudicator had concentrated on conceding that
      the appellant's account was not believable because her punishment  did
      not accord with the expected punishment she should  have  suffered  as
      set out in the CIPU Report. It does not appear at that stage  to  have
      been an application to vary the grounds of appeal. Without wishing  to
      appear excessively formalistic, we consider that it if it  was  sought
      to vary the grounds at that stage, then it should have been done in  a
      document which purported to do so, and in fact as  we  have  seen,  no
      effort appears  to  have  been  made  to  do  so  until  Mr  Khubber's
      additional grounds of appeal, as they  are  described,  dated  17  May
      2004.  Again, these were provided very soon before the hearing and  it
      is not a matter of irrelevance that again Mr Blundell would have  been
      placed in significant difficulty, we do not doubt, at the hearing  and
      it seems unlikely, though we did not canvass the matter with him, that
      the hearing would have been able to proceed  on  the  day  if  we  had
      granted Mr Khubber's application. That is in no  sense  conclusive  or
      determinative but it is a factor of relevance,  bearing  in  mind  the
      overriding objective of the  Rules  which  we  have  quoted  above  at
      paragraph 16.  We consider that there is also force to the point  made
      by Mr Blundell that in the additional grounds of appeal dated  17  May
      2004 all that is contained in this regard is objective of  the  Rules,
      which we have quoted above, a general challenge to credibility without
      in any sense particularising the nature of that challenge. There is no
      statement in this document that it is to be read in  conjunction  with
      the outline submissions previously rejected by Mr Rapinet.

18.   Mr Khubber has suggested  that  by  analogy  we  should  consider  the
      reasoning of the Court of Appeal in E and R and also  in  Haile.    In
      the latter case the evidence necessary to prove  the  mistake  of  the
      Adjudicator was first produced at the  Court  of  Appeal  although  it
      could and should have been detected by the claimant's advisers  before
      the IAT decision or at least before the judicial  review  hearing.  It
      was nevertheless admitted by the  Court  of  Appeal.  Simon  Brown  LJ
      accepted that under the Ladd v Marshall test it would have  fallen  at
      the first hurdle but did not consider that  these  principles  applied
      strictly to public law and judicial review cases.

19.   This case was considered by the Court of Appeal in E and R. The  court
      did not agree that Ladd v Marshall principles had no place  in  public
      law but rather that  they  were  the  starting  point  but  there  was
      discretion to depart from them in exceptional circumstances  and  that
      Haile had been held to be such a case on its  particular  and  unusual
      facts.

20.   Here we are of course concerned with a fresh issue rather  than  fresh
      evidence.  We remind ourselves of the fact that there  was  no  formal
      application to vary the grounds of appeal before Mr Rapinet  and  that
      such formal variation was sought only four days prior to  the  hearing
      before us.  As we have  noted  also,  the  point  made  to  us  by  Mr
      Blundell,  there  is  but  the  most  generalised  challenge  to   the
      credibility findings   in  the  application  for  variation.   It  may
      perhaps be inferred that one is supposed to read  that  in  connection
      with the outline submissions before Mr Rapinet, though  that  was  not
      done in the additional grounds of appeal document. This is not a  case
      of new evidence but evidence which was submitted at the time when  the
      Deputy President formally granted permission after the judicial review
      proceedings, without his attention being drawn to Ms Enayat's  report.
      It is not trial by ambush, but   it comes sufficiently close to it  to
      be unattractive and again we consider that that is not  an  irrelevant
      factor.

21.   Clearly, our discretion as to whether or not  to  permit  a  party  to
      vary his grounds is not an absolute one. The reasons for the variation
      and the timing of the application for variation and in connection with
      that the implications for the other  party  at  the  hearing  are  all
      factors that must be taken into account, and each case is likely  very
      much to depend upon its own facts.  In this case we  do  not  consider
      that it would be right to allow  the  proposed  variation,  given  the
      opportunity to make the application  for  that  variation  at  a  much
      earlier stage, including a renewed application if it could be said  to
      be renewed, after the  rejection  of  the  outline  submission  by  Mr
      Rapinet, at some time well before the hearing before us.

22.   We also bear in mind the point made by Mr Blundell  by  analogy  to  E
      and R  concerning  whether  any  new  evidence  would  have  made  any
      difference to the Adjudicator's findings.  As we  have  stated  above,
      the outline submissions challenge the Adjudicator's  findings  on  the
      basis that they were flawed because she concluded that the appellant's
      account was not believable because her punishment did not accord  with
      the expected punishment she should have suffered as  set  out  in  the
      CIPU Report. We note in passing that that report has not been shown to
      be flawed, but rather that Ms Enayat disagrees  with  that  particular
      point.  Quite apart from that, it is far from the case, as Mr Blundell
      contended,  that  the  Adjudicator  found  the   appellant   to   lack
      credibility purely because her evidence did not accord with  the  CIPU
      Report.  For example, the Adjudicator noted changes  in  her  evidence
      concerning the dates which she gave,  as  set  out  at  paragraph  22,
      though she did not consider this was  necessarily  weighty  given  the
      other problems with her  credibility.  There  is  also  the  point  at
      paragraph 21 concerning the very late mention of a family  friend  who
      was said to be a major or a  general  whose  existence  had  not  been
      mentioned previously and the explanation for the failure to do so  was
      found to be  implausible  by  the  Adjudicator.   She  also  noted  at
      paragraph 23 that the appellant's explanation as  to  how  the  police
      came to know that  she was engaged  in  a  homosexual  act  completely
      lacked credibility since her claim was that the police might have been
      keeping an eye on her since 1991, and it was  inconceivable  that  the
      police would not have discovered that she had a girlfriend, given  the
      relatively long duration of that relationship.  She also found  it  to
      lack credibility that the police had found out about the visit made by
      her friend to her as this entailed the police keeping a constant watch
      on her.  Also at paragraph 24 the Adjudicator disbelieved the  account
      as to the incident in the  surgery  when  she  claimed  to  have  been
      discovered, given the change in her evidence as to the day of the week
      when that  occurred in relation to the day when the  cleaner  normally
      came and the transformation in her evidence on that point and the fact
      that it had occurred relatively recently. Further, the Adjudicator  at
      paragraph 25 of her determination found it  lacking  credibility  that
      the appellant's uncle would at such a degree of short notice have been
      able to make arrangements for her and her sister to leave and find  an
      agent within a period of about two weeks from the date she claimed  to
      have been arrested. She also found it lacking in credibility that  the
      appellant's girlfriend did not leave for Turkey with her.

23.   Taken  as a whole, therefore, we consider  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      ample reasons to  disbelieve  the  appellant,  quite  apart  from  the
      matters which are specifically challenged in the  outline submissions.
       There is no articulated challenge to those other findings to be found
      anywhere in the appellant's grounds of appeal. It is true that we have
      not heard submissions on the point, but we set these points out as  we
      do in relation to the issue of whether the challenge would  have  made
      any difference in any event and on the face of it we consider that  it
      would not have done so.   That is but part of  our  overall  reasoning
      that has led us to conclude that it would not be a proper exercise  of
      our discretion to permit the grounds of appeal to be  varied  in  this
      case, and we have accordingly refused to do so.

24.   Having made our ruling in this regard, we  went  on  to  consider  the
      further point made by Mr Khubber concerning  the  Refugee  Convention.
      We are quite unable to accept that we have  any  jurisdiction  to  say
      anything on this point at  all.  The  issue  is  not  before  us.  The
      Secretary of State certified the asylum claim as we have  seen,  under
      paragraph 9(6)(c) of Schedule 4 to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999
      (as amended) and the Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal  against  the
      refusal by Keith J on 14 February 2002 to grant judicial review of the
      appellant's  challenge  to  the   Adjudicator's   upholding   of   the
      certificate. As a consequence we have no jurisdiction to come  to  any
      conclusions on the asylum claim and we do not consider that  it  would
      be proper for us to provide any guidance in that respect either.

25.   Thereafter Mr Khubber made the point that the  Adjudicator's  findings
      did not mean that the appellant was  not  a  lesbian,  since  she  had
      concluded that she did not believe  she  had  ever  had  a  homosexual
      relationship with another woman but did not specifically find that she
      was  not a lesbian.

26.   The Tribunal was asked to look at the Article  3  issue  holistically.
      The appellant had left Iran in violation of the exit  regulations  and
      did not conform to the Hijab and was  a  woman  and  cumulatively  she
      would be at risk.   The Tribunal was referred to  Ms  Enayat's  expert
      report from  page 87 onwards concerning the situation of failed asylum
      seekers.

27.   Thereafter we heard evidence from Ms Enayat.  Since 1983 she has  been
      a Senior Associate Member of St Anthony's College Oxford, attached  to
      the Middle East Centre there.  Since 1998 she has been an  independent
      consultant on Iranian affairs and an independent editor  and  producer
      of books on the Middle East.   Iran  appears  to  be  her  speciality.
      Pages 87 onwards of her report are relevant. We were referred  to  the
      penultimate paragraph on page 87 and also to page 88.   We  were  also
      referred to pages 89 and 90.   As regards the consequences for  failed
      asylum seekers, Ms Enayat said that anyone who had left Iran illegally
      and stayed away for quite some time was at risk of  interrogation  and
      carried quite a high risk of torture or maltreatment.  If it was known
      to the authorities that she was a lesbian it  would  carry  additional
      risks.

28.   She was asked whether it would be relevant  if  the  authorities  knew
      that members of her family had escaped from Iran. She said that if the
      family had a political background and perhaps criminal records and had
      asylum  abroad  it  would  add  to  the   authorities'   interest   in
      interrogating her.  There was quite good cumulative evidence over  the
      last two or three years that the Iranian authorities exercised quite a
      lot of surveillance over the exile community  and  this  was  evidence
      that had been available since 2000.  Mr Khubber put to  her  that  the
      appellant's sister has asylum status in the United  Kingdom,  and  the
      appellant said that her other sisters had asylum in Sweden.  Ms Enayat
      said that it depended on the reasons for asylum status, and  it  would
      increase the risk.

29.   We asked Ms Enayat how the authorities would know and  she  said  that
      she would be questioned and also if they had political activities.

30.   Mr Khubber told Ms Enayat that the appellant's sister  in  the  United
      Kingdom had fled because of committing adultery in Iran and asked  her
      whether she saw that as relevant to the appellant.  Ms Enayat did  not
      consider that in itself  to  be  relevant  unless  there  was  a  case
      outstanding against her. She made the point that  married  women  used
      their maiden names for legal matters.

31.   She was asked what would be the risk on return on the  basis  of  what
      she knew and she said that it would be for two reasons that she  might
      face extra scrutiny beyond any other illegal leaver. The first was the
      length of her stay abroad and the  second  was  the  position  of  the
      family.  Another risk factor would be the awareness of the authorities
      if they were aware that she was a lesbian.

32.   She was asked what the appellant's treatment would  be  and  she  said
      that nobody could say anything very specific. There  was  no  concrete
      evidence, but scraps of evidence only. A general assessment  was  very
      difficult  indeed.  The  duration  of  detention   was  impossible  to
      predict.  She could go home and be called to court. She would have  to
      answer challenges of illegal exit.  Being undocumented  and  using  an
      illegal border crossing were both problems.

33.   She was asked what she could say from her knowledge  of  the  relevant
      aspects concerning the appellant as to what the consequences  for  her
      would be.  Ms Enayat said that if the appellant was  a  lesbian,   and
      was interrogated  and  treated  roughly,  as  could  happen  with  the
      security forces, and was accused of being immoral, purely  on  account
      of being abroad as a single woman in  suspicious  circumstances,  then
      she  might  confess  to  her  sexuality  which  would  lead  to  other
      consequences. As to why she would admit, it was very difficult if  one
      were in prison in Iran and there was a high level of rape in prison in
      Iran. It was an unpredictable factor. As she  was  unmarried  she  was
      likely to be more vulnerable. There was a risk of ill-treatment on the
       facts as found. It was not a crime to be a lesbian,  but  it  was  to
      engage in the relevant act. It depended upon the outlook and  attitude
      of the captors.   She could be exposed to extrajudicial  treatment  on
      that basis.

34.   She was asked whether on return,  as  the  appellant  was  an  illegal
      leaver, who did not respect the Hijab, she would be at risk  and  also
      as a single woman.   She said that with regard to the  Hijab,  if  she
      was politically opposed and vocal,  even  quite  small  acts  of  past
      defiance, there was a degree  of  vulnerability.     Not  wearing  the
      Hijab abroad would not be a problem. As a single woman violating  exit
      regulations with a risk of being held in detention for a  while  there
      was a risk of assault and sexual harassment.  Ms Enayat  could not say
      how great the risk was. There was a lot of literature on the  rape  of
      women in prison.  If detained and charged she would have to be brought
      to court as it was very like the French judicial system, if there  was
      a complaint that she had committed an offence  then  the  court  would
      investigate.  The court would be the normal court although the  branch
      of the judiciary sitting at the airport had a reputation, having  been
      assigned specific duties  often  overlapping  with  the  Revolutionary
      Court and the judge there was a well known radical rightist judge.

35.   She was asked whether the appellant would be charged  about  the  exit
      regulation breach only and said that it was likely that it would be  a
      charge about illegal exit but because of the way the  penal  code  was
      drawn up there was a chance of other factors being drawn  in.    Three
      articles of the Code of  Islamic  Punishment  concerned  Iranians  who
      committed crimes  while  abroad,  and  the  third  was  not  specific,
      concerning crimes against the law  of  Iran  and  the  acts  were  not
      specified.

36.   We asked Ms Enayat whether she knew  of  any  cases  where  additional
      charges had been  brought  and  she  said  no,  there  was  so  little
      documentation. She knew of three or four cases over  the  years  where
      the people had returned and been killed and she knew of one person  to
      whom it had occurred in 1988.    There were very scattered cases.  She
      could not  quantify the risk.

37.   When cross-examined by Mr Blundell Ms Enayat said that  she  had  most
      recently reread her report in November 2003.    She  appreciated  that
      the Adjudicator had found that there had been no previous interest  in
      the appellant in Iran.  She was referred to page 7 of her  report  and
      the  final  paragraph.   It  remained  the  case  that  there  was  no
      systematic evidence. As regards what was said  in  the  last  document
      stating that fines only were applied, she criticised this on the basis
      of the age of the report and that the text of  the  Canadian  document
      was unclear and there was  no  documentation  on  the  application  of
      penalties.  She accepted that if there were  an  infringement  it  was
      more likely to come to the attention of the authorities.

38.   She was referred also the second of the two cases referred to at  page
      8 of her report from the Australian paper 'The Age' and she was  asked
      whether she had made any further enquiries about the  criticisms  said
      to have been made by the second person mentioned there of the  Islamic
      regime whilst seeking asylum in Australia. She said that she would not
      be able to find out as they would be tried in camera. She had not made
      any further enquiries.

39.   She was also referred to paragraph 5 of her report at page 7, when  Mr
      Blundell put it to her that there was an omission in the text  of  her
      report from the fuller detail of the documents set out at page  96  in
      that  the  words  'Though  their  arrest  may  have  been  politically
      motivated' had been omitted from the body of her  report.   Ms  Enayat
      said that that was unintentional.  Political  motivation  was  not  of
      great significance. Amnesty International might or might not have  had
      further documentation.

40.   Mr Blundell put to Ms Enayat that the overall question  was  that  she
      did not cite instances of failed asylum seekers being physically  ill-
      treated.  Ms Enayat agreed with  that  and  said  that  there  was  no
      information, but nor was  there any that there was a lack of problems.
      She had made quite extensive enquiries.

41.   On re-examination Mr Khubber suggested to Ms Enayat  that  it  may  be
      that post-September 11, 2001 there might be an additional  impact  and
      she said that she would not put that at the dividing line, but if  you
      looked at  the  UN  Special  Rapporteur's  report  for  2003  to  2004
      concerning visits in 2003, that reflected quite a sharp  deterioration
      in human rights treatment in Iran.

42.   We asked Ms Enayat if she knew of any failed asylum seeker being  ill-
      treated and she said that there was  the  case  she  had  referred  to
      earlier of the  brother of a friend of hers, in 1988.

43.   In his submissions Mr Khubber argued that  the  cumulative  effect  of
      the various elements was what placed the appellant at  risk.  She  was
      aged thirty-six or thirty-seven and a single woman who had  left  Iran
      without lawful permission. She had two sisters with refugee status  in
      Sweden and the sister who had fled with  her  from  Iran  had  refugee
      status in the United Kingdom.  The Tribunal could allow the appeal and
      remit it in the light of the expert evidence that the Adjudicator  had
      not had before her, but otherwise could allow the appeal.

44.   It was hard to say in concrete terms what the  situation  was  on  the
      ground in Iran. The Tribunal should see what  could  be  accepted  and
      what followed from the objective evidence. It was clear  that  if  the
      Adjudicator had had this information she  could  have  concluded  that
      there would be a breach of Article 3 on return. Iran was a  theocratic
      totalitarian state. It was clear from Ms Enayat's evidence that  there
      would be a risk of adverse treatment. She would be  questioned  as  to
      why she had been away for so long and there was also a risk on account
      of association with her sisters who had claimed asylum.   There  would
      be a combined effect via their names as four people with  her  surname
      had left Iran.  Mr Khubber accepted that it was unclear  why  the  two
      sisters in Sweden had claimed asylum. There would be interest  in  the
      details of her background and a reasonable inference of suspicion into
      what she had been doing outside Iran and she was at risk of  detention
      and it could be that she would be required to attend court.    It  was
      necessary to look at what could be inferred. There were no fair  trial
      processes in Iran and she was at risk of sexual assault  if  detained.
      This was not a general but a specific argument.

45.   In the alternative, the case fell within Article  8.   There  was  the
      question of whether her sexuality arose and there was an overlap  with
      Article 3 on that.  If she were a lesbian and was questioned as to why
      she went and that emerged, it was a very serious  issue  to  consider.
      If her sexuality  was  not  in  issue,  then  it  was  accepted  as  a
      consequence of Ullah and Razgar, the point was  limited.   A  detailed
      consideration of the issues was needed.

46.   In his submissions Mr Blundell opposed remittal on the basis that  the
      Tribunal could deal with the appeal.  The Tribunal should consider the
      evidence concerning failed asylum seekers generally and then go on  to
      consider the particular circumstances of the appellant.  There was  no
      suggestion that bodies such as Amnesty International or  Human  Rights
      Watch or the UNHCR argued that failed  asylum  seekers  could  not  or
      should not be returned to Iran and that was of significance  relevance
      to a claim of being at risk as a failed asylum seeker per se.

47.   It was a fair point that there was no systematic  evidence  about  the
      problems arising for returnees who had been found to be in  breach  of
      the exit regulations. Ms Enayat was aware of no  more  than  three  or
      four cases scattered over the years and no evidence of them  or  their
      circumstances. There was only one case  she  knew  of  personally,  in
      1988.  There was no evidence that failed asylum seekers per se were at
      risk.  The two examples cited were different from this case  and  from
      people returned as failed asylum seekers per se. The former Australian
      case involved a Christian and the latter  had  criticised  the  regime
      while in Australia allegedly. There  was  the  point  as  regards  the
      Amnesty case that the detention could be politically motivated.   This
      was of relevance to the weight to be attached to  Ms  Enayat's  report
      since the body of the report had misquoted the  Amnesty  International
      report.

48.   In light of the Adjudicator's credibility findings the  appellant  had
      not been found to be a lesbian and there  was  no  record  of  lesbian
      activity. She would return with no  record  of  any  interest  in  her
      including lesbianism.  That was not reasonably likely to come to light
      but in any event being a lesbian was not a crime.  It would   be  very
      odd if she admitted it and indeed odd if she was questioned  about  it
      also.

49.   It was unclear how the authorities would know  about  her  sisters  in
      Sweden or her sister in the United Kingdom.  There was no  information
      as to why the sisters in Sweden had been granted refugee status so  no
      adverse connotations could be made. The situation of the sister in the
      United Kingdom was not a particularly  important  consideration.   The
      fact that she had come on the basis of adultery did not make it likely
      that anyone would hold this against  the  appellant.   As  regard  the
      Hijab point, Ms Enayat had said that this would not be a problem while
      done in the west. As regards whether she adopted the same attitude  on
      return, there was no  sufficient  evidential  basis  to  make  that  a
      factor, alone or cumulatively, and it was not by itself a  persecutory
      requirement.   So, even if she returned and would not wear  the  Hijab
      she would not be at risk.
50.   By way of reply, Mr Khubber argued that  the  Tribunal  could  draw  a
      reasonable inference by way of speculation as to what could be seen to
      happen. There was little concrete  evidence  about  the  situation  in
      Iran. Neutral investigators regarded it as a closed society.  Reasoned
      speculation was  what  was  needed  and  concrete  examples  were  not
      required.  It was a matter of reasonable  inference.  Difficulties  in
      collating information did not preclude the claim being made  out.   It
      was clear that Iran violated its human rights obligations.   The Hijab
      was not critical but was part of  the  cumulative  effect.  The  point
      concerning her sister was the risk of association  with  her  and  the
      other  absent  sisters.   Investigation  would  reveal  absence.   Her
      lesbianism could be exposed on return.  It was  part  of  the  overall
      context. The decision of the Tribunal  in  Rasti  [2002]  UKIAT  02598
      should be borne in mind.

51.    In  the  light  of  our  previous  findings,  the  issue  before   us
      essentially is as set out in the grounds of appeal, as to whether  the
      appellant faces a risk on return to Iran as a woman who has  left  the
      country illegally, as someone who does not prescribe to the Hijab, and
      is at risk on account also of her relationship to her  three  sisters,
      all of whom have been  granted  refugee  status,  one  in  the  United
      Kingdom and two in Sweden, and therefore as  a  failed  asylum  seeker
      together with these additional factors, she is at risk on return.

52.   We have had the benefit of reading Ms Enayat's  report  together  with
      her evidence in connection with the relevant matters arising from that
      report.  We bear in mind the fact that the appellant has been  in  the
      United Kingdom since 23 October 2000, having left Iran it seems on  11
      October 2000, and in this regard as a further risk factor as contended
      by Ms Enayat is the fact that she has been out of  Iran  for  over  3�
      years.

53.   In her report Ms Enayat deals  with  the  penalties  a  failed  asylum
      seeker might face and first of all considers the situation where there
      has been a violation of exit regulations  which  we  think  is  common
      ground is the situation in this case.  She notes the  absence  of  any
      systematic evidence on the applications of  the  laws  concerning  the
      violations of exit regulations. The Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee
      Board documents suggest  that  fines  only  are  applied.   Ms  Enayat
      criticises that document on the basis that it provides generalisations
      offered orally by two specialists on Iran, one based  in  England  and
      one in France,  however, and contends that it is unclear  whether  the
      specialists refer to announced government policy concerning those  who
      leave the country illegally, the formal statutory penalties  for  this
      kind of violation or documentation that they do not cite.  It has been
      suggested that the age of this document is a relevant factor also.

54.   We would find it surprising if two  people  described  as  specialists
      would simply have  repeated  announced  government  policy  or  formal
      statutory penalties but would rather, as  indeed  Ms  Enayat  has,  be
      expected to give their opinion on what actually  happens.  We  do  not
      consider that this evidence is properly subject to the criticisms that
      Ms  Enayat  makes.  Otherwise,  Ms  Enayat  cites  a  recent   Amnesty
      International  Urgent Action Notice which is  annexed  to  her  report
      concerning thirteen men arrested at Tehran Airport in  June  1992  who
      were  'reportedly  held  in  connection   with   passport   and   visa
      violations'. The annexed report makes it clear that their arrests  may
      have been political motivated, though as Mr Blundell pointed out,  for
      whatever reason, this clause was omitted from  the  main  body  of  Ms
      Enayat's report. We accept that this is most likely to have arisen  as
      a consequence simply as a mistake on the part of Ms Enayat, but it  is
       a salutary reminder of the extreme care that has to be  exercised  in
      preparing expert reports in order that the full picture  is  provided.
      Given the suggestion  that  the  arrests  may  have  been  politically
      motivated, is not the case with regard to the appellant before us,  we
      see this as being a point of limited relevance.

55.   Ms Enayat also draws attention to  an  item  which  recently  appeared
      'The Age' an Australian newspaper, in April 2002.  This concerned  two
      people who had failed to be  granted  asylum  in  Australia  and  were
      returned to Iran. The former, a Christian  convert,  said  that  since
      returning home he had been exiled by  his family  and  his  phone  had
      been tapped and his movements monitored and he had been prevented from
      obtaining work or a passport. Although there is  clearly  therefore  a
      differential factor between his  case  and  the  appellant's,  in  any
      event, what happened  to  him  appears  to  fall  some  way  short  of
      amounting to a breach of his human rights.  The other man interrogated
      was interrogated for six hours at the  airport  on  arrival,  and  was
      ordered to appear before  a  Revolutionary  Tribunal  which  meets  in
      secret.  He said that he had been asked to justify a criticism he  had
      made of the Islamic regime while seeking asylum in Australia  as  well
      as facing charges of leaving the country illegally. Clearly the former
      factor is different from the case before us, and of course it is   not
      known what happened subsequently to this person.

56.   Ms Enayat considered that anyone who had been away from  Iran,  having
      left illegally for some time, was at risk of interrogation with  quite
      a high risk of torture or maltreatment.  On the Adjudicator's findings
      it is clear that the appellant was not known to the authorities to  be
      a lesbian  and  therefore  that  risk  factor  disappears.  Ms  Enayat
      considers that it was also the case that if the appellant's family had
      a political background and perhaps criminal records, and had  obtained
      asylum abroad, it could  add  to  the  authorities'  interest  in  the
      appellant.

57.   It is the case, however, that as regards  the  appellant's  sister  in
      the United Kingdom, she appears to have left Iran on account of  fears
      of reprisal as a consequence  of  committing  adultery,  and  that  we
      consider can only  properly  be  regarded  as  involving  an  interest
      specific to her and not carrying any implications for other members of
      her family. As regards the two sisters in Sweden, nothing is known  of
      the basis upon which they left Iran.  As a consequence, we can see  no
      evidence to indicate that the appellant would face any additional risk
      factor on account of her relationship with her sisters.  The most that
      might be known is that four people with the same surname have all left
      Iran, although we have not been shown evidence to  indicate  that  the
      authorities would be aware of that, but even if they were, we  do  not
      consider  in  the  light  of  the  lack  of  evidence  concerning  the
      activities of the sisters while in Iran  other  than  the  sister  who
      committed adultery, that she faces risk on that  account.   We  should
      add that we see it as entirely speculative that  the  appellant  might
      admit to being a lesbian even if she is a lesbian. It is true that the
      Adjudicator did not specifically find that she was not a  lesbian  but
      rather made findings concerning what she claimed had happened  to  her
      on account of being a lesbian. We accept that no finding was  made  on
      this point, but we consider it, as we say, that it is  speculative  to
      suggest that she might at some stage if questioned reveal that she  is
      a lesbian.

58.   As regards what treatment she might  face,  Ms  Enayat  very  candidly
      stated that nothing very specific could  be  said  but  there  was  no
      concrete evidence.   She had become aware over the years of  three  or
      four cases where people had returned to Iran and been killed. She knew
      of one case from her personal experience,  being  the   brother  of  a
      friend, in 1988.   We  know  nothing  about  the  histories  of  these
      people.  It is therefore impossible for us to conclude from these  few
      cases over a number of years that any real risk to  the  appellant  of
      similar treatment can be identified.

59.   Ms Enayat did not go into any  detail as to the ways in which risk  to
      the appellant might be augmented by the duration of her  absence  from
      Iran. We consider that that has to be seen in the light of  the  other
      evidence concerning risk rather than being a factor that per se  gives
      rise to any real risk.  Equally is the situation of her reluctance  to
      wear the Hijab.  That by itself cannot properly be said to be  a  risk
      factor but again this is a matter to be  placed  cumulatively  in  the
      balance, as Mr Khubber invited us to do.

60.   Ms Enayat also  candidly said that she could not  say  how  great  the
      risk was to the appellant as a single woman who had violated the  exit
      regulations which she seems to have regarded as the  essential  matter
      giving rise to risk.  She could  not  quantify  the  degree  of  risk.
      There is documentary evidence about Iranian  prisons  and  their  poor
      quality and treatment of detainees.  Of course it is far from the case
      in our view that it  has  been  shown  that  the  appellant  would  be
      subjected to imprisonment.  It may well be that she would  be  stopped
      and questioned as a consequence of her having been  out  of  Iran  for
      several years and having left in breach of her  exit  violations,  the
      latter point which would on its own, we consider, be more likely  than
      anything else to result in a fine. A  period  of  questioning  can  no
      doubt not be ruled out, but we consider that  the  evidence  that  she
      would be ill-treated in such a manner as to give rise to an Article  3
      breach of her human rights is  excessively  speculative.   We  do  not
      consider that it can properly be extrapolated from  the  general  poor
      reputation of the Iranian state for human rights protection that there
      is a specific risk to this person with her history  as  found  by  the
      Adjudicator on return to Iran.   No  doubt  Mr  Khubber  is  right  to
      contend that reasoned speculation is necessary in a case of this kind,
      but at the same time we remind ourselves that what has to be shown  in
      such a case is a real risk of breach of the appellant's  human  rights
      rather than fanciful speculation arising  from  generalisations  about
      the poor human rights record of the Iranian state.

61.   Taken as a  whole,  we  consider  that  the  case  is  not  made  out.
      Specifically we do not consider that the appellant as  the  sister  of
      three women who have obtained asylum elsewhere, who has  been  out  of
      Iran herself for over 3� years, who left Iran in breach of regulations
      and is reluctant to wear the Hijab, is a person who faces a real  risk
      of ill-treatment giving rise to a breach of her human rights on return
      to Iran.  In this regard we should add that we do not consider   there
      to be a real risk of breach of her Article 8 rights.  The  Adjudicator
      found that she had not established that she has  ever  had  a  lesbian
      relationship. No arguable risk  on that account therefore arises.

62.   This appeal is dismissed.




                                 D.K. ALLEN
                             VICE PRESIDENT iHij

-----------------------
      1


