
H-TW-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) |
|                           |        |Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 |
|On 20 April 2004           |        |                            |
|Prepared 20 April 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|27 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                  |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Z Jafferji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Ethiopia,   appeals   against   the
    determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs  R  Goldfarb,  who  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision made on 2 June 2003 refusing him  leave  to
    enter following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom at Heathrow Airport on 11
    April 2003 and claimed asylum on arrival.  The basis of his  claim  can
    be briefly be summarised as follows.

3.    The Appellant is a well-known football player in Ethiopia.   In  2001
    he became a member of the EDP and had the responsibility of  recruiting
    new members to the  party.   He  began  having  problems  when  he  was
    selected to pay for the national team.  If he was  playing  abroad  the
    other players would have their own passports but his passport was  kept
    by the Football Federation.  He was also assigned  additional  security
    during his football activities.  The Football Federation  attempted  to
    force him to play for government teams which are  military  teams.   He
    was told that if he refused to play either he  or  his  family  members
    would be in danger.  He did refuse to play. He knew that if he accepted
    a position he would be recruited as a solider.

4.    The Appellant was given a warning and about two weeks  later  one  of
    his brothers was killed by government soldiers.  His  refusal  to  play
    continued and  he  suffered  harassment  from  the  military.   On  one
    occasion he found that his  car  had  been  smashed.   Two  days  later
    soldiers came to his home and told him that if he did not leave his own
    football team and stop his involvement with the EDP he would be killed.
     There was another occasion when he  was  leaving  his  house  and  two
    soldiers were waiting for him.  One of them hit him in  the  face  with
    the  butt  of  a  gun.   The  appellant  fell  down  and  was   knocked
    unconscious.  He was taken to hospital where he stayed for a week.   He
    had an operation on  his  eyelid  where  he  had  been  hit.   He  then
    recovered for two or three weeks.

5.    The Appellant approached the Ethiopian Cultural Minister to ask if he
    could have a letter in support of an application to obtain  a  visa  to
    leave the country  and  play  football  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    government put pressure on his football club to write  to  the  British
    Embassy as they did not want him to leave.  He  realised  how  critical
    the situation was for both himself and  his  wife.   He  approached  an
    agent to help them cross  the  border  into  Kenya.   They  arrived  in
    Nairobi on 1 January  2003.   They  remained  there  for  three  months
    awaiting the agent's further actions and in April 2003 he was  able  to
    board a plane for the United Kingdom.

6.    The Adjudicator did not believe the account given by  the  Appellant.
    She has set out her findings and conclusions in paragraphs 32-35 of her
    determination.  The  Appellant  had  asserted  that  he  kept  his  own
    political affiliations secret from his football club although they were
    known to the Football Federation.  The  Adjudicator  did  not  consider
    this credible.  The Football Federation was said to be trying to  force
    the Appellant to play for government teams which  were  military  teams
    but there was no objective evidence to support this assertion.

7.    The appellant had said that because of his failure to  play  for  the
    military team his brother had been killed and that later  his  own  car
    had been smashed up.  The  Adjudicator  commented  that  there  was  no
    evidence  before  her  to  support  any  of  those   assertions.    She
    acknowledged that it was often difficult for claimants in asylum  cases
    to provide documentation but she did consider that it  would  not  have
    been difficult for the Appellant to have provided a  death  certificate
    relating to his brother.  He had suffered injuries to his eye  and  had
    received hospital treatment.  It would not have been  unduly  difficult
    to have provided some written evidence in support of that assertion.

8.    The Adjudicator did  not  believe  that  the  appellant  was  of  any
    interest to the authorities nor  that  there  was  a  serious  risk  if
    returned to Ethiopia that he would suffer  ill-treatment  amounting  to
    persecution.  She commented that there was no evidence to  support  his
    assertions.  She had given the case the most anxious scrutiny  and  had
    exercised extreme caution before finding that the Appellant was lacking
    in credibility.  She referred to paragraphs 203 and 204 of  the  United
    Nations Handbook and to the case of Chiver  (10758).   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

9.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the  Adjudicator  attached
    too much weight to the absence of documentary evidence and had erred in
    law by implying that corroboration was necessary: Kasolo  (13190).   It
    is  argued  that  the  Adjudicator  made  corroboration   a   necessary
    ingredient to making a positive  finding  on  credibility  and  thereby
    misdirected herself.  It was on this ground  only  that  permission  to
    appeal was granted.

10.   At the hearing before  the  Tribunal  Mr  Jafferji  argued  that  the
    references the Adjudicator made to the absence of documentary  evidence
    in paragraphs 32, 33 and 35  of  her  determination  showed  the  undue
    weight she had attached to its absence.   It  indicated  that  she  had
    erred in her approach to the assessment of the evidence.  In  substance
    she had required corroboration and this was the reason  she  had  found
    the Appellant not to be credible.

11.   Mr Jafferji applied for permission to vary his grounds to argue  that
    the Adjudicator had failed to deal with the issue of whether there  was
    a risk to the Appellant on return as a failed asylum seeker.  This  had
    been raised in the Appellant's skeleton argument before the Adjudicator
    but it had not been considered  in  the  determination.   Even  if  the
    Appellant's account was disbelieved, there was a risk that  because  of
    his occupation and the fact that he had made an unsuccessful claim  for
    asylum, he would face persecution from the authorities on  return.   Mr
    Jafferji conceded that there was no evidence to  support  a  contention
    that failed asylum seekers per se were at risk on return but  the  risk
    to the Appellant came from his own particular standing as a  well-known
    footballer.

12.   Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  misdirected
    herself on the issue of corroboration. The burden of proof remained  on
    the Appellant.  The Adjudicator was entitled to comment on the  absence
    of documentary evidence  when  assessing  what  weight  to  attach  the
    Appellant's oral evidence.  He argued that the Appellant should not  be
    permitted to amend his grounds  at  this  late  stage.   There  was  no
    indication whether the failed asylum seeker point  was  pursued  before
    the Adjudicator.  If there was any  substance  in  the  point,  it  was
    surprising that it had not been raised in the grounds of appeal.

13.   The Tribunal will deal firstly  with  the  application  to  vary  the
    grounds of appeal.  The application is made at the  last  moment.   The
    only explanation for the late application is that the point was spotted
    by Mr Jafferji when he recently received  the  papers.   The  point  is
    certainly raised in the skeleton argument that the Appellant  would  be
    at risk as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  but  there  is  nothing  in  the
    determination to  indicate  that  the  point  was  pursued  before  the
    Adjudicator.  If it was and if  it  formed  an  integral  part  of  the
    submissions, there is no explanation why the point was  not  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.  Further, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
    ground would have  any  real  prospect  of  success.   As  Mr  Jafferji
    concedes there is no evidence  to  support  a  contention  that  failed
    asylum seekers are at risk in Ethiopia for  that  reason  alone.   Even
    assuming  that  this  application  becomes  known  to   the   Ethiopian
    authorities, the Tribunal is not satisfied that there is any basis  for
    a finding that it would lead  to  the  Appellant  being  persecuted  or
    treated contrary to Article 3 on return.

14.   The main issue in this appeal is whether the  Adjudicator's  findings
    on the issue of credibility are  undermined  by  her  comments  on  the
    absence  of  documentary  evidence.   There  is  no   requirement   for
    corroboration  and  in  Kasolo  the  Tribunal  held  that  it   was   a
    misdirection  to  imply  that  corroboration  was  necessary.   In  our
    judgment the Adjudicator has not made this error.  She acknowledged  in
    paragraph 33 of her determination  that  asylum  claimants  often  have
    difficulties in providing documentation to support their accounts.  She
    reminded herself of the provisions of paragraphs 203  and  204  of  the
    UNHCR Handbook.  Paragraph 203 reads as follows:

      "After the applicant has made a genuine effort  to  substantiate  his
         story there may still be a  lack  of  evidence  for  some  of  his
         statements.  As explained  above  (paragraph  196)  it  is  hardly
         possible for a refugee to prove every part of his case and, indeed
         if this were a requirement the majority of refugees would  not  be
         recognised.  It is therefore  frequently  necessary  to  give  the
         applicant the benefit of the doubt."


      Paragraph 196 refers to the fact that an applicant may not be able to
    support his statements by documentary or other proof and cases in which
    an applicant can provide evidence of all his  statements  will  be  the
    exception rather than the rule.  The Adjudicator  reminded  herself  of
    these general principles and the Tribunal is  not  satisfied  that  the
    Adjudicator required corroboration  before  accepting  the  Appellant's
    account of events.

15.   The fact that corroboration is not required does  not  mean  that  an
    Adjudicator is  required  to  leave  out  of  account  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence which might reasonably  be  expected.   An  appeal
    must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the weight
    to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure to produce
    other evidence in support.  The Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  comment
    that it would not have been difficult for the Appellant  to  provide  a
    death certificate concerning his brother or some  evidence  to  support
    his contention that he had received  hospital  treatment.   These  were
    issues of fact for the Adjudicator to  assess.   When  the  Adjudicator
    says in  paragraph  35  that  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  his
    assertions, it is clear, and  both  representatives  accept,  that  the
    Adjudicator is referring to evidence which supports or corroborates the
    oral evidence of the Appellant.

16.   In summary the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Appellant erred  in
    law in her assessment of the Appellant's evidence. She has not  imposed
    a requirement for corroboration nor has she  taken  irrelevant  factors
    into account.  Her findings were open to her for the reasons she gave.

17.   It follows that this appeal is dismissed.


                                                                H J E LATTER
            VICE PRESIDENT
