



                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                    YT (Minority church members at risk) Eritrea CG [2004]
UKIAT 00218


                    Date of Hearing: 27 July 2004
                                                    Date Signed:28 July 2004

                              Date Determination Notified:  09 August   2004




                                   Before:


                        Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)

                    Mr D. Parkes (Acting Vice President)

                              Mrs L.R. Schmitt






Between
            Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:    Mr J. Bild, Immigration Advisory Service
For the Respondent:  Mr A Hutton, Home Office Presenting Officer


The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who appeals against the  determination
of an Adjudicator, Mr D. G. B. Trotter,  promulgated  on  16  January  2004,
following a hearing at North Shields (King's  Court)  on  10  December  2003
dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
State to refuse both his asylum and human rights claims.
Although it had earlier been in issue,  there  was  no  substantive  dispute
before the Tribunal that the Appellant was born on 19 May 1985.  He  is  now
19 years old but was aged 17 when he arrived  at  Heathrow  on  9  September
2002 and applied for asylum.  The Secretary of State made a  decision  on  1
November 2002 refusing to granting leave to enter and refusing to grant  the
Appellant asylum.  This gave rise to a right of appeal under section 69  (1)
of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Appellant duly appealed  on  12
November 2002.
There is no cross-appeal by way of a Respondent's notice.  Accordingly,  the
facts found by the Adjudicator are the basis of the appeal before  us.   The
Appellant's case is that he was converted from his Orthodox faith  into  the
Pentecostal Church as a result of being introduced  to  it  by  his  sister.
From an early age he was an activist in the  Kale  Hiwot  ["Word  of  Life"]
Church in Eritrea,  the  KHCE.   He  attended  the  church  in  Asmara.   In
paragraph 7 of a  statement  attached  to  his  application,  the  Appellant
stated that, from the outset, he was involved in distributing  leaflets  and
organising meetings, alongside other members of the church.  His  activities
included approaching non-church members in  the  local  community,  although
this  was  done  discreetly  in  order  to  avoid  the  attention   of   the
authorities.  The church was tolerated by the authorities in Asmara,  partly
because it had international members  and  partly  because  it  assisted  in
organising local social projects.  In May 2002, however, the KHCE church  in
Asmara was closed down by the authorities, although  the  elders  encouraged
the congregation to maintain local  groups  and  to  continue  studying  and
teaching their  religion.   Although  the  Appellant  was  only  17,  senior
members of the church appointed him as a group leader in  the  neighbourhood
and at his school.  He arranged meetings, one of which  was  interrupted  by
the authorities.  The  Appellant  was  arrested  and  ill-treated.   Over  a
period of two months  in  prison,  he  was  interrogated  and  assaulted  on
approximately 9 separate occasions by  different  officers.   The  Appellant
gave an account of an escape from a prison to which he was transferred  that
the Adjudicator rejected.
The  Adjudicator  was  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  has  maintained  his
interest in the Pentecostal Church whilst living in the United Kingdom.   He
is an active member of the church in Newcastle.   The  Adjudicator  regarded
his activities there as consistent with his genuine profession of  religious
adherence.
In paragraph 25 of the determination, the Adjudicator set out  his  findings
as to the level of involvement of the Appellant in the KHCE in Asmara:


      "The Appellant's case is that he was  arrested  as  the  leader  of  a
      "house church".  Perhaps that is putting the matter a little too  high
      - what he seems to have done was for a brief period (about six  weeks)
      to have held Bible study and prayer meetings in his home  attended  by
      perhaps a dozen or so people.  For all that, however, and in the light
      of  the  evidence  of  the  way  in  which  the  authorities   treated
      Pentecostalists in the period after the 21 May 2002 decree I do accept
      on the lower standard of proof firstly that he was an active member of
      his congregation, secondly that part of that  activity  following  the
      closure  of  the  church  involved  him  in  the  activities  that  he
      described,  thirdly  that  these  activities  caused  his  arrest  and
      fourthly that after his arrest in his original prison of incarceration
      he was interrogated and beaten.  I do not think  that  he  was  beaten
      every day but I do not find his exaggeration  of  the  amount  of  the
      beating in interview  of  great  materiality.   I  note  that  in  the
      statement which he handed over at the time of  the  SEF  interview  he
      says he was interrogated nine times  and  beaten  on  that  number  of
      occasions, I think that is the truth,  although  no  doubt  under  the
      pressure of trying to convince the interviewer of  the  truth  of  the
      core of his account he somewhat exaggerated."

Mr Bild, who appeared on behalf of the Appellant before  us,  accepted  that
he was not in a position to  contest  the  Adjudicator's  rejection  of  the
Appellant's account of  his  escape  and  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  the
Adjudicator's findings on this issue.
The Adjudicator reasoned that the Appellant would not be  of  any  immediate
interest to the authorities on his return to Eritrea, although he  would  be
"logged in" (to use the Adjudicator's expression) as  a  man  who  had  been
detained following the crack down on the "Pentes" but who had been  released
and was of no further interest to the authorities.  As the  Adjudicator  had
rejected the Appellant's account of his escape, he would not be  treated  as
an escapee.  See paragraph 28 of the determination.  In paragraph 29 of  the
determination, however, the Adjudicator considered  the  Appellant's  future
on return to Eritrea:


      "Even if the Appellant were of no interest to the authorities  on  his
      return to Eritrea I have  to  consider  whether  he  would  become  of
      interest to them as a result of his religious convictions... It is  my
      view  almost  impossible  that  a  man  with  this   man's   religious
      convictions would be able on return to his native land to refrain from
      the manifestation of his Christian faith as he understands  it  or  to
      limit his manifestation of his faith to meetings  of  less  than  five
      people in a house.  The overwhelming likelihood is that he  would,  by
      virtue of his religious convictions,  feel  compelled  to  preach  the
      Gospel whether it be publicly or (more likely) in an underground house
      church."

There  is  no  issue  that  arises  in  relation  to  this   part   of   the
determination.  The following passage, however, was the subject of  detailed
scrutiny by the Tribunal:

      "I have to ask myself whether this would place  him  at  any  risk  of
      further ill-treatment.  It is  in  my  view  highly  significant  that
      following the immediate aftermath of the decree of 21 May  2002  there
      is no compelling objective evidence to support  the  proposition  that
      Pentecostalists continued to be persecuted in Eritrea.  The up-to-date
      Country Assessment does not give any  authoritative  corroboration  of
      such  a  proposition  and  the  objective  evidence  tendered  by  the
      Appellant only goes to the immediate post  decree  period.   Like  the
      Home Office Presenting Officer I find it significant that by  2003  it
      was possible for the  pastor  of  this  man's  own  church  to  be  in
      communication  with  the  United  Kingdom  by  telephone  and  by  fax
      illustrating that even so senior an individual is no longer considered
      by the authorities to warrant detention or ill treatment.  I am  aware
      that since that fax was sent it has been asserted that the pastor  has
      been arrested but this would seem to be an assertion inconsistent with
      the general relaxation that appears to have happened since the  Spring
      of 2002 and I do not accept that assertion."  [Our italics.]

In paragraph 30 of the determination, we consider that there  is  a  finding
by the Adjudicator  of  considerable  importance  in  the  context  of  this
appeal.  He stated:

      "On this basis it seems to me that the Appellant who would  have  been
      at risk had he been returned to Eritrea in accordance with the Removal
      Directions has been able to obtain some security  from  that  risk  by
      effluxion of time and a relaxation of the situation in Eritrea."  [Our
      italics.]


It is apparent from the passages  that  we  have  set  out  above  that  the
Adjudicator found the Appellant to be an activist in the KHCE and  that  his
religious convictions were sufficiently strong to compel him to  preach  the
Gospel either in public or, more likely, in  an  underground  house  church.
The Adjudicator also accepted  that  he  had  been  arrested,  detained  and
imprisoned for a period of two months and that, during  the  course  of  his
imprisonment,  he  had  been  interrogated  and  beaten  on  at  least  nine
occasions.  Although the Adjudicator  made  no  express  finding  that  this
amounted to persecution for a Convention reason, it seems  to  us  that  the
Appellant's description of his ill-treatment was  broadly  accepted  by  the
Adjudicator, although subject to some exaggeration.  We  consider,  however,
the Adjudicator was making a finding that the Appellant had been  persecuted
for his adherence to the church.  In the  remainder  of  the  determination,
however, the Adjudicator made it  equally  clear  that  he  considered  this
incident was a consequence of the immediate aftermath of the  events  of  21
May 2002 and that, thereafter, there followed a general  relaxation  in  the
authorities' attitude towards Pentecostalists such  that  they  were  either
not ill-treated at all or only to an extent that fell below a level of  ill-
treatment sufficient  to  cross  the  threshold  of  a  claim  under  either
Convention.  It is this contention that is the subject of the  appeal.   The
question that the Tribunal is asked to resolve  is  whether  the  background
evidence supports the Adjudicator's finding that there has  been  a  general
improvement in the position of Pentecostal Christians in Eritrea  since  May
2002.
For the purpose of this appeal, we were provided by the Appellant  with  two
bundles of material.  In addition,  the  Secretary  of  State  provided  the
Country Report on Eritrea prepared by CIPU  in  April  2004.   There  is  no
dispute that, on 21 May 2002, the Eritrean government  closed  all  churches
other than the Orthodox, Roman Catholic  and  Lutheran  denominations.   All
other groups, including KHCE, have been closed down.   The  KHCE  church  is
part of Serving in Mission (SIM), an international organisation.   Elsewhere
in  the  background  information,  SIM  is  described  as   an   evangelical
Protestant Mission which used to be called the Sudan  Interior  Mission  and
is one  of  the  oldest  African  mission  agencies,  established  in  1893,
presumably with links to other Pentecostal or evangelical churches in  other
parts of the world.  Mr K. Riegert from SIM (Canada) wrote an e-mail to  the
Appellant's solicitors on 28 February 2003  to  the  effect  that  the  term
"Pentecostals"  refers  to  evangelical  Christian  churches  as   well   as
Methodists, Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses and  other  charismatic  Christian
groups.  As a result of the May crackdown, all the affected members  of  the
Pentecostal churches have had to meet in private homes, normally  under  the
direction of group leaders.   Mr  Riegert  had  personal  knowledge  of  one
pastor who was imprisoned on several occasions beginning in April  2002  and
as well as other examples.
In the bundle prepared specifically for the appeal before the  Tribunal,  we
have been provided with a Freedom House press  release  dated  7  July  2004
indicating that various  members  of  Pentecostal  denominations  have  been
arrested in the course of  2004.   Pastor  Hagos  of  the  Rema  Evangelical
Church in Asmara has been  arrested  and  his  whereabouts  remain  unknown.
Helen Berhane, a singer popular amongst the youth, has been  held  since  13
May 2004 in a shipping container at the Mai Serwa military camp,  apparently
because she refused to sign  a  paper  recanting  her  Christian  faith  and
agreeing not to participate in Christian activities.  Her arrest  follows  a
similar  earlier  case.   The  Press  Release  continues  that   since   the
crackdown, pastors, soldiers, women, children  and  the  elderly  have  been
jailed  after  being  caught  worshipping,  reading  the  Bible  or  praying
together.  It records that the US State Department  reports  that  over  300
Christians remain in prison.  The US Commission on  International  Religious
Freedom recommended that Eritrea be classified as a country  of  "Particular
Concern" as a result of religious persecution.
Mr Bild also referred us to the general human  rights  problems  experienced
in Eritrea.  In the Amnesty International report of May 2004, page 1,  (page
5 of the bundle) there is  reference  to  Aster  Yohannes,  the  wife  of  a
detained former minister, who returned to Eritrea in December 2003 from  the
USA where she had been studying.  She was detained at the  airport  and  has
never been seen since.  In addition, 10 independent  journalists  remain  in
secret detention and incommunicado since  their  arrest  in  September  2001
when the entire private press  was  banned.   On  page  13  of  the  report,
Amnesty International deals  with  religious  persecution.   It  records  an
upsurge of religious persecution of members  of  minority  Christian  faiths
since early 2003. On pages  15  and  16,  there  is  a  list  of  incidents,
demonstrating a pattern of frequent arrests  in  February  to  May  2003,  a
resumption again in September 2003 which was  intensified  in  2004.   These
included 57 students, including girls, arrested in August  2003  on  account
of  possessing  bibles.   Some  were  held  in  underground  cells,   others
imprisoned in  metal  shipping  containers  in  sweltering  conditions  with
little food and no medical care.  Those held  were  put  under  pressure  to
abandon their faith.  Most were released after some weeks but  some  leaders
are, apparently, still detained.  Of direct relevance to the present  appeal
is reference to the arrest on 23 November 2003 of 8 KHCE members,  including
the pastor, in  Mendefera.   Worshippers  in  two  Pentecostal  churches  in
Asmara were arrested in a February and March 2004.  On  18  March  2004,  20
members  of  the  Appellant's  church  in  Assab  were  detained.    Amnesty
International has stated that there are currently reported to  be  over  400
members  of  minority  churches  in  detention  in  spite  of  international
criticism.
It may be of some significance that no apparent  reason  has  been  provided
for the crackdown.  It has been  suggested  that  it  is  partly  linked  to
government  action  against  young   people   trying   to   avoid   military
conscription.  This might well explain  the  government's  attitude  towards
the Jehovah's Witnesses who hold deep-rooted objection to military  service.
 It is less easy to explain in relation  to  the  Appellant's  own  position
where there is no credible evidence of any moral  or  ethical  objection  to
military service.  It may be that, although a secular  state,  the  Eritrean
authorities favour the  Orthodox  Church  and  seek  to  resist  charismatic
churches, particularly those having links abroad.
The  Country  Report  prepared  by  CIPU  in  April   2004   provides   this
information:


           Non-Sanctioned Religious Groups



           6.40 The US Department of State  report  on  Religious  Freedom,
           2003, noted that, "74 military and  national  service  personnel
           were arrested in February  2002  and  remained  imprisoned  near
           Assab during the period covered by the report [1 July  2002,  to
           30 June 2003]. Reports suggest  that  they  are  being  detained
           until  they  repudiate  their  faith.  Some  of  the   detainees
           reportedly have been rolled  around  in  oil  drums,  abused  by
           fellow prisoners, and the women sexually  abused;  some  of  the
           detainees reportedly suffer from  partial  paralysis  and  other
           physical injuries as a result of their  torture.  Other  reports
           describe other  individuals  and  groups  in  the  military  and
           national  service  who  have  been   detained,   harassed,   and
           physically tortured for  practicing  non-sanctioned  religions".
           [6b] (p4)


           6.41 The US Department of State report on Religious Freedom 2003
           documented numerous abuses of non-sanctioned religious groups:


             On 1 January 2003 "50 members of the Rhema  Church  in  Asmara
             were detained for 10 days without charge. On 16 February 2003,
             an additional 17 Rhema Church members  were  detained  for  15
             days after meeting in a private residence; some of the members
             reportedly were beaten while in detention". [6b] (p3)


             On 16 March 2003 "more than 70 members of different Protestant
             churches (Rhema, Full Gospel, Kalehiwot,  and  Mesert  Cristos
             churches) in Asmara were detained  for  10  days.  This  group
             reportedly was held in  a  metal  shipping  container  without
             ventilation or sanitation facilities". [6b] (p3)

             On 23 March 2003 "40 members of  the  Philadelphia  Church  in
             Asmara were detained for 8  days,  and  some  reportedly  were
             subjected to physical torture and pressured  to  recant  their
             faith. The pastor and other church leaders who went to inquire
             on their behalf also  were  detained.  Members  reported  that
             their pastor was forced to walk barefoot  over  sharp  stones.
             After 8 days, relatives were forced  to  sign  papers  stating
             that those detained would not attend church services  or  meet
             in their homes with other church members". [6b] (p3)


             On 17 April 2003 "15  members  of  a  splinter  group  of  the
             Orthodox Church in Kushte were attacked  while  meeting  in  a
             private residence. A few of the members were admitted  to  the
             hospital for treatment as a result of the attacks. On the same
             day in Asmara, 11 members of the Mesert  Cristos  Church  were
             arrested while meeting at their church building  and  detained
             for 1 day". [6b] (p3)


           6.42 Amnesty International advised that "On 7 September  [2003],
           12  members  of  the  Eritrean  Bethel  Church,  including   two
           children, were arrested at a prayer  meeting  in  Asmara".  [7g]
           (p2)


           6.43 The US Department of State report on Religious Freedom 2003
           noted that, "There were several reports that on occasion  police
           tortured those detained for their religious  beliefs,  including
           using bondage, heat exposure,  and  beatings.  There  also  were
           credible reports that some of the  detainees  were  required  to
           sign statements repudiating  their  faith  or  agreeing  not  to
           practice it as a condition for  release.  In  some  cases  where
           detainees refused to sign, relatives were  asked  to  do  so  on
           their behalf. Some of  these  statements  reportedly  threatened
           execution  for  those  who  continued  to  attend   unsanctioned
           religious services or meetings". [6b] (p3)


           6.44 On 18 September 2003  Amnesty  International  stated  that,
           "Fifty-seven young male and female members of minority Christian
           churchs are being held in  metal  shipping  containers  at  Sawa
           military camp in Western Eritrea.  They were  arrested  in  mid-
           August  [2003]  and  are  being  held  incommunicado  in   harsh
           conditions, which  amount  to  torture  or  cruel,  inhuman  and
           degrading treatment. The 57 prisoners of conscience  are  school
           students from all over Eritrea who were sent  to  Sawa  Military
           Camp in western Eritrea for a compulsory 3-month  summer  course
           under new pre-National Service education regulations. They  were
           arrested in the camp  for  possessing  bibles  in  the  Tigrinya
           language (although this is not illegal) and  are  imprisoned  in
           metal shipping containers. Conditions in the  containers,  which
           have no light or ventilation, are said to be extremely  hot  and
           suffocating, and they are allegedly  being  given  little  food,
           refused medical care and have to perform bodily functions inside
           the container. They are being pressurized to sign statements  to
           abandon  their  religion  and  re-join  the  majority   Eritrean
           Orthodox Church. Five others arrested with them were allowed  to
           go free when they signed the statements". [7h] (p1)

We were also referred to the decision of the Tribunal in  MA  (Female  draft
evader) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT  00098,  (Ouseley  J.,  President).   Having
considered the background material, the Tribunal considered the position  of
a young female, liable for military conscription, who  would  be  identified
as a draft evader.  The Appellant was not a person who was likely to  refuse
to undertake national service for religious or  conscientious  reasons  such
as a Jehovah's Witness.  Neither was  she  a  deserter  from  the  frontline
because she had not served.  Furthermore, the Appellant had no  claim  under
the Refugee Convention because her  claim  based  on  religious  reasons  or
imputed political opinion had been properly rejected.   Nor  did  her  claim
arise as a result of an unlawful departure from the country.   Nevertheless,
the Appellant's claim was allowed under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR,  largely
because of a UNHCR recommendation, to be reviewed  in  mid  2004,  following
the return from Malta of about 220 Eritreans in 2002, some of whom  were  of
draft age or failed asylum seekers.  The evidence as  to  what  happened  to
those returnees from Malta  was  uncertain.   All  of  them  were  initially
detained,  although  those  over  40  or  with  children  were  subsequently
released.  The  conditions  of  detention  were  congested,  unsanitary  and
uncomfortable, leading to disease and malnutrition, which may have  resulted
in some deaths.
In our judgment, the material before us does not support  the  Adjudicator's
conclusion that there has been an improvement since the events of May  2002.
 In particular, the information to which we have referred does  not  support
the Adjudicator's conclusion  that  there  has  been  a  relaxation  in  the
attitude of the Eritrea authorities  towards  the  minority  churches.   The
Adjudicator did not identify the written source for his conclusion  that  it
is now safe for persons like the Appellant  to  return.   The  Adjudicator's
reasoning that "there is no compelling objective  evidence  to  support  the
proposition that Pentecostalists continued to be persecuted in  Eritrea"  is
contrary to the material to which we have referred.  His reliance  upon  the
fact that the Appellant was able to communicate  with  his  pastor  in  2003
(indicating that even such a senior figure was no longer considered  by  the
authorities to warrant detention) is undermined by the  Appellant's  account
that the pastor has since been  arrested.   The  Adjudicator  rejected  that
part  of  the  evidence  as  inconsistent  with  his  view  of  the  general
relaxation that he considered to have happened since  the  spring  of  2002.
We now have the evidence, however, of continued arrests in  2003  and  2004,
including the arrest of a KHCE pastor.
In the context of the Adjudicator's other findings  this  is  of  particular
significance.   The  Adjudicator  expressly   found   that   the   religious
"profile", (if we may properly use this expression),  was  of  a  man  whose
religious  convictions  would  render  him   incapable   of   limiting   his
involvement to meetings of less than five people in a house, as required  by
law.  More important still is the Adjudicator's finding in paragraph  30  of
the determination that, absent the relaxation he felt  existed  in  Eritrea,
the Appellant would have been at  risk  of  persecution  on  return.   As  a
result of  our  conclusion  that  there  is  no  compelling  evidence  of  a
relaxation, it is an inevitable consequence that,  had  the  Adjudicator  so
found, he would also have found the Appellant liable to persecution.
For these reasons, we  consider  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  in  his
finding that there has been a general relaxation in  the  Eritrean  attitude
towards minority churches.  Since it is clear from  his  determination  that
his rejection of the Appellant's claim was based  solely  upon  his  finding
that conditions had improved, the Appellant's  claim  must  succeed.   Given
the Adjudicator's findings as to what the  Appellant  is  likely  to  do  on
return to  Eritrea  as  a  result  of  his  religious  convictions,  we  are
satisfied that his activities will result in his coming into  conflict  with
the authorities.  This is likely to result in his  detention  in  conditions
that violate the Refugee Convention and his Article 3 rights.


Decision: The Appellant's appeal is allowed.







                                                               Andrew Jordan
                                                              Vice President
                                        Approved for electronic distribution

