
LSH | |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 14 June 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|MA ( Ba'ath party - Ill-treatment by authorities) Sudan [2004]    |
|UKIAT 00336                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|13 October 2004                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                              |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                  |
|Mr G F Sandall                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Miss H Kaur, of Counsel, Instructed by
                       TRP, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J G Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr Neil Davison, who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's refusal to recognise him as a refugee or to allow
      him  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  humanitarian   grounds.
      Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Adjudicator had
      apparently accepted the claimant's account of low-level activities for
      the Ba'ath party of Sudan and that arguably the risk on return  should
      have been evaluated.

   2. Mr Jones conceded that  the  appeal  must  be  allowed.  The  argument
      between the parties related to  the  question  whether  it  should  be
      allowed outright, or remitted afresh to a  different  Adjudicator  for
      further findings of fact.

   3. For the appellant, Miss Kaur directed us  to  the  following  positive
      findings by the Adjudicator -

         . that the appellant was arrested in 2000

         . that he had been putting up posters (16(e))

         . that his activities were low-level and at  the  nuisance  level,
           and he was not in greater danger now than in 2000

         . that he was a long-term member of the Ba'ath party (16(a))

         . that he had been arrested on  numerous  occasions  and  suffered
           routine torture (16(d) and 16(b))

         . that he was a long-term political activist

         . But that the Adjudicator rejected the  levels  of  ill-treatment
           which the appellant claimed during these detentions, despite the
           objective evidence.

   4. The Adjudicator considered  that  future  risk  to  leaders  could  be
      distinguished from that for low-level activists.  Miss Kaur  submitted
      that this was an error of law on the  basis  of  CIPU  Country  Report
      April 2004 paragraphs 6.1-6.5 and an Amnesty International  report  of
      31  January 2003 which appears at page 12 of her bundle.  Further, the
      expert report of  Peter  Verney  had  not  been  properly  considered,
      especially at paragraphs 17-20.  The  CIPU  Country  Report  indicated
      (paragraph 6.3) that  things  had  worsened  not  improved  since  the
      appellant came to the United Kingdom.   There was  objective  evidence
      of torture and reference was  made  to  scarring  in  the  appellant's
      statement.

   5. For the  Respondent,  Mr  Jones  agreed  that  the  determination  was
      unsustainable.  There was a  lack  of  clarity  in  the  Adjudicator's
      findings and he had misdirected himself as  to  the  correct  date  at
      16(b).  It was not clear whether he had believed any of the claimant's
      account after 1991 and that disbelief arguably governed the  whole  of
      the claimant's account. It was difficult to assess the  current  risk,
      other than by reference to  the  Ba'ath  party  section  of  the  CIPU
      Country Report and paragraph 5.3 of the doctor's report.  He asked the
      Tribunal to allow and remit the appeal for consideration afresh.

   6. The Tribunal retired to consider the submissions and indicated that we
      would allow the appeal outright, with reasons to follow, which we  now
      give.  The relevant passages of the determination are at paragraphs 6-
      8, 16, and 14 of the Adjudicator's determination -

      "6.   ...The appellant, a Sudanese male, belongs to a political  party
      in Sudan.  The party is the al Ba'ath party and the aim of that  party
      is to unify Arab states.  It is a democratic party, currently  opposed
      by the Sudanese Government.  He joined the party  in  1989,  following
      his brother's footsteps.  His function was to  prepare  leaflets,  and
      write Articles about the party. He assisted  in  the  distribution  of
      leaflets.

      7.    His brother left Sudan in 1989 and never returned.  His  brother
      lives in Iraq and runs the party from that country. The appellant  was
      at secondary school when his brother left Iraq.  He  was  involved  in
      political activities at that time, engaged in attempts to recruit more
      students.  In 1991, the appellant was  involved  in  a  demonstration,
      which resulted in police intervention.  The appellant was arrested and
      questioned about his brother.  He was released after  three  days  and
      beaten at during detention.  He continued with his political activity.
       He was arrested, detained, beaten and tortured in 1992, but continued
      his political activity.  In 1993, he was arrested again, and held in a
      detention centre for one month.  Once again he  was  questioned  about
      his brother, and  also  about  his  own  activities.   He  was  beaten
      severely and has scars on his left leg and right hand.  He was  warned
      about his son's political activity,  but  nevertheless  the  appellant
      continued with his political activity and in 1994,  he  was  arrested,
      beaten, tortured, detained for  one  week  and  released  again.    He
      attended University between 1995-1999, in Khartoum.  He completed  his
      studies but was arrested on numerous occasions during those years.  In
      the year 2000, security forces detained  him  while  he  was  sticking
      posters on a wall.  He was arrested, beaten, tortured and detained for
      two months.  His torture included electric shock  treatment.   He  was
      sent to another detention centre, and during his  transfer  period  he
      managed to escape. He went on to contact party members  in  the  area.
      He stayed in hiding for about 20 days.  He was taken to  another  city
      where he remained with another member for about one  month,  until  he
      was able to find an agent.  He was taken to the port of Sudan where he
      remained for 10 years [sic] before being put  inside  a  lorry,  which
      embarked on a ship.  After two weeks he arrived in the United  Kingdom
      by the same lorry.

      8.     He fears persecution if he returns to Sudan on the  grounds  of
      his political opinion.  He fears that he will  be  killed  or  at  the
      least detained and tortured...

      14.   The  security  forces  reportedly  torture  and  beat  suspected
      opponents of the Government such  as  student  leaders,  lawyers,  and
      others.   The security forces use excessive force, including  beatings
      and tear gas, to disperse unapproved demonstrations.  There have  been
      reports  that  security  forces  torture  persons  in  'ghost  houses'
      although there were no reports in 2001 that security forces used these
      'ghost  houses'.   These  are  places  where  security  forces  detain
      Government  opponents  incommunicado  under  harsh  conditions  for  n
      indeterminate  time  with  no  supervision  by  the  courts  or  other
      independent authorities with powers to  release  the  detainees.   The
      security forces  are  rarely,  if  ever,  held  accountable  for  such
      abuses."

   7. Paragraph 16 has already been summarised. The CIPU Country Report  for
      April 2004 at paragraphs 6.1-6.5 says this -

       "6.1 The USSD Report on Human Rights Practices for 2003, which was
       published in March 2004, stated that "The Government's human rights
       record remained extremely poor, and although there were improvements
       in some areas, numerous, serious abuses remained." Amnesty
       International (AI) claimed in its July 2003 report 'Sudan: Empty
       Promises?'

       "Yet, with the important advances in human rights promotion in
       northern Sudan and internationally sponsored agreements on the issue
       of protection of civilians in most of the south it is still true to
       say that 'virtually every kind of human rights violation of concern
       to Amnesty International has been perpetrated by a political and
       security establishment that behaves as if it is unaccountable'", as
       stated in AI's 1995 Annual Report on Sudan.

       6.2 In a February 2003 briefing to the UN Commission on Human Rights,
       Human Rights Watch (HRW) called on the Commission to renew the
       Special Rapporteur's mandate.  The human rights situation in 2002 and
       2003 remained poor in most areas, including the abuse of individuals
       and groups, and the severe restriction of the fundamental freedoms of
       the people of Sudan as reported in detail by human rights groups such
       as AI and SHRO.  Yet the UN Commission voted to reject the resolution
       on the situation in Sudan, resulting in the end of UN human rights
       monitoring in Sudan.


       6.3 According to the USSD Report for 2003 the "Security forces and
       associated militias were responsible for extra-judicial killings and
       disappearances."  "Security forces regularly beat, harassed,
       arbitrarily arrested, and detained incommunicado opponents or
       suspected opponents of the Government".   The Special Rapporteur (SR)
       stated in January 2003 that "Overall, the role of the security
       apparatus as the main entity responsible for the human rights abuses
       as well as the impunity enjoyed by security officers remains an issue
       of serious concern."


       6.4 Various human rights groups reported on specific cases concerning
       the violation of the human rights of organisations, groups and
       individuals' throughout 2003 and into 2004.  The USSD Report stated
       that there were no reports of the Government taking any action
       against any members of the security forces who have reportedly
       killed, tortured, beat, raped or otherwise abused persons in 2001 and
       2002.


       6.5 The USSD Report on for 2003 stated that "The Intergovernmental
       Authority on Development (IGAD), under Kenyan leadership, continued
       to work towards an end to the country's civil war." [3a] (p 1) "In
       October 2002, the parties signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
       that called for a cessation of hostilities and unimpeded humanitarian
       access to all areas of the country, and which both parties have
       largely respected; however at year's end [2003] access to the Darfur
       region was restricted due to the conflict."  "

   8. The  appellant's  account  of  his  ill-treatment  accords  with  that
      evidence.  We  now  consider  the  appellant's  medical  evidence;  Dr
      Huckstep has been  qualified  since  1986  having  studied  at  Oxford
      University Medical  School  and  worked  in  inter  alia  at  Accident
      Emergency spinal injuries and general Surgery.   He is a member of the
      Royal college of General Practitioners and a full-time GP.    However,
      he regularly writes medical reports on asylum seekers.

   9. In the present appeal he sets out carefully at paragraph 2  the  modes
      of torture to which this appellant claims to have been subjected.

      "2.1  Mr Mohammed  states  that  he  was  tortured  in  the  following
           manners, (For the purpose of this section,  I  shall  amalgamate
           the various episodes of torture, since it would not be  possible
           in any case to differentiate older from newer sings  of  torture
           in terms of physical markings once one to two years have elapsed
           from the most recent torture episode).


            Beaten with sticks
      2.1.1 Mr Mohammed reported that he was beaten  with  sticks.   He  was
           beaten on the entire body, but mostly on the soles on  the  feet
           and on the back.  He was also beaten on the palms of the heads.


           Electricity applied to his back
      2.1.2 Electric current were applied to his back using live wires.   At
           times, his torturers made his back wet using water, so that  the
           electric current would spread across the  film  of  water.   The
           electric  current  being  applied  to  his  back   occurred   on
           approximately "not less than a hundred times".


           Cigarettes being stubbed out on his skin
      2.1.3 He told me that cigarettes were stubbed out on his  arms,  hands
           and  elsewhere  on  his  body.   This   occurred   approximately
           seventeen to twenty times.


           Suspension from a height
      2.1.4 At times he was suspended from his tied hands, so that his  legs
           were not touching the ground and  he  was  swinging.   At  other
           times he was suspended upside down from his ankles.


           Being hit with bags of sand
      2.1.5 His back was impacted with bags of sand.  This occurred  on  all
           the detentions.  (The electric current being applied to his back
           also occurred nearly all the detentions.  He told  me  "While  I
           was at University this occurred many, many times").


           Exposure to blazing sun
      2.1.6 He was made to stand for several hours in the blazing sun, while
           tied up.  At other times he was made to lie down on the hot sand
           while tied up, with no clothes  on,  in  the  blazing  sun,  for
           several hours.


           Sleep deprivation
      2.1.7 At times he had to go four days  without  sleep.   He  was  kept
           awake by loud noise and bright lights.  He was  tied  up  during
           this period of four days' sleep deprivation, so he was unable to
           put his fingers in his ears.  He was being watched by  an  armed
           guard the entire time.  If he fell asleep, he would be woken  up
           and punished further.


           Being burnt by white hot metal
      2.1.8 A white hot piece of metal was taken from a fire and pressed  on
           various parts of Mr Mohammed's anatomy.


           Being beaten with a piece of metal
      2.1.9 Mr Mohammed was beaten with hard metal  and  he  remembers  that
           this left a scar on his left upper leg."

  10. At paragraphs 4 and  5  his  overview  of  the  mental  state  of  the
      appellant and his opinion as to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
      account of torture is as follows:

      "4.1  Mr Mohammed told me he sleeps very poorly and he has a  headache
           if he wakes up suddenly.  He told me that he has many bad dreams
           about the torture and when these bad dreams occur he relives the
           torture or experiences of running desperately away from would-be
           torturers.


        4.2 He told me he has experiences of reliving the torture during the
           day and these sound to me very much like classic flashbacks.  He
           told me he feels very low and sad and  he  misses  his  life  in
           Sudan very much.  He was not married in Sudan, but he misses his
           family very much.  He told me that eating is very difficult  and
           he has very low appetite.


        5.1 Mr Mohammed reported that he had been tortured on many occasions
           by the Sudanese authorities of his political persuasions and the
           modes of torture are set out above.


        5.2 I carefully examined Mr Mohammed's entire body surface  and,  as
           documented above, found a very large number of scars.  There are
           a large number of linear scars n his  back  and  on  his  limbs,
           fully consistent with being beaten with sticks.


        5.3 There are areas on his left arm and his  left  leg,  which  have
           been massively burned and these areas of scarring are diagnostic
           of a burn and I do not believe that there is  any  other  likely
           mode of causation.


        5.4 In addition, he bears a large  number  of  cigarette  burns  and
           while some are slightly faint and could have been  caused  by  a
           light  cigarette  burn,  with  a  classical   circular,   shiny,
           puckered, discoloured scar of a cigarette burn.


        5.5 In addition, he bears scars over his feet, which he told me were
           caused by ropes and the circumferential nature  of  these  scars
           and their positioning are fully compatible with rope burns.


        5.6 In conclusion, I find the physical examination  of  Mr  Mohammed
           highly consistent with his history of having  been  tortured  as
           stated."

  11. The intervening paragraphs deal in detail with each of the  scars  and
      there are a great many of them.   On the basis of this medical  report
      the Tribunal accepts that  the  appellant  has  on  his  body  a  very
      significant level of scarring  which  is  fully  consistent  with  his
      having been physically abused on more than one occasion over the  long
      period that he alleges.  That shows that the authorities maintained an
      interest in him for almost 10 years, particularly in the light of  his
      brother's status as the leader of the Ba'ath party in Sudan. The  CIPU
      Country Report for April 2004 records the attitude of the  authorities
      to that party -

      6.200 According to the Danish fact-finding Report of 2001, "The pan-
      Arab Baa'th Party (BP) is divided into pro-Syrian and pro-Arab [Iraqi]
      factions, but members of both factions are [reportedly] at risk of
      attack."   The Baa'th Party reportedly remained committed to unifying
      Sudan with either Egypt or Libya according to sudan.net as an initial
      step in the creation of a single nation encompassing all Arabic-
      speaking countries.  However, the Baa'th Party's ideological
      reservations about the regimes in those two countries prohibited
      active political backing for this goal.  According to sudan.net, "The
      Nimeiri and al-Bashir governments alternately tolerated and persecuted
      the Baa'th."

  12. We reminded ourselves of the evidence  of  the  Sudanese  authorities'
      continuing abuse (with impunity) of political opponents as recorded in
      the CIPU Country Report which is the Respondent's evidence.   We  note
      the evidence of lengthy abuse of this  particular  appellant  and  his
      credible account of ten years' connection with this party.  We do  not
      consider his activities to be low-level, but in any event, there is no
      indication in the CIPU Country Report evidence that the authorities in
      the Sudan make that distinction.

  13. The Tribunal does not find it necessary to remit this appeal for fresh
      findings of fact.  There  are  sufficient  findings  of  fact  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination as it stands  and  accordingly,  we  allow
      this appeal outright.

  14. The appellant's appeal is allowed.



                                        Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                        Vice President

                                        Date: 17 February 2005

