
ar   LB (Internal flight alternative -  Article  3)  Vietnam  [2004]  UKIAT
00331


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing :  1 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                         .17th December 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                 Mr P Bompas
                                Mr S S Percy




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives

Ms K Amos, Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the appellant; Mr  H
Sadiq Solicitors of Tahirs Solicitors appeared for the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed with leave of  the
      Tribunal  against a determination of Adjudicator,  Mr  P  W  Cruthers,
      allowing on Article 3 grounds only the appeal  of  the  respondent,  a
      national of Vietnam, against  the  decision  to  give  directions  for
      removal following refusal to grant  asylum.  To  avoid  confusion  the
      respondent is hereafter referred to as the  "claimant".

2.    The Adjudicator accepted that  the claimant would face a real risk  of
      serious harm in her home area of Binh  Bien  at  the  hands  of  gangs
      demanding  repayments  of  loans  made  to  her  husband.  He  further
      concluded that if the claimant relocated there would  be no real  risk
      these gangs, being local, would be able to threaten her in other parts
      of Vietnam. He nevertheless allowed the appeal on  Article  3  grounds
      since he considered firstly that the claimant would face  difficulties
      as a single mother with a baby and two young children -  he emphasised
      that such a person would  face  societal  lack  of  protection  -  and
      secondly  that the claimant's children would  experience  difficulties
      accessing education.

3.    The grounds of appeal contended that the Adjudicator erred in  law  in
      his assessment of the internal  relocation  issue.  This  was  firstly
      because the objective evidence in its entirety did not bear out hat  a
      single mother would face systematic discrimination or  harassment  and
      secondly because the Adjudicator failed to state why the  difficulties
      the claimant  would  face  in  accessing  education  would  cross  the
      threshold of severity and amount to a breach of Article 3.

4.    We would accept that the Adjudicator did not appear  to  consider  the
      objective evidence in its entirety in assessing the  consequences  for
      the appellant of relocating as a single mother with  a  baby  and  two
      young  children.  Certainly  he  should  have  made  clearer  how   he
      correlated this finding with his earlier observation at  paragraph  32
      that: "Regarding persecution of an  illegitimate  child,  issue  of  a
      single mother, the  Vietnam Committee of Human Rights holds that there
      would be no systematic discrimination or harassment ..."  However,  we
      do not consider that this shortcoming on its own disclosed  any  error
      of law, since it was open to him to read  the  objective  evidence  as
      distinguishing between the  problems a single  mother would face as  a
      result of having an illegitimate child and the problems she would have
      more generally, when  compared to two parent families  with  whom  she
      would have to compete for scares  resources.  We  do  have  a  further
      criticism of the Adjudicator's treatment  of this issue, but  that  is
      best dealt  with  below  when  considering  his  general  approach  in
      internal relocation.

5.    Turning to the second main ground of  appeal,  we  consider  that  the
      Secretary of State is right to say that the Adjudicator's findings  on
      the question  of internal relocation generally  discloses  a  material
      error of law.  Although he made reference  to  two  leading  Court  of
      Appeal judgments on internal relocation (Robinson [1998]  QB  929  and
      Karanakaran [2003] 3 All ER 449) and one  of  the  leading  Strasbourg
      judgments on the same topic (Hilal v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 31,  ECHR),  he
      nowhere appeared to apply  the  relevant  test  established  in  those
      cases, that of whether relocation  would  be   "unduly  harsh"  for  a
      claimant or whether, in the language of Hilal v UK it  would  offer  a
      "reliable guarantee against the risk of ill-treatment" (paragraph 68).
       The Adjudicator appeared to  find  the  refugee  definition  and  the
      Article 3 threshold satisfied simply by virtue  of  the  existence  of
      "difficulties".  In our view this was not a case in  which  there  was
      evidence that   "difficulties"  facing  the  person  would  amount  to
      serious harm or and undue difficulties.

6.    Mr Sadiq sought to submit that we should infer from the  Adjudicator's
      reference  to the test of reasonableness in paragraphs 49 and 53  that
      he had applied a serious harm or undue hardship test. We cannot accept
      this. Detached from any reference to Article 3 the reasonableness test
      applied by the Adjudicator simply appears to be  synonymous  with  his
      reference to "difficulties".

7.     In  relation  to  the  evidence  which  was  before  the  Adjudicator
      concerning single mothers, even if it showed single women  would  face
      problems of protection, it did not establish that the harassment  they
      would face from the authorities or non-state actors  would  amount  to
      serious harm or treatment  contrary to Article 3.

8.    On the evidence which was  before  the  Adjudicator,  there  was  also
      nothing to show that children of single mothers or other  persons  who
      relocate would be wholly denied education. At paragraph  30  he  noted
      that documentation through the ho khau system in operation in  Vietnam
      was necessary for all administrative  processes,  such  as  education,
      work, admission to hospital etc. However, there was no evidence before
      him to show that the claimant  would  be  prevented  from  registering
      under the  ho khau  system.  Hence  there  was  no  proper  basis  for
      considering she  would  not  be  able  to  renew  her  identity  card.
      Furthermore, even if there had been evidence that this claimant  would
      be forced to relocate outside this system, the Adjudicator had himself
      noted at  paragraph  33  that,  whatever  the  official  position  and
      notwithstanding that moving without permission restricted the  ability
      of individuals to obtain legal residence  permits,  in  practice  many
      continued to move without approval, especially  migrant  or  itinerant
      labourers moving from rural areas to cities in search of  work.  There
      was also no evidence to show that in general the children  of  persons
      who in this way live an unregistered  existence  do  not  in  practice
      receive education from some source.

9.    On the basis that we have identified a material error of  law  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination we shall go on to  consider  the  evidence
      for ourselves. It seems to us relevant in this case that Vietnam is  a
      country with a large population (over 80 million, not  "8.14  million"
      as stated by him reporting a Home Office submission in paragraph  15).
       Furthermore, whilst the objective materials do indicate  that  single
      mothers would face difficulties in relocating, these would  not  cross
      the threshold of undue hardship or treatment contrary to Article 3.



10.   For the above reasons  the   appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.




                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


                           -----------------------
      1


