
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |HI(Transfer Order -         |
|                           |        |Adjournment - Interests of  |
|                           |        |Justice) Somalia [2004]     |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00062                 |
|On 16 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|06 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Moulden (Chairman)                                         |
|Mr A L McGeachy                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is the Secretary of State.  The respondent is a  citizen
      of Somalia.  The appellant has been given  permission  to  appeal  the
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Ms  E  Dubicka,  allowing  on  both
      Refugee Convention and human rights grounds  the  respondent's  appeal
      against the appellant's decision to refuse to grant her  asylum.   The
      respondent was granted limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
      until 30 August 2003.

2.    The hearing was conducted by video link with the Tribunal  sitting  in
      London and the representatives appearing in Birmingham.  Mr A Lawther,
      a Home Office Presenting Officer, represented  the  appellant.   Mr  A
      Mahmood of counsel instructed by Hassan Solicitors, appeared  for  the
      respondent.

3.    The respondent claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  June
      2002 accompanied by her three children.  She claimed asylum by post on
      16 July 2002.  The notice containing the decision  against  which  she
      appeals is dated 2 September 2002.  The Adjudicator heard  the  appeal
      on 22 April and 21 May 2003.  Permission to appeal was  granted  on  4
      August 2003.

4.    The respondent claimed to fear  persecution  from  majority  clans  in
      Somalia because of her membership of  a  minority  clan,  the  Ashraf,
      Hassam sub-clan and Sharif Ali sub-sub-clan.

5.    The main question which arises in  this  appeal  is  whether,  at  the
      hearing on 21 May 2003, events occurred  as  a  result  of  which  the
      Adjudicator should have  stopped  the  hearing  and  sought  an  order
      transferring the proceedings for hearing  afresh  before  a  different
      Adjudicator.  The  power  to  do  so  arises  under  Rule  52  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.

6.    The events of 21 May 2003 need to be  viewed  in  the  light  of  what
      happened on the  first  day  of  the  hearing,  22  April  2003.   The
      Adjudicator sets out these  matters  in  paragraphs  3  to  8  of  her
      determination in the following terms,

           "3.  The hearing finally commenced at four in the afternoon,  on
           22 April 2003.  This had been delayed by about half an  hour  as
           the appellant entered with all her children.  I did not consider
           that she could have a fair hearing with three children to attend
           to.  I asked Mr Malik whether any  thought  had  been  given  to
           making suitable arrangements, given he had  been  waiting  until
           three in the afternoon.  He had not.  Fortunately the  appellant
           quite readily managed to arrange for a friend to  attend  court.
           There was no explanation why the obvious childcare needs had not
           been addressed earlier in the day.


           4.  The Respondent served a CIPU October  2002  and  the  Danish
           Report [see above], and from the appellant's representative came
           a signed and  typed  letter  from  a  'Yusuf'  stating  that  he
           corroborates the appellant's clan and her presence  in  Kismayo.
           The respondent and I were shown a Home Office  letter  dated  17
           March 2001 on a recognised refugee but not in the witness' name!
            I asked whether the witness was to be called and  was  told  he
           was not as he was in London.  No adjournment was  sought.   This
           was surprising, in view of the witness' importance, but  clearly
           that was a matter fro Mr Malik.  There was an  appellant  bundle
           but Mr Malik could not explain to me why  it  was  necessary  to
           serve a duplicate of the Home Office  bundle  with  a  two  page
           statement.    Moreover   on   hearing    the    appellant    and
           notwithstanding her signature at page 7, it sounded nothing like
           her.  It was in legalistic language and  sounded  more  like  an
           argument than normal language.   It  repeatedly  refers  to  the
           Secretary of State  having  'erred  in  relation  to  successive
           paragraphs and failing to consider matters which had been said.


           5.  The appellant was asked to 'adopt'  her  interview  and  the
           statement at page 7 of the appellant's bundle.   She  was  asked
           whether it was right she had never seen UN troops in Kismayo  to
           which she replied 'no, they used to stay, they were in Kismayo'.
            This was in 1995 and she though they left in June  19945.   She
           was asked what she has said in interview.  Her  reply  was  that
           she was not asked whether there were Kismayo at  that  time  you
           were there till recently'.  [This was  incomprehensible  to  me,
           though the appellant sounded articulate].   She  confirmed  that
           her family in Kismayo were  her  husband,  the  three  children,
           another child who was killed, two sisters  and  a  brother.  She
           lived in Alanley, one of four areas, and the others were  called
           Farjano, Fanola and Shqalaha.  She was asked whether there was a
           railway station, to which she said no.


           6.  The Respondent at this stage objected  that  it  seemed  the
           case was not fully prepared and  Miss  Morgan  felt  prejudiced.
           Her objection was a valid one in my view  as  I  could  not  yet
           deduce where Mr Malik was heading.  I asked him how he  expected
           me to judge whether the appellant's  geography  of  Kismayo  was
           accurate and how the Respondent was to address that.  His  reply
           was the he would serve a map.  Asked why he had not done so with
           the other documents, he said he had  yet  to  find  one  on  the
           internet.  That response did cause me concern over  the  use  of
           court time in this manner.  I asked why the statement,  which  I
           indicated seemed to sound nothing like his client, did  not  set
           out the appellant's evidence in chief,  as  recommended  by  the
           practice direction.  He said 'it was the caseworker'.  All  that
           had passed so far indicated to me scant regard for the court and
           the preparation of this appeal.  Mr Malik, I regret,  seemed  to
           me to be 'ad-libbing' in calling evidence in chief.  The hearing
           was adjourned to 21 May 2003, with directions which are  on  the
           IAA file.  [By the resumed hearing, the  witness  statement  was
           filed only a day late and I was assured had been served  on  the
           Respondent at the same time].


           7.  The day of the resumed hearing, the 21st May 2003, was not a
           good day for the IAA.  Apart from this part-heard appeal,  there
           was  another  listed  that  day,  but  both   before   different
           adjudicators, and  other  than  myself.   [The  other  also  was
           allocated the incorrect interpreter].  That necessitated changes
           to the list in my court to accommodate the part  heard  appeals.
           In fact only this appeal  proved  to   be  effective.   But  the
           presenting officer tor this appeal,  Miss  Thandi,  was  in  the
           court where  the  appeal  had  been  erroneously  listed.   [The
           Respondent was in no way responsible for the incorrect listing].
            I asked the Presenting Officer in my court, Miss Burroughs,  to
           inquire about the Home Office position in respect   of  the  two
           appeals, given the errors in listing, and to  inform  me.   That
           was at half past eleven.  At two o'clock in the afternoon,  when
           I inquired whether Miss Burroughs was in court,  I  was  advised
           she had left the building.  There was no message, to  the  court
           usher's knowledge.  Mr  Malik  wished  to  proceed  because  the
           witness had travelled from London.  In the light of no  response
           from the Respondent I did so.  However, after the appellant  had
           given evidence for thirty five minutes, a more senior IAA member
           of staff advised me that a  message  had  been  left  that  Miss
           Thandi, who was still presenting another case, was to  represent
           in this appeal.  [There was no explanation why the  message  did
           not reach me sooner].  inquiries were made about the position in
           the other court and at about three o'clock Miss Thandi  made  an
           application to  adjourn  this  appeal.   She  was  still  cross-
           examining in the other court.  She had told the usher  allocated
           to my court in the morning that she intended to represent.


           8.  I advised her that further evidence had been  heard  in  her
           absence.   Rule  40  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum   Appeals
           (Procedure) Rules  2003  required  I  must  not  adjourn  unless
           satisfied that the appeal or  application  cannot  otherwise  be
           justly determined.  I took into account the  importance  of  the
           witnesses being cross-examined, in particular.  But also  I  was
           concerned to secure an effective  disposal  of  the  appeal  and
           avoid unnecessary attendance of witness.  That is why  the  more
           appropriate application and solution, it seemed to me, was for a
           transfer order.  I envisaged that such an application was likely
           to follow if I adjourned any way, given the evidence  called  in
           the Respondent's absence.  I could not see how to remedy that so
           as to ensure a fair  hearing  other  than  by  starting  afresh.
           Above all, I wished to  avoid  that  happening  with  a  witness
           attending a second time given he is material to a core issue.  I
           therefore  invited  Miss  Thandi  to  make  a   transfer   order
           application on this occasion.  She sought a short adjournment to
           take instructions.  I referred her also to considerations of the
           witness' travel costs.  Mr Malik indicated his objection  to  an
           adjournment.  Nor did he wish to agree to a transfer order being
           considered by a Senior Adjudicator as provided  under  Rule  52.
           However, Miss Thandi was instructed to ask me to mark  the  file
           with the adjournment  request.  She  did  not  wish  to  seek  a
           transfer order, as those were her  instructions  and  could  not
           assist me further with the logic of such a course.  Nor did  she
           wish me to put the appeal back until  later  in  the  afternoon.
           Therefore I heard the appeal, and from this point in  accordance
           with the Surendran guidelines for Adjudicators."

8.    Having reached  the  conclusion  that  she  should  proceed  with  the
      hearing the Adjudicator  did  so,  in  the  absence  of  a  Presenting
      Officer.   In  a  clear  and  careful  determination  she  found   the
      respondent and her witness to be credible.   She  concluded  that  the
      respondent was a Somali citizen who belonged to her claimed clan, sub-
      clan and sub-sub-clan. She found that the respondent would be at  risk
      of persecution for a Convention reason and infringement of her Article
      3 human rights.

9.    The grounds of appeal are in the following terms,

      "1)    The  Adjudicator  has  allowed  this  appeal  under  the   1951
           Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.


      2)    The Secretary of State would  argue  that  the  Adjudicator  (Ms
           Dubicka) erred in deciding to hear this appeal, given the issues
           that arose on the day of the hearing.


      3)    The Secretary of State was ready to proceed with the substantive
           hearing  on  21  May  2003.   The  Presenting  Officer  who  had
           originally presented the appeal  part-heard  on  22  April  2003
           (Miss Morgan) was not continuing to run  the  case,  however,  a
           different Presenting Officer (Miss  Thandi),  had  prepared  the
           case and was  to  represent  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
           remainder of the appeal hearing.


      4)    It appears that on the day of the hearing the  IAA  had  made  a
           number of errors in regard to the listings.   The  Adjudicator's
           determination covers this at paragraphs 6 and 7.  The Presenting
           Officer, Miss Thandi, had been put into a different  court  from
           Adjudicator Ms Dubicka, whom the case  was  before  as  a  part-
           heard.   The  Adjudicator  does  note  at  paragraph  7  of  the
           determination that the Home Office were in  no  way  responsible
           for the incorrect listing.


      5)    Miss Thandi was told of the error at 10  am,  and  informed  the
           usher that she wished to present the case and to move  the  case
           at such short notice was  unacceptable.   It  certainly  appears
           from reading the Adjudicator's determination at paragraphs 6 and
           7 and Mrs Thandi's minute of events, that there was a  breakdown
           in communications.  The Secretary of State would argue that this
           is not surprising, given messages  were  being  relayed  between
           courts by third parties.


      6)    The Secretary of State would argue that the matter  should  have
           been adjourned given the complications which  arose  through  no
           fault of the Home Office. Whilst it is important for the  appeal
           to be dealt with expeditiously, the overriding concern should be
           the just disposal of the appeal.  The Secretary of  State  would
           argue  he  was  disadvantaged  in  this  matter,  and  that   by
           proceeding to hear the appeal in the absence of  the  Presenting
           Officer was not in the interests of justice.


      7)    It is submitted that for the  above  reasons  the  Adjudicator's
           decision to allow this appeal under the 1951 Convention and  the
           ECHR is flawed, and that the Secretary of State's appeal  should
           be allowed."

10.   Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms

           "The grounds virtually speak for  themselves.   The  appeal  had
           been  adjourned  part-heard  on  22  April  2003   because   the
           respondent's representative seemed to be hopelessly unready.  It
           might have been wise  for  there  to  have  been  an  order  for
           transfer at that time.


           The Adjudicator gave directions and proceeded with  the  hearing
           on 21 May 2003 apparently under the belief that  the  directions
           had been served.  In fact the Appellate Authority had sent out a
           notice reading "No further directions".  Upon the adjourned date
           this appeal together with another had been set down for  hearing
           in the wrong court before the wrong Adjudicator.  It was a court
           before which the Presenting Officer now concerned had an appeal.
            This one was removed from that court and the Presenting Officer
           made it known to the court staff that she would  be   presenting
           as soon as her first case was concluded.  This message  was  not
           passed  on  to  the  Adjudicator.   In  ignorance  of  this  the
           Adjudicator eventually commenced the hearing, heard evidence and
           then  was  addressed  by  the  Presenting  Officer  seeking   an
           adjournment.  The Adjudicator herself though that she  ought  to
           abandon the proceedings at that stage to  enable  an  order  for
           transfer to be made but since that was not requested  by  either
           side continued with the hearing in the absence of the Presenting
           Officer because the then appellant had  a  witness  from  London
           whom she thought ought to be heard.


           The Adjudicator took the view that justice could be done without
           an adjournment. That  seems,  with  respect,  to  have  been  in
           conflict with the view she also held that there  ought  to  have
           been an order for transfer.


           The truth of the matter is that the Adjudicator was placed in an
           impossible situation as a result of the failure of the Appellate
           Authority to arrange the court list properly  and  as  a  result
           there was a breach of natural justice and the Secretary of State
           was not heard.  Arguably there is only one possibility and  that
           is  that  the  appeal  must  be  heard  afresh  by  a  different
           Adjudicator.


           Opportunity must at least be given to  that  proposition  to  be
           considered and permission to the appeal is therefore granted."

11.   The Vice President who granted  permission  to  appeal  also  directed
      that notice be given to the parties and their representatives in  Form
      T12.  It was given and the operative part of the letter stated,

           "The Chairman is of the view  that  this  is  a  case  which  is
           suitable  for  a  remittal  for  a  fresh  hearing  by   another
           Adjudicator.  The  Chairman  would  be  grateful  if  you  would
           consider this proposal and, if you  do  not  agree,  inform  the
           Tribunal of your objections within 14 days of  receipt  of  this
           letter.  If we do not hear from you within 14 days, the Chairman
           will assume that you are in agreement, and a determination  will
           be  issued  accordingly.   If  there  is  an  objection  to  the
           Chairman's proposal, the matter will be listed."


12.   Normally, there is  no  reply  to  such  letters  and  the  appeal  is
      remitted.   Occasionally,  there  is  a  letter  of  support  for  the
      proposal, with the same outcome.  Only rarely does one of the  parties
      or their  representatives  object.   In  this  case  the  respondent's
      representatives objected in their letter of 2 September 2003.   It  is
      as a result that this appeal came before us for an oral hearing.

13.   We find no  merit  in  Mr  Mahmood's  submission  that  there  is  any
      significance in the  fact  that  the  appellant  fielded  a  different
      Presenting Officer on the first and second hearings  (Miss  Morgan  on
      the first and Mrs Thandi on the second).  The  important  question  is
      whether the party, be that party the  claimant  or  the  Secretary  of
      State, was represented by somebody.  A party does not have  the  right
      to the same representative on an adjourned hearing.  It  is  perfectly
      possible and desirable that if  one  representative  cannot  attend  a
      replacement should familiarise himself  or  herself  with  the  papers
      before the hearing and,  if  possible,  be  briefed  by  the  previous
      representative.  In fairness to Mr Mahmood he did not suggest that the
      same representative was essential, only that this was  desirable.   We
      agree.  However, it is not a requirement.

14.   Mr Mahmood submitted and Mr Lawther  agreed  that  Mrs  Thandi  should
      have accepted the Adjudicator's suggestion that the hearing be aborted
      and a transfer order obtained.  We accept the  explanation,  that  Mrs
      Thandi was an inexperienced Presenting Officer who  took  instructions
      before  appearing  before  the  Adjudicator  and  then  stuck  to  her
      instructions in circumstances where, had she  been  more  experienced,
      she would have recognised the merit of what was being suggested by the
      Adjudicator and,  at  the  least,  asked  for  time  to  seek  further
      instructions.  We do not accept that the Adjudicator  was  constrained
      by what Mrs Thandi was seeking, for reasons to which we  will  return.
      Mrs Thandi should have realised that an adjournment would  not  assist
      anyone.  It would only postpone a pre-existing problem which had to be
      resolved.

15.   Mr Mahmood accepted that by the time Mrs Thandi  appeared  before  the
      Adjudicator the Adjudicator had  heard  approximately  35  minutes  of
      further evidence.  Mr Mahmood submits that the situation could at that
      point have been remedied had the  Adjudicator  either  summarised  the
      evidence to the Presenting Officer or provided the Presenting  Officer
      with a copy of her record of proceedings.  There is  another  possible
      course of action.  The witness could have been  asked  to  repeat  the
      evidence.  None of these alternatives would have been desirable.   All
      of them could, arguably, disadvantage one party or the other.

16.   Mr Mahmood submits that, having decided to proceed  with  the  hearing
      in the absence of a Presenting Officer, the Adjudicator reached proper
      conclusions clearly open to her on the evidence.  We  agree  with  the
      latter part of this submission, not contested by Mr  Lawther,  but  it
      begs  the  question  whether,  having  discovered  the  problems,  the
      Adjudicator should have proceeded  any  further.   We  find  that  she
      should not have done so.

17.   We asked the representatives to assist us in relation to the  question
      of whether, under Rule 52, an Adjudicator can seek  a  transfer  order
      from a senior Adjudicator if an application for a  transfer  order  is
      not made by either or both of the parties.  Both accepted and we  find
      that an application for a transfer order is not  required  before  one
      can be made. An Adjudicator has power to ask a senior  Adjudicator  to
      make a transfer order of his or her own motion,  although  it  may  be
      prudent to inform the representatives of this intention  and  to  hear
      their submissions before reaching a conclusion.

18.   Rule 40 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003
      which deals with adjournment provides,

           "40-1)  Subject to any provision of these Rules or of any  other
           enactment, an  Adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  may  adjourn  the
           hearing of any appeal or application.


           40-2)  An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing
            on the application of a party, unless satisfied that the appeal
           or application cannot otherwise be justly determined."

19.   The provisions of Rule 40(2) do not apply to a  transfer  order  under
      Rule 52 but, by analogy, some assistance can be gained by  considering
      whether the appeal can be justly determined in  the  circumstances  in
      which a transfer order is being considered.

20.   There is a significant passage in paragraph  8  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination where she says.,

           "That is why the more appropriate application and  solution,  it
           seemed to me, was for a transfer order.  I envisaged  that  such
           an application was likely to follow if I adjourned anyway, given
           the evidence called in the respondent's absence.   I  could  not
           see how to remedy that so far as to ensure a fair hearing  other
           than by starting afresh."

      This was a correct and appropriate assessment.  The Adjudicator should
      have followed her judgment and sought a transfer order from  a  senior
      Adjudicator, notwithstanding Mrs Thandi's objections,  which  are  now
      conceded to have been misconceived.   It  is  not  clear  whether  the
      Adjudicator thought that she could seek a transfer order if  this  was
      contested.  We find that she could have done.  The reason given by the
      Adjudicator for continuing with the hearing, to avoid a witness having
      to travel to another hearing, is material but does  not  outweigh  the
      importance of the fact that the appeal procedure  was  at  that  stage
      fatally flawed, incapable of  proper  remedy,  and  should  have  been
      resolved by a transfer order.

21.   We allow the Secretary of State's appeal and remit for hearing  afresh
      before an Adjudicator other than Ms E Dubicka.




                                                                 P R Moulden
                                                              Vice President

