


MG (Fast Track - Accuracy of Country Material) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00070
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                 Date of hearing: 19 September 2003
                                            Date determination notified: 22
September 2003

            Before:

            MR G. WARR Chairman
            MR A A LLOYD JP
            MRS E HURST JP

                 Appellant

            and

            THE SECRETARY OF STATE      Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Turkey,  appeals  the  determination  of  an
adjudicator (Mr P D King) dismissing  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
respondent to grant  application for asylum.

2. Before us, the Appellant was represented by Ms A Dar Howe  &  Co..  Mr  S
Ouseley appeared for the Respondent.

3. The appeal is governed by the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Fast  Track
Procedure) Rules 2003.

4. The appellant is a Turkish Kurd. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  28
August 2003 and applied for asylum. The date of  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision iis 2 September 2003. The matter came before the adjudicator  on  9
September 2003.

5. The appellant said he  was a supporter of HADEP and became  a  member  of
DEHAP on 20 May 2003.The appellant complained of two arrests involving  very
short periods of detention and ill-treatment  in  1999.  He  had  undertaken
military  service  between  August  2001  and  January  2003.  It  was   the
appellant's case that there had been a third  detention  on  7  August  2003
because he was collecting a petition for the Amnesty Law.  He  was  detained
again for a very short period.

5. In the Secretary of  State's  letter  giving  reasons  for  refusing  the
appellant's application it is stated in paragraph 14 as follows:

      "Additionally, the Secretary of State notes your claim that  you  were
      arrested  while  collecting  a  petition  for  the  Amnesty  Law.  The
      Secretary of State is aware that the Amnesty Law was  adopted  by  the
      Turkish Parliament on 8 December 2000, and was  expanded  on  18  July
      2001. (CIPU April 2003 paras 5.43-5.50). The Secretary of  State  does
      not find it credible that given your claim that you were collecting  a
      petition for the Amnesty Law the police would have the interest in you
      that you allege."


6. The adjudicator accepted the account of the earlier  detentions  (subject
to some  exaggeration  of  the  ill-treatment  suffered)  but  rejected  the
account of the  third  detention  broadly  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
Secretary of State. He found in  paragraph 42  that  "the  circumstances  as
described by the appellant would seem therefore not  to  fit  the  objective
material and for that reason I do not  find  the  incident  in  August  2003
happened in the way described or at all."

7. On 18 August 2003 the Home Office Turkey  Bulletin  2/03  was  published.
This refers to  the  Turkish  Parliament  approving  a  "controversial  bill
granting partial amnesty to Kurdish militants." It  came  into  force  on  6
August 2003.

8. Unfortunately  no  one  drew  this  Bulletin  to  the  attention  of  the
adjudicator. Mr Ouseley acknowledged it was extremely regrettable that  this
happened  but   submitted   that   the   adjudicator's   conclusions   could
nevertheless be upheld. The adjudicator had  had  other  valid  reasons  for
finding that the appellant had not been arrested and detained on  2003,  for
example, the absence of  medical  evidence  and  the  appellant's  vagueness
about the Amnesty. Ms Dar, for her part, submitted that  the  appeal  should
be allowed on the basis of the adjudicator's findings as to  the  first  two
detentions even if the Tribunal was not minded to reverse the  adjudicator's
conclusions as to the third detention. She had made some  reference  to  the
amnesty in her skeleton argument.

9. It is important to bear in mind that this case is governed  by  the  Fast
Track procedure. In those circumstances it is extremely important  that  the
adjudicator is  not  misdirected  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  the
objective evidence. In the ideal world such mistakes would be put right.  In
the standard appeal procedure the error might well  have  been  spotted  and
corrected. However, where each stage in the appeal process  must  follow  so
swiftly, there is a  need  to  be  especially  vigilant.  The  adjudicator's
approach was quite clearly based on the Secretary of State's mistaken  point
on the background material. Moreover, the bulletin 2/03 had  been  published
prior to the refusal letter so it makes the  Secretary  of  State's  mistake
doubly embarrassing. Given the  correct  information,  the  appellant  might
claim that his political activism was not inconsistent with  the  background
material. The Secretary of State was represented before the adjudicator  and
so there was a further opportunity to put matters right at the  hearing.  Ms
Dar says the point was raised in her skeleton argument but we  have  to  say
not particularly clearly. However, in our view,  such  criticism  as  it  is
appropriate to make in such a case is to be levelled at the  respondent  and
Mr Ouseley, to be fair, did not argue to the contrary.

10. Ms Dar argued that the appellant was entitled to succeed  on  the  basis
of the findings made by the adjudicator in his favour. However, the case  of
ACDOG  [2003] 00034 (Turkey) on which she relied should  not  be  approached
on the basis that an appellant's case is to be determined on  the  basis  of
completing a checklist - see paragraph 47 of the determination. Whether  the
appellant is at risk depends on an overview of all  the  material.  In  this
instance, the Secretary of State unwittingly put an obstacle in the  way  of
the appellant. This contributed to the adjudicator assessing  the  risks  on
return on the footing that the appellant had not been  arrested  since  1999
rather than August 2003, the month of his arrival. While there may  well  be
many difficulties in the way  of  the  appellant  succeeding  it  cannot  be
assumed that the adjudicator's decision would have been  the  same  had  the
mistake not been made.

11. We have reached the conclusion that the matter should be remitted for  a
fresh hearing in fairness to the appellant.

12. The appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  we  remit  the  case  to  be
determined afresh by an adjudicator other than Mr P D King.

Appeal allowed
                                                                     G. Warr
                                                                    Chairman

                                                           19 September 2003
