
                                                    MS (Fresh Evidence)
           Iran [2004] UKIAT 00130                                       | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 13th May 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                08 June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                               Miss J Grimmett

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms R Chowdhury, instructed by Clore & Co
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr S Bilbe, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mrs  S
     Turquet, promulgated on 4th September 2003 following a hearing on 21st
     August 2003.  The  appeal  against  the  Notice  of  Decision  of  the
     Secretary of State containing removal directions for the Appellant  to
     Iran,  raised  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   The  appeal  was
     dismissed on both grounds.

  2. The essence of the Appellant's case was that she had  been  persecuted
     by her husband, his family and her  family  that  she  had  also  been
     persecuted by the Islamic regime of Iran, and she had  been  summonsed
     to appear before a religious court for adultery.  She  had  said  that
     her marriage had been terrible and that her husband had subjected  her
     to very degrading treatment.  She had been abandoned by  him  and,  in
     order to provide for herself and her child, had gone to  stay  with  a
     friend but had been treated as a servant there.

  3. Later, she had met Daroush who helped her obtain a  divorce  from  her
     husband.  In addition to obtaining a divorce from her husband, she had
     succeeded in obtaining custody of her child.  She said that her family
     had taken against her because she had written poetry which was adverse
     to God and she had had a dream about Christ.  She  had  also  gone  to
     church with a friend which had lead  to  her  being  arrested  by  the
     Kometi.

  4. After her divorce, she  had  entered  into  a  "mattah"  or  temporary
     marriage for a period of five years.  She  had  entered  into  it  one
     month after her divorce and thus during the period of three months and
     eleven days, the "Iddah", during which it is  forbidden  to  a  Muslim
     woman to remarry following a divorce.  This meant that her family knew
     that she was guilty of adultery;  they had reported her to the Iranian
     religious  authorities,  her  brother  and  her  ex-husband's   family
     threatened her and sought to take her child away from her and her life
     had ceased to be safe in Iran.

  5. The summons before the religious court meant  that  she  risked  death
     from stoning.  She explained various  matters  about  her  involvement
     with the church.  It was plain from  what  she  was  saying  that  her
     concern was not to escape the husband;  her concern was about the  way
     in which her adultery would cause her  to  be  stoned  to  death,  and
     whether her father and brothers, if they wished to kill her, would  be
     able to do so because they would face no punishment.

  6. The Secretary of State rejected the claim for a  variety  of  reasons.
     In particular, he did not accept the  credibility  of  her  claims  in
     relation to the way in which she became involved with Daroush and  the
     risk of any adultery charge.  That  letter  made  it  clear  that  the
     Secretary of State considered that the information she had  given  was
     vague and had been fabricated in order to enhance a weak asylum claim.
      The significance of those comments are that the Appellant would  have
     been very clear from the Secretary of State's letter of 11th  February
     2003  that  the  success  or  otherwise  of  her  claim  could  depend
     critically upon her showing credibly that she was indeed  at  risk  of
     prosecution for adultery and that the religious and other  authorities
     were taking what she said she had done seriously in that respect.

  7. The Adjudicator agreed with the findings of the  Secretary  of  State.
     She referred to inconsistencies in the Appellant's  various  accounts.
     She pointed out that the Appellant is a well educated woman who worked
     in Iran.  Her work was variously described as a psychiatric consultant
     or a family consultant dealing with  exceptional  children.   She  had
     said that she had managed to pay the rent  for  accommodation  because
     she was working, although on another occasion she said she had had  to
     sell  valuables  to  pay  rent  and  for  food  which  were  seen   as
     inconsistent statements.  There was inconsistency over certain of  the
     allegations  of  treatment  by  the  husband  in  the  marriage.   The
     Adjudicator concluded that the introduction of rape allegations  at  a
     late stage was an attempt to elaborate her asylum claim.

  8. The Adjudicator also found inconsistencies in the  way  in  which  the
     Appellant described her relationship with  her  family.   In  her  SEF
     statement she said that her family did not help her when  her  husband
     had started to abuse her, they had rejected her;  but in her interview
     she said that her family agreed that she was being abused,  asked  her
     to get a divorce, and told her husband to  permit  the  divorce.   She
     said later that she had not sought help from her family;  she had only
     sought help from a maternal aunt and had not been in contact with  her
     family for about eight years.  Again, later  she  said  that  she  had
     never told her family about the beatings, but her mother had seen  how
     she was treated in public.  Her mother had advised her to divorce  her
     husband.

  9. There were other discrepancies in  relation  to  whether  it  was  her
     brother or brother-in-law or both who were waiting for  her  when  she
     had gone to fetch her son from school on one occasion in order  to  do
     her harm.  The Adjudicator found implausible various  statements  that
     were made about her interest in Christianity and dreams about Christ.

 10. The Adjudicator pointed out that the Appellant said that  she  started
     to live with Daroush in 2000 shortly  after  meeting  him.   She  said
     this:

           "35.  At this time she was married to  her  husband  but  living
                 apart.  I accept that in Iran a woman suspected of adultery
                 may well face serious consequences;  I  therefore  find  it
                 implausible that this Appellant, an intelligent  and  well-
                 educated woman, would have taken the risk  of  living  with
                 another  man,  while  still  married.   I  note  that   the
                 Appellant has not mentioned any problems, while living with
                 Daroush, until shortly before her divorce.  This  leads  me
                 to conclude that she was not living with him  in  a  sexual
                 relationship.  Mr Daroush gave evidence.  I found  some  of
                 his answers evasive, when he was  asked  about  his  future
                 intentions in relation  to  the  Appellant.   He  was  very
                 hesitant in answering.  He said  that  he  lived  with  the
                 Appellant, although he knew  she  was  in  the  process  of
                 getting a divorce because he thought that he  was  doing  a
                 humanitarian job and the Appellant was lonely.  I  find  it
                 implausible that he would put the Appellant more at risk by
                 living together in a sexual relationship.  I find it likely
                 that he may have helped her with her divorce but that  they
                 did not live together in a relationship as claimed".


      (Although the Adjudicator refers to 2000 as when the Appellant started
      living with  Mr  Daroush,  and  she  may  well  have  said  that,  the
      questionnaire (Q23) refers to it being April 2002.  If the latter date
      were correct, it would simply raise the alternative problems  for  the
      Appellant that she had lived on her own, separated from  her  husband,
      for two years, and had no need to rush into a temporary  marriage  for
      security, least of all during the Iddah period.)


 11. The Adjudicator then turned to the way in which the  relationship  was
     said by the Appellant to have developed:

           "36.  The Appellant and Mr Daroush  have  said  that  they  went
                 through Mattah, a temporary  marriage,  on  27.3.2002.   Ms
                 Brewer  submitted  that  this  marriage  was  to  give  the
                 Appellant some security.  I find it  implausible  that  the
                 couple, if they were living  together  in  a  relationship,
                 which could have disastrous consequences for the  Appellant
                 if known, would then seek to regularise  the  situation  by
                 this ceremony.  The report of Dr Ansari, submitted  by  the
                 Appellant, indicates that a registered  temporary  marriage
                 would be viewed with contempt  by  Iranian  families.   She
                 would have been viewed as little more than a prostitute,  a
                 woman  of  ill-repute.   She  would  have  been   seen   as
                 conducting a very blatant act of adultery.  I do  not  find
                 that this Appellant, in  these  circumstances,  would  have
                 gone through a temporary marriage.   There  is  a  document
                 purporting to be the marriage  contract.   I  place  little
                 weight on this document as evidence of the marriage.  There
                 is nothing official on it."

     (The marriage certificate may have been changed from 2000 to 2002, but
     nothing appears to turn on that.)

 12. The divorce deed showed that the divorce was at the wife's request and
     that the husband had indeed not been granted  custody  of  the  child.
     The Adjudicator rightly pointed  out  that  that  suggested  that  the
     husband may have had mental problems, because it is normal on  divorce
     in Iran for the father to receive custody of the child.

 13. The Adjudicator then turned to a related matter of some significance:

           "38.  The Appellant had  mentioned  in  her  SEF  that  she  was
                 summoned to a religious court on 4.9.1381  (25.11.2002)  to
                 attend  on  the  28.11.2002.   She  repeated  this  in  her
                 interview.  She had submitted a copy of this at the hearing
                 that was adjourned.  This document is an invitation  asking
                 her to  attend  to  explain  some  issues.   The  place  of
                 presence was the Social Circle Department.  There had  been
                 no mention before the date of the hearing before me of  any
                 further summons.  At the hearing, the Appellant submitted a
                 summons issued  on  10.9.1381  (1.12.2002)  to  attend  the
                 Family Community Bench on 14.12.2002  to  answer  questions
                 relating  to  her  illegal  marriage  before   ending   her
                 marriage.  I do not place weight on this document.   If  it
                 had been in existence before, I  would  have  expected  the
                 Appellant to have mentioned it.  Mr Daroush  said  that  it
                 was delivered to his home and he told the officer that  the
                 Appellant had left.  If the officer had been told that  the
                 Appellant had left, it would  not  be  plausible  that  the
                 summons would be left on the premises.   I  note  that  the
                 letter from the British Embassy in Tehran dated  4.12.2000,
                 in the Respondent's Bundle, states that outside every court
                 in Iran there are any number of freelance typists, who  can
                 produce all sorts  of  legal  and  bureaucratic  documents.
                 Similarly I place little weight on the document, which  was
                 called the Police Summons at the hearing.  It is couched in
                 very vague terms.  If adultery  were  regarded  in  such  a
                 serious way in Iran, I do not find it likely  that  someone
                 suspected of this would be invited  to  attend  to  explain
                 some issues.  I do not find that the Appellant was summoned
                 to court in relation to adultery."

 14. The Adjudicator dealt with other matters including the fact  that  she
     continued to work at her former employment provided by Mr Daroush  and
     she  would  deal  with  those  who  made  appointments  in  her  other
     occupation dealing with  exceptional  children.   She  concluded  that
     these were not the acts of woman in genuine fear:  the Appellant would
     not have stayed so long in Iran  before  leaving  if  she  were  being
     persecuted.  The Adjudicator rejected the claim that the Appellant was
     accused of adultery and concluded as well that she was not, therefore,
     a member of a particular social group and would not  face  risk  as  a
     returned asylum seeker.

 15. The grounds of appeal in relation to the asylum claim  are  dependant,
     it is accepted, upon the report of an  Iranian  lawyer  based  now  in
     Sunderland, a Mr Kakhki.  In a report of 20th September 2003,  he  was
     asked if the original copy of the summons, which  is  referred  to  in
     paragraph 38 of the Adjudicator's determination,  was  authentic.   He
     sets out the tests which he uses to  analyse  whether  a  document  is
     authentic and he comes to the view that it was an authentic  document.
     He makes various other comments in a general way about the  procedures
     in Iranian courts and what would happen to the Appellant if  she  went
     back.  He says that on immediate arrival she  would  be  arrested  and
     taken directly to the court where she would be punished  according  to
     the law if she were found guilty.  The punishment that he  is  talking
     about is punishment for adultery, which is being stoned to death.

 16. The qualifications of Mr Kakhki are LLB 1990 Tehran, LLM 1997  Shiraz,
     and he is a first class attorney at law admitted  before  the  Supreme
     Court, who spent five years as  a  practising  first  class  attorney.
     Since August 2002, he has been providing expert evidence  in  relation
     to legal and immigration matters, as a resident of the United  Kingdom
     since March 2002.  He  specifically  states  that  as  a  first  class
     attorney he has authority to assess and verify the authenticity  of  a
     variety of Iranian legal and government documents.

 17. The Appellant, having obtained leave to appeal, then seeks  from  this
     Tribunal permission to rely on new evidence, the report of Mr  Kakhki.
     The Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules  2000,  Rule  21,
     sets out what must be done if a party wishes the Tribunal to  consider
     evidence not submitted to the Adjudicator.  The two  features  of  the
     written notice which must be served are  that  it  must  indicate  the
     nature of the evidence and explain why it was  not  submitted  to  the
     Adjudicator.  There is a time constraint on the service of the  notice
     setting out those matters.

 18. Ms Chowdhury, who has said everything which could be said on behalf of
     the Appellant, had to acknowledge that the Rule had not been  complied
     with in any respect.  She contended that the Secretary  of  State  was
     not prejudiced because he knew that the Appellant was looking to  rely
     upon the report of Mr Kakhki.  It may very well be the case  that  the
     Secretary of State is not prejudiced by the  failure  to  provide  the
     notice, in terms of understanding the nature of the evidence.  But  it
     is also important to recognise that the Rules require  an  explanation
     as to why the evidence was not submitted  to  the  Adjudicator;   that
     explanation is an important part of the Tribunal's consideration as to
     whether or not the  evidence  should  be  admitted.   It  is  for  the
     Tribunal to decide whether or not evidence should be admitted  and  it
     is a grave mistake, one unfortunately too often made, for  parties  to
     suppose that the Rules can be ignored and they can just  turn  up  and
     put the evidence in without having to comply with the Rules.

 19. The Tribunal, however, considered what explanation there was as to why
     the report of Mr Kakhki had not been  submitted  to  the  Adjudicator.
     There was no evidence as to why it  had  not  been  submitted  to  the
     Adjudicator.  The only available explanation was that set out  in  the
     grounds of appeal prepared by counsel other than  Ms  Chowdhury.   The
     grounds of appeal say that the summons had been sent by  post  to  the
     Appellant with other documents on the 19th  June  2003  and  that  the
     Adjudicator had failed to realise that the last witness statement  was
     signed on 17th June 2003, before  the  documents  had  been  received.
     Further, the Appellant stated to the  Adjudicator,  according  to  the
     grounds of appeal, "that she had not sent it to her solicitors because
     this document had been overlooked by her in amongst the other  various
     documents that were kept inside the envelope" in which the summons had
     been sent to her.

 20. We point out that where it is sought to rely upon  an  explanation  of
     that sort, it is incumbent on the party to provide evidence as to what
     was said to the Adjudicator  and  as  to  why  the  document  was  not
     produced earlier.  We are  prepared  to  accept,  however,  for  these
     purposes, that that is the explanation given to the Adjudicator as  to
     why the summons, which is the subject matter of the  expert's  report,
     was not produced until the day of  the  hearing.   Inferentially,  the
     reason why the expert report was produced later than the Adjudicator's
     hearing was because the Appellant herself did not  make  the  document
     available to her legal advisers until the day of the hearing.  Indeed,
     Ms Chowdhury accepted that there was no evidence  that  anybody  other
     than the Appellant or Mr Daroush was aware of the document  until  the
     day of the hearing.  She had not communicated  its  existence  to  her
     solicitor at all, even by telephone, to  see  if  this  was  something
     which was of relevance to her asylum claim.

 21. We regard this underlying explanation as to  why  there  could  be  no
     expert's  report  made  available  to  the   Adjudicator   as   simply
     incredible.  We point out that the summons was served, on its face, on
     the 1st December 2002 and that Mr Kakhki says that where a summons  is
     served, it is signed for by the husband if served at his residence and
     that explains the signature of Mr Daroush upon it.

 22. Mr Daroush, however, saw the  Appellant  on  the  12th  December  2002
     according to answers  which  she  gave  in  interview.   Although  the
     Appellant says that she  had  left  his  address  before  the  summons
     arrived, because of an earlier summons from the religious court  which
     she had failed to answer, it is inconceivable, if  this  document  was
     genuine and has the import which Mr Kakhki attaches to it, that it was
     not mentioned to the Appellant by him.

 23. It is also regarded as quite extraordinary that this  document,  which
     the Appellant said put her in fear of facing a  serious  charge  which
     could lead to death by stoning, was not regarded by her  as  having  a
     significant effect upon her asylum claim in the light of the Secretary
     of State's dismissal of her application.  She is, as assessed  by  the
     Adjudicator, an intelligent woman and the assertion that she  received
     this summons only after signing her last witness statement provides no
     credible explanation as to why it was not submitted to  the  solicitor
     almost immediately upon receipt.  The idea that it was just overlooked
     in amongst some other documents, as if it was  a  parking  ticket,  is
     not, to our mind, credible.  We do not accept  the  suggestion  by  Ms
     Chowdhury that the Appellant was in such a  state  of  mind  that  she
     could  not  possibly  have  been  thinking  in  a  normal  way.    The
     psychiatric evidence to which the Adjudicator refers simply  does  not
     bear out any such mental state.

 24. The position,  therefore,  is  that  the  explanation  that  has  been
     provided is not credible.  Even if true, it is  perfectly  clear  that
     the evidence of Mr Kakhki could have been obtained with only the  most
     modest amount of diligence by the Appellant referring the document  to
     her solicitor, who would have realised that if headway was to be  made
     with it, it would need to be supported by something weightier.

 25. The Court of Appeal in E v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
     [2004] EWCA Civ 49 is relevant to how the Tribunal should approach the
     admissibility of fresh evidence.  It is concerned  directly  with  the
     exercise by the Tribunal of its power to reconsider a case rather than
     to grant permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal;   it  was  also
     decided under the 2000 Rules.  However, having considered a number  of
     earlier Court of Appeal decisions, including those which have commonly
     been cited in this Tribunal, it sets out  principles  which  are  also
     applicable to the reception of fresh evidence  by  the  Tribunal  when
     considering whether to grant leave to appeal  to  it  and  the  appeal
     itself.  The basis for the reception of such evidence cannot be  wider
     under the 2003 Rules where the appeal is limited to a  point  of  law.
     The principles in Ladd v Marshall, as set out in paragraph  23(ii)  of
     E, are to be applied, but recognising that  exceptional  circumstances
     may exist in  which  justice  requires  that  the  fresh  evidence  be
     admitted.  The failure of  legal  representatives  is  not  a  general
     exception.  The mere fact that  fresh  evidence  is  admitted  is  not
     sufficient of itself to mean that an appeal should be  allowed  and  a
     decision remitted.

 26. The Court of Appeal said, in paragraph 92:

         "92.     In relation to the role of the IAT, we have concluded:
                 i.    The Tribunal  remained  seized  of  the  appeal,  and
                       therefore able to take account of  new  evidence,  up
                       until  the  time  when  the  decision  was   formally
                       notified to the parties.
                 ii.   Following the decision, when it was  considering  the
                       applications for leave to appeal to  this  Court,  it
                       had a discretion to direct a re-hearing;  this  power
                       was not dependent on its finding an arguable error of
                       law in its original decision.
                 iii.  However, in exercising such discretion, the principle
                       of finality would be important. To justify  reopening
                       the case, the IAT would normally need to be satisfied
                       that there was a risk of serious  injustice,  because
                       of something which had gone wrong at the hearing,  or
                       some important evidence which  had  been  overlooked;
                       and in considering whether to admit new evidence,  it
                       should be  guided  by  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles,
                       subject to any exceptional factors.
                 We should emphasise that this  analysis  is  based  on  the
                 regime applicable to this case, under which  the  right  of
                 appeal to the IAT was not confined to issues of law (before
                 the change made by  the  2002  Act,  s  101:  see  para  17
                 above)."
 27. The principles in Ladd v Marshall are set out in paragraph 23(ii):

        "New evidence will normally be admitted  only  in  accordance  with
        'Ladd v Marshall principles' (see Ladd  v  Marshall  [1954]  1  WLR
        1489), applied with some additional flexibility under the CPR  (see
        Hertfordshire Investments Ltd v Bubb [2000] 1 WLR 2318, 2325; White
        Book para 52.11.2). The Ladd v Marshall principles are, in summary:
        first, that the fresh evidence could not have  been  obtained  with
        reasonable diligence for use at the trial; secondly, that if given,
        it probably would have had an important influence  on  the  result;
        and,  thirdly,  that  it  is  apparently  credible   although   not
        necessarily incontrovertible. As a general rule, the fact that  the
        failure to adduce the  evidence  was  that  of  the  party's  legal
        advisers provides no excuse: see Al-Mehdawi v Home Secretary [1990]
        1AC 876."

 28. The new evidence in this case fails the first test in Ladd v Marshall.

 29. In order to reach a view as to whether the material should be admitted
     exceptionally, we turn to the nature of the  material.   There  are  a
     number of problems with the report of Mr Kakhki.  The  first  is  that
     much of what he has to say is rendered rather less  valuable  than  it
     might otherwise be because he is very dependant on the  provenance  of
     the document in the context of the evidence given to the  Adjudicator.
     Of course, one cannot rule out  material  which  may  be  relevant  to
     credibility by saying that someone has been found to be not  credible,
     where the evidence in question might go some  way  to  supporting  the
     credibility of that witness.  But, as the Tribunal has made  clear  in
     Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439*, how  documents  of  this  sort  are
     approached involves a consideration of the reliability of the document
     and the weight to be attached to it in the context of all the evidence
     about it, and the evidence which the Appellant has given.

 30. In this case, the evidence that the Appellant received a  summons  for
     having entered into an illegal marriage, illegal because it was in the
     Iddah period, involves the Adjudicator's conclusions in paragraphs  35
     and 36 of her determination.  It is clear to us that those conclusions
     mean that the background to the production  of  this  summons  require
     considerable  scepticism.   As  the  Adjudicator  pointed   out,   the
     Appellant gave evidence that she was living with Mr Daroush whilst she
     was still married to the husband before she got divorced.  The address
     given on the divorce papers and the  address  where  the  summons  was
     served are the same.  It is extraordinary that the Appellant,  now  so
     concerned about the impact of her activities on the risk of a  serious
     criminal charge, should have been  in  a  relationship  of  that  sort
     whilst she was still actually married.

 31. It is even more extraordinary that the Appellant, after  the  divorce,
     with only a period of three months and eleven  days  to  wait,  should
     enter into an explicit form of temporary marriage after one month, and
     then obtain and present to the Adjudicator an expert's  report  which,
     as summarised correctly by the  Adjudicator,  shows  that  those  acts
     would undermine her honour and integrity in the minds of what might be
     called right-thinking members of the ordinary Shi-ite community.   The
     "mattah"  marriage  is  seen  as  a  form  of  licence  for   clerical
     licentiousness and is generally disapproved of for that reason.

 32. The next factor in the background is that Mr Kakhki makes no reference
     to a matter to which the Adjudicator adverts in her  determination  in
     paragraph 38, when she refers to it being evidenced, and not disputed,
     that outside every court there are freelance typists able  to  provide
     every type of court form for every purpose.  Given that is so,  it  is
     particularly important for an expert to explain how he can  tell  that
     the document that he is examining is not one of those, and is  instead
     a genuine document, bearing in mind that genuine blank  forms  may  be
     obtained, indeed genuine stamps may even be applied to  them,  through
     bribery or inefficiency.  He does not deal with that obvious  problem,
     which the Adjudicator raised.

 33. It is also our view that the  report  itself  is  over-simple  in  its
     approach to what might be said to the family court, and  its  response
     to the alleged offence of forming a temporary  marriage  during  Iddah
     and the risk of stoning.  This is particularly important in the  light
     of what the Adjudicator said about the way in which adultery has to be
     proved.   The  Adjudicator  specifically  draws   attention   to   the
     limitations on the evidence which has to be given;  the strictness  of
     the evidence is a corollary of the severity of the penalty.  In  order
     to be convicted of adultery, it is necessary for the evidence  of  the
     act of adultery to be given by four just men or three just men and two
     just women, neither of which condition was fulfilled (paragraph 24).

 34. It is simply unrealistic for an expert to say that someone is at  risk
     of that penalty without dealing with the ways in which the  allegation
     has to be proved, and it would have been a problem for him even if the
     Adjudicator had not mentioned it.  We would also point out, as  indeed
     has been the case for a while,  that  the  infliction  of  stoning  is
     sporadic, rare, and according to the latest CIPU Report of April 2004,
     paragraph 6.212, is currently in abeyance.

 35. The position, therefore, is that the expert's report is not one  which
     we regard it as necessary to admit exceptionally in order for  justice
     to be done.  It suffers from significant weaknesses in the Appellant's
     case in any event, and itself contains significant weaknesses.  We  do
     not consider that, if it were allowed in,  there  would  be  a  proper
     basis for saying that the Adjudicator might have erred in law and that
     the case needed to be reconsidered on credibility.

 36. We now turn to the argument in relation to Article 3,  Article  8  and
     suicide risk.  The Appellant produced to the Adjudicator a report from
     a Consultant Psychiatrist, who is not unknown to the Tribunal,  called
     Dr Steadman.  He produced a lengthy report dealing  with  a  range  of
     psychiatric conditions.  The Adjudicator referred to these matters  in
     paragraph 45 of her determination:

           "Article 8.  Ms Brewer argued that  the  Appellant's  Article  8
           rights would be breached if she were returned to Iran.  She said
           that it would  be  disproportionate  to  return  the  Appellant,
           particularly in the light of Dr Steadman's report and the report
           on the Appellant's son.  Dr Steadman's Report gives a  diagnosis
           of anxiety and depression.  This was given after one meeting and
           based on the Appellant's account.  There is no  indication  that
           the Appellant is receiving psychiatric treatment.  In any event,
           the CIPU Report states that  there  is  an  extensive  range  of
           specialist care in Tehran in both the private  and  governmental
           sectors.  There are four regional centres for the prevention  of
           mental health disorders.  Efforts were being  made  to  increase
           inpatient  and   outpatient   mental   health   facilities   and
           counselling services.  If the Appellant returns to  Iran,  I  am
           satisfied that there would be adequate health provision for  her
           and her son.   Dr  Steadman  stated  that  the  Appellant's  son
           demonstrated  abnormal  attachment  to  his   mother   and   was
           overactive and rather anxious.  These  conditions  may  well  be
           attributable to being in a foreign country, where he has no  one
           but his mother and cannot speak the language.  The conditions in
           the receiving country do not meet the threshold for Article 3."

 37. Ms Chowdhury points out, and it is correct, that  the  Adjudicator  in
     that paragraph makes no specific mention of one matter to which in the
     middle of his report Dr Steadman refers and that is risk  of  suicide.
     He sets out that the Appellant  was  sorrowful  through  most  of  her
     assessment and described various fears which she had.  She  said  that
     she had taken three overdoses in Iran, the first one six months  after
     her husband left her, the last some months before coming to the United
     Kingdom.  On the last occasion, she had seen a  psychiatrist  and  had
     been given medication because her heart would  rise  suddenly  without
     warning.  She then said when asked how she would cope if she was  sent
     back to Iran that she would kill herself in  preference  to  this  but
     would not harm her son.  Dr Steadman mentioned  various  risk  factors
     and then said "it is my view taking all of the above into account that
     this lady would be at significantly increased  risk  of  further  self
     harm or suicide where she be returned to her country".

 38. Ms Chowdhury  submits  that  the  matter  should  be  returned  to  an
     Adjudicator for him to assess the degree of risk in the light of  that
     report and having heard evidence from the  Appellant.   She  submitted
     that it was established that to return someone to a country, or indeed
     to decide to return someone to a country, where that person would face
     a real and significantly increased risk of suicide, involved a  breach
     of Article 3.  In this context she referred to the decision of  Silber
     J in Kourtolli v SSHD [2003] EWHC 2744 Admin  and  to  the  Tribunal's
     decision in P (Yugoslavia) [2003] UKIAT 00017.  It  is  not  necessary
     for the purposes of this  decision  to  enter  the  debate  about  the
     effect, if any, of the decision in N v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  1369  on
     the earlier Court of Appeal decision in Soumahoro.

 39. However, taking Ms Chowdhury's proposition  as  broadly  correct,  the
     argument does not succeed on the facts.  First, almost the sole  basis
     for the briefly expressed material upon which Dr Steadman  relies  for
     his conclusion is what the Appellant told him.  The Appellant has  not
     been found to be credible in significant aspects of her evidence.   Dr
     Steadman's report is not a sound basis for doubting the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions in that respect.  But it means that little weight  can  be
     given to what she told him.   It  is  clear  that  she  gave  no  such
     evidence herself to the Adjudicator, yet she had  the  opportunity  to
     give any such evidence had she been so minded;  it plainly is  capable
     of being relevant.

 40. Secondly, it is evident, simply from the case of  P  (Yugoslavia)  and
     the criteria that are set out there for  the  assessment  of  risk  of
     suicide, that Dr Steadman's report is  generalised,  poorly  analysed,
     and an unstructured document which provides very little by  way  of  a
     sound basis for the conclusion to which he  comes.   We  would  expect
     cogent evidence to be adduced in order to make out any  asserted  risk
     of this sort because of the ease with which such an allegation can  be
     made to bolster a weak case.

 41. It is necessary for evidence of suicide risk to be  far  clearer  than
     here;  and the adding together of further self-harm and suicide in one
     sentence dealing with risk, as if there were no difference between the
     two and as if they could be equated, is  entirely  inappropriate.   It
     does not follow at all that every act of  self-harm  could  constitute
     some form of exposure to treatment which breaches Article 3.

 42. We find the comments made  by  Dr  Steadman  in  that  respect  wholly
     unpersuasive and though the Adjudicator might have  mentioned  it,  we
     recognise that in the course of her very  careful  determination,  she
     had dealt with the main points which  were  raised  by  the  Appellant
     before her.  It is expecting too much of an  Adjudicator  for  her  to
     trawl through every passage  in  a  report  of  that  length  from  Dr
     Steadman, unless particular points are clearly made by  the  Appellant
     at the hearing and supported in submission  so  that  the  Adjudicator
     knows what points really matter.  We emphasise that because the volume
     of material produced in these cases is so extensive  that  it  is  not
     difficult at all for an advocate to find  something  that  might  have
     been placed in front of an Adjudicator that has not been referred  to.
     We ourselves  have  been  favoured,  if  that  is  the  word,  with  a
     voluminous bundle of material including background  material  much  of
     which is out of date and most of which is completely irrelevant.

 43. This appeal is dismissed.













                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


