
Heard at Field House         NA (Kyrgyz Woman) Tajikistan CG [2004] UKIAT
00133
On      19 May 2004
Written                    19                    May                    2004




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             28 May 2004

                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                       Mr R Chalkley (Vice-President)
                                Mr R Hamilton



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Tajikistan, appeals,  with  leave,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  D  S  Corke,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 25 April 2002 to issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum.

  2. Ms K Cronin represented the Appellant.  Mr  A  Sheikh,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. She lived with  her
     mother, her only living relative, in Zhergital in Tajikistan.  She  had
     no friends in Tajikistan. They were  members  of  the  minority  Kyrgyz
     ethnic group. In June 2001, when she was 28 years old, she was  walking
     along the street when she was abducted by a group of  Tajik  men  in  a
     car. She was taken out of town, beaten and raped. Her mother became ill
     as a result of stress when she told her about  the  attack  afterwards.
     At the end of August 2001 the men came back  and  attacked  the  house,
     breaking windows shouting  and  threatening.   The  Appellant  and  her
     mother gave their savings to friends to safeguard them.  The  situation
     is not clear at this point (and Ms Cronin was unable to help us)  as to
     whether the Appellant and her mother then went to stay with some  Greek
     friends and later returned home, or whether they remained at home.   At
     all events in November 2001 there was another attack on  the  house  in
     which the men came and beat the Appellant and her mother. On 1  January
     2002, the mother died.  The Appellant  went  to  live  with  her  Greek
     friends but could not stay there for  long.  Fourteen  days  after  the
     mother's death, the men came back to the family house  and  set  it  on
     fire. The incidents were reported to the  police  without  result.  The
     Appellant came to the UK on 19 February 2002 and claimed asylum  on  26
     February 2002.

  4. This appeal was previously remitted by the Tribunal to be heard afresh,
     save that the new Adjudicator was bound by a direction of that Tribunal
     that the positive credibility finding in respect of the  rape  incident
     reached by  the  previous  Adjudicator  in  a  determination  that  was
     otherwise set aside, was to be accepted as sustainable and credible.

  5. In fact, although initially  Ms  Cronin  challenged  the  Adjudicator's
     credibility findings as being Wednesbury unreasonable on the  basis  of
     the grounds of  appeal,  the  Adjudicator  essentially  determined  the
     remitted appeal on basis that all the material events described by  the
     Appellant actually happened. However he found the  Appellant  to  be  a
     singularly unimpressive witness who was  prone  to  exaggeration  in  a
     number of respects and particularly in the gloss  she  put  upon  these
     events. The Adjudicator  described  the  examples  of  this.  She  gave
     inconsistent oral evidence about having no friends  in  Tajikistan  but
     then, when questioned about having said that she stayed with the  Greek
     family, said that they were personal friends, and then later said  that
     they were friends of her mother's.  She was vague in her account of the
     circumstances surrounding the rape.  Though she said she  reported  the
     incidents to the police it emerged that she did  not  report  the  rape
     until a month after it happened by which  time  there  was  little  the
     police could do about it.  She did not tell the police about the attack
     on house in August.  She did not go to or approach the  prosecutors  or
     local politicians. She explained this by saying that she was frightened
     of the police due to being  Kyrgyz,  but  then  acknowledged  that  she
     herself had never seen any violence used by the police  against  Kyrgyz
     people. The Appellant's written evidence implied that all the incidents
     had been perpetrated by the same group of  Tajik  men,  but  in  cross-
     examination she admitted that she did not know the men  who  raped  her
     and none of those men were involved in  the  attack  on  her  house  in
     August. She also conceded in cross-examination that all but one of  the
     attackers in November were different from the previous attack  but  one
     of them looked  like  a  person  who  attacked  the  house  in  August.
     Moreover, the house had been left without windows and this was an  open
     invitation to thieves and vandals and therefore further  attacks  could
     not be attributed to any particular  ethnic  group.   When  the  family
     house was eventually burned, the Appellant was not  present  and  could
     not say who did it.

  6. We should mention at this stage that the grounds of appeal, which  were
     accompanied  by  written  submissions,  suffered   from   extreme   and
     unnecessary  verbosity,  running  to   many   more   pages   than   the
     determination itself. Ms Cronin, who  was  not  responsible  for  their
     drafting, helpfully produced at the outset  of  the  hearing,  a  short
     precis of the points she wished to advance to us,  for  which  we  were
     grateful.  Later in the hearing we  agreed  that  a  challenge  to  the
     viability of the Adjudicator's conclusion of internal relocation should
     be added to the pr�cis, as the matter had been mentioned in the written
     submissions though was well buried amidst the excess  verbiage.  It  is
     fair to say that none of the points made by  the  Adjudicator  that  we
     have described in paragraph 5 were challenged specifically by Ms Cronin
     in her submissions, save  that  she  explained  the  vagueness  of  the
     Appellant's account of the events surrounding the rape in terms of  the
     medical evidence as to her mental state, which is quite understandable.



  7. There are therefore essentially undisputed findings about the  specific
     facts of this appeal. As we shall describe later however, Ms Cronin did
     attack the conclusions that the Adjudicator drew from the facts in  the
     light of the evidence as a whole, especially  in  relation  to  a  1951
     Convention  reason,  causation,  risk   on   return,   sufficiency   of
     protection, and internal relocation. We  accept  that  there  are  some
     errors in the Adjudicator's conclusions,  as  we  shall  describe,  but
     given the sustainability of his specific findings of fact, we are  able
     to cure those errors.

  8. On the basis of the facts as established the Adjudicator considered the
     objective material, about which the shall say more later, and concluded
     that the evidence did not  show  a  course  of  conduct  by  ethnically
     motivated attackers, nor would there be any real risk of persecution or
     a breach of Article 3 on  return.  Alternatively  there  was  a  viable
     internal relocation option that would not be unduly harsh.  Accordingly
     he dismissed the asylum and associated Article 3 appeals.

  9. In reaching these conclusions the Adjudicator also took into account  a
     psychological  report  from  a  consultant  clinical  psychologist  who
     diagnosed  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  a  major   depressive
     disorder resulting from the assault and rape.  The Adjudicator did  not
     accept the opinion that the claimant  could  not  recover  in  her  own
     country because there would be a constant exacerbation of the  symptoms
     and that therapy should be carried out in  Glasgow.  This  would  infer
     that a rape victim could only recover  from  psychological  trauma  she
     were to leave the country she lived and went abroad for treatment.  The
     objective  evidence  showed  that  there  was   psychiatric   treatment
     available in Tajikistan.

 10. The Vice President granting permission to appeal did so in  respect  of
     ground 2 only and the following terms .
           "The grounds otherwise raise arguable issues relating to  ethnic
           Kyrgyz in  Tajikistan  and  (which  it  is  submitted  that  the
           Adjudicator failed to adequately consider)  and  as  to  whether
           women who are risk of trafficking for economic or social  profit
           and/or are capable of being described as vulnerable, are lacking
           a sufficiency of  protection  from  the  state  and  engage  the
           Refugee  Convention  (a   submission   which   the   Adjudicator
           rejected)."

 11. As we have said, Ms Cronin, in her submissions to us, did not  directly
     follow the grounds of appeal. She did not pursue  with  any  force  the
     challenge to the Adjudicator's dismissal of the free  standing  Article
     3/8  claim  on  health  grounds,  beyond  stating  that   the   country
     information showed that psychiatric care in Tajikistan  is  in  a  very
     poor condition but she could not press this aspect of the claim  beyond
     that and had  no  instructions  to  withdraw  it.  Notwithstanding  the
     limited psychiatric facilities available  in  Tajikistan,  we  consider
     that the freestanding appeal under either Articles 3 or  8  on  medical
     grounds cannot succeed, given the medical and objective evidence before
     us and the guidance of the Court of Appeal in N [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1369
     and  Djali  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1371  on  the  high  severity  threshold
     required,. We therefore dismiss this  aspect  of  the  appeal,  as  the
     Adjudicator's conclusion on this point is not clear.

 12. Turning to the appeal on asylum and associated Article  3  grounds,  we
     have first considered the question of a  1951  Convention  reason.  The
     Adjudicator held in paragraph  27  that  the  Appellant  did  not  face
     persecution on the grounds of her ethnicity as a Kyrgyz (this  being  a
     fact based assessment to which we shall  return  later)  and  therefore
     could only qualify for asylum as a member of a particular social group.
      He considered whether  any  category  of  women  in  Tajikistan  could
     constitute such a group. His findings on this point are not clear.   He
     did not accept that "women in danger of being trafficked  for  economic
     or social profit" could constitute such a group as not every woman  was
     at risk of trafficking.  He then considered whether  "vulnerable  women
     without protection" were a particular social  group  but  not  seem  to
     reach any  conclusion  about  that.  He  then  went  on  to  find  that
     "unmarried Kyrgyz women in Tajikistan" did constitute a "social  group"
     on the basis of the "primitive" and "Sabine" attitude to them  of  some
     Kyrgyz men. However he made no reference to the legal basis on which he
     reached that conclusion.

 13. Plainly Kyrgyz women could engage the protection of the 1951 Convention
     on the basis of their ethnicity if the facts permit.  Whether  they  or
     any subgroup constitute also a particular social group for the  purpose
     of the 1951 Convention turns upon the analysis made  by  the  House  of
     Lords in Shah and Islam [1999] Imm AR 283 HL. Ms Cronin argued that  it
     was not necessary for the existence of this particular social group for
     there to be clear discrimination in law, if there was discrimination in
     practice. We do not agree.   That  is  not  what  the  House  of  Lords
     decided. This issue was considered by the Tribunal at  some  length  in
     [2004] UKIAT 00059 M Albania. We adopt  their  reasoning.  One  passage
     explains their approach.
           10. The Adjudicator dealt with matters at paragraph  21  of  his
           determination as follows.
                 " The US State Department and  CIPU  reports  confirm  that
                 violence against women remains a serious problem  and  that
                 the police response is  lax.  Trafficking  in  women  is  a
                 problem and police corruption and involvement is an issue.
           With all respect to the Adjudicator it seems to us that  he  has
           gravely misunderstood the effect  of  Shah  and  Islam  in  that
           rather generalised approach which does not  suggest  any  active
           undermining  of  the  position  of  women  in  Albania  by   the
           provisions of the law."

 14. We agree with the Tribunal in M Albania that an  essential  feature  of
     the House of Lords' conclusion that women in Pakistan are a  particular
     social  group  was  precisely  because  the  law  of  Pakistan   itself
     undermined their position in clear and unambiguous terms.  There is  no
     such evidence in relation to Tajikistan.  Indeed the evidence before us
     shows the contrary.

 15. We should at this point mention that we have  before  us  a  reasonable
     volume of  objective  material  concerning  Tajikistan.   There  is  an
     objective bundle from the Appellant's representatives which includes  a
     report from Freedom House and the US State Department report for  2002,
     as well as an  assessment  of  psychiatric  care  in  Tajikistan,  some
     general guidance notes from UNHCR that are not country specific, and an
     article from UNHCR confirming that  Tajikistan  has  banned  landmines,
     though how this latter document is  relevant  in  this  appeal  is  not
     clear. Ms Cronin in her submissions referred only to the Freedom  House
     report and an expert report from  Dr  N  Megoran  commissioned  by  the
     Appellant's representatives for this appeal. Mr Sheikh produced for  us
     a number of US  State  Department  bulletins  about  Tajikistan  and  a
     profile on the Kyrgyz of Tajikistan.


 16. The Tajikistan Human Rights bulletin dealing with discrimination  based
     on sex and other reasons reports that
           "The constitution provides for the rights and freedoms of  every
           person regardless of nationality, race, sex, language, political
           persuasion, or social status and also specifically  states  that
           men and women have the same rights; however  in  practice  there
           was some discrimination against women.
           The criminal code  prohibits  rape  (although  not  specifically
           spousal rape) which is punishable by up to 20 years imprisonment
           or, in certain circumstances the death penalty.
           The  law  accords  women  in  equal  rights  with  men   however
           discrimination against women remained a problem.   Traditionally
           there has been a high  level  of  female  participation  in  the
           workforce and in institutes of higher learning.   There  was  no
           formal discrimination against women in employment, education, or
           housing;  in  urban  areas  women   were   employed   throughout
           government, academic institutes and enterprises.  However  women
           faced  diminishing  educational  opportunities  and   increasing
           poverty.  Women legally are entitled to receive  equal  pay  for
           equal work; however this regulation was not always  enforced  in
           practice.
           The criminal code protects the women's rights  in  marriage  and
           family matters.  Inheritance laws do  not  discriminate  against
           women;  however  in  practice   some   inheritance   is   passed
           disproportionately to sons.
           There were many local women's groups and NGOs  headed  by  women
           that worked to improve the status of women.  The government  has
           a specific committee for women's and family affairs."

 17.  Though  there  are  problems  in  Tajikistan   and   there   is   some
     discrimination against women, it is plain that the constitution and the
     law of the country does not in itself undermine the position of  women.
     Moreover the government is taking action to enhance women's position in
     society. We therefore disagree with Ms Cronin,  on  the  basis  of  the
     interpretation of Shah & Islam contained in M Albania,  that  women  in
     Tajikistan, or any subgroup of them as argued before us or  before  the
     Adjudicator, can constitute a particular social group.  The Adjudicator
     made an error  of  law  in  finding  that  unmarried  Kyrgyz  women  in
     Tajikistan do constitute a particular social group, but we can  correct
     that error as we do.

 18. We then considered whether  there  is  any  viable  objective  material
     showing discrimination/persecution of ethnic Kyrgyz on grounds of their
     ethnicity, or a lack of sufficiency of protection of ethnic Kyrgyz from
     the authorities against non-state agents,  and  whether  the  Appellant
     would be at real risk of persecution or a breach  of  Article  3  as  a
     female Kyrgyz.  Ms Cronin relied heavily  in  her  submissions  on  the
     report commissioned from Dr Nick Megorum. He  is  a  Fellow  of  Sidney
     Sussex College, Cambridge, who researches issues embracing nationalism,
     boundary disputes, state building and ethnic relations in Central Asia.
     He has an impressive CV and  publications  list,  which  features  work
     relating to Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. It does not reveal
     any publications relating to Tajikistan or that he has in fact  visited
     that country. We say this not to diminish his  professionalism.  Indeed
     many of the  things  he  says  in  his  report  are  well  sourced  and
     corroborated in other objective material before us. However in  certain
     key passages of his report he expresses himself in general terms  about
     the situation in Central Asia rather than in Tajikistan. Thus  he  says
     that there is corruption and police brutality throughout Central  Asia.
     That certainly is corroborated extensively in the papers before us.  He
     says on page 24 that there has  been  little  research  on  the  Kyrgyz
     minority of Tajikistan because it is  too  small  to  present  a  major
     separatist threat to state  power  in  the  way  the  Tajiks  might  in
     Uzbekistan and the Uzbeks in Kyrgyzstan. He puts the numbers of  Kyrgyz
     in Tajikistan and at  approximately  1%  of  the  population  after  an
     outflow during and after the Tajik civil war of 1993/7. This conclusion
     is  properly  sourced  and  we  accept  it  also.  It  shows  that  the
     authorities in Tajikistan do not see their Kyrgyz minority as a  threat
     and that is significant in our assessment. He  notes  that  there  were
     some tensions between Kyrgyz and Tajiks  in  Kyrgyzstan  in  2000,  and
     there are  ongoing  the  border  difficulties  between  Tajikistan  and
     Kyrgyzstan. Again we accept this. However, he then goes on to offer the
     following opinion in respect of the Appellant's ability to seek justice
     in Tajikistan.
           "Vulnerable women are often liable to sexual abuse by police  in
           Central Asia, who can generally act with impunity against  women
           or other people who lack powerful family or  other  ties.   This
           has been reported in numerous  anecdotal  ways,  and  I  further
           learned of it though  a  colleague  who  worked  in  an  NGO  in
           Kyrgyzstan supporting the commercial sex workers.   It  is  also
           something that I have  witnessed  first-hand  on  one  occasion.
           Whilst this incident was in Kyrgyzstan, police cultures are very
           similar.  In such circumstances it  is  quite  possible  that  a
           vulnerable woman without money or  the  backing  of  importance,
           well-connected or forceful males  could  find  no  support  from
           police."


     In his conclusion, he states further that the account of the  Appellant
     is entirely plausible and that if true and she were to be  returned  to
     Tajikistan "I do not doubt that she would suffer any emotional  traumas
     and the real danger of further physical abuse and attack."

 19. The Adjudicator did not disregard this report, as implied by Ms Cronin.
     He concluded that much of it  was  not  particularly  relevant  and  we
     agree. Insofar as it discussed the vulnerability  of  single  women  to
     bride  snatching  in  Kyrgyz  communities  and  the  lack  of  marriage
     prospects for women over 20 and  the  social  exclusion  of  rape  that
     women, he was happy to accept it. However he was not  clear  about  the
     view he took concerning the sufficiency of protection available to  the
     Appellant from the police and the consequent risk to the Appellant. Nor
     did he address the specific points quoted in paragraph 18 above. We can
     make good that deficiency.

 20. As we have  said,  Dr  Megoran's  report  did  not  show  any  personal
     experience of Tajikistan and this is  particularly  borne  out  in  the
     crucial passage we have quoted in paragraph 18.  His observations about
     the vulnerability of women to sexual abuse by  police  are  generalised
     across Central Asia rather focused on Tajikistan.  But it is not a part
     of the Appellant's case that she was sexually abused by the police.  He
     reports unspecific anecdotal evidence from a colleague that the  police
     can act with impunity against unprotected women but again this  relates
     to Kyrgyzstan not Tajikistan, as  does  the  example  that  Dr  Megoran
     witnessed himself.  This  passage  is  not  in  our  view  sufficiently
     focused, or well sourced, or corroborated, to carry material weight. We
     asked Ms Cronin specifically whether there was any  objective  material
     relating to Tajikistan concerning a lack of sufficiency  of  protection
     from the police for the Kyrgyz. She was unable to identify  any,  apart
     from referring back to the passage in  Dr  Megoran's  report  described
     above.  This  lack  of  corroboration  in  the  objective  evidence  is
     striking. It may be that  there  is  limited  research  as  Dr  Megoran
     states, but there is clear objective material about  other  aspects  of
     life in Tajikistan and there  are  active  NGOs  in  that  country.  We
     consider that if  there  were  material  ill-treatment  of  the  Kyrgyz
     minority to any meaningful extent there would be some mention of it  in
     the country material. The reality, as Dr Megoran  noted,  is  that  the
     ethnic Kyrgyz are small in number and are not perceived or treated as a
     threat.

 21. We also take into account the objective evidence we have quoted already
     concerning  the  position  of  women   generally.   Whilst   there   is
     discrimination,  the  Tajikistan  government  is  actively  engaged  in
     promoting female rights and it would appear that the position of  women
     in Tajikistan society is rather  better  than  in  other  countries  in
     Central Asia. As we have already quoted there is  powerful  legislation
     and action offered by the state in terms of the  criminal  law  against
     rapists and traffickers. The area where the law is  not  much  enforced
     according to the objective material is in relation  to  spousal  abuse,
     but that is not relevant in this appeal.

 22. Dr Megoran opines that the Appellant's claim is plausible.  We  do  not
     doubt that.  Sadly ill-treatment of women and  rape  and  vandalism  of
     property occurs in most countries in the world. The issue before us  is
     whether there is a real risk that the Appellant will on return face ill-
     treatment of the severity amounting to persecution (and here  ethnicity
     must be an ingredient if there is to be a successful asylum claim) or a
     breach of Article 3.

 23. Ms Cronin referred us to  passages  in  the  Freedom  House  report  on
     Tajikistan, which we have considered. It shows that as a consequence of
     the Tajik civil war as many as 25,000  male  heads  of  household  were
     killed and many women have been forced to provide  for  themselves  and
     their dependents.  Thus there  are  many  single  women  providing  for
     themselves and their families in Tajikistan. The report  suggests  that
     the status of women in Tajik society remains relatively  low  and  that
     there is extensive discrimination  particularly  in  the  rural  areas.
     This is a view that we have balanced with the other  material  we  have
     described about the role of women in society.  The status of  women  in
     Tajikistan may be relatively low compared to Western standards but  the
     evidence suggests that it may rather better than in other countries  in
     Central  Asia.  It  also  suggests  that  although  Tajik  law  forbids
     discrimination based on ethnicity  and  language  there  is  widespread
     discrimination  against  non  Tajiks.  However  on  analysis  the  main
     problems are with other ethnic communities, though the report describes
     occasional incidents of physical harm and  regular  discrimination.  We
     have taken this evidence into account but it does not suggest that  the
     problem is of the severity to constitute in general terms a  real  risk
     of persecution for Kyrgyz generally or Kyrgyz women in particular.

 24. Ms Cronin argued on the  basis  of  the  objective  evidence  that  the
     Adjudicator's conclusions  risk,  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
     viability of internal  relocation  are  wrong  in  law.  She  said  the
     Adjudicator failed to take properly into account the combined  risk  of
     her ethnicity and her being a single woman. We do not agree.

 25. Plainly the Adjudicator had the evidence as a whole in mind in reaching
     his conclusions. If anything the Adjudicator erred in  the  Appellant's
     favour  in  accepting  that  unmarried  Kyrgyz  women   in   Tajikistan
     constitute a particular social group because some Kyrgyz  men  find  it
     acceptable to kidnap and rape them in order to marry them, and there is
     no evidence that they would be sufficiently protected by the state. The
     Appellant does not fit the profile for a person at risk in this way. At
     28 she is above the age indicated in the objective evidence,  when  she
     would be at risk of abduction for forced marriage among the Kyrgyz,  or
     where she would be a target for traffickers.  Whilst  there  remains  a
     serious problem of spousal  abuse  in  Tajikistan,  rape  of  the  kind
     experienced  by  the  Appellant  is  regarded  very  seriously  by  the
     authorities.

 26. The Adjudicator  carefully  assessed  what  actually  happened  to  the
     Appellant and his conclusions are sustainable on  the  evidence  before
     him.  The Appellant did not report the rape to the police until a month
     after it happened and she did not know who had been responsible for the
     attack.  She did not report the August attack on her house.   In  these
     circumstances it is difficult to see what the police could  have  done.
     She said she was afraid of the police and that is why  she  did  go  to
     them but the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  this  was
     contradicted by her own evidence that she  did  ultimately  go  to  the
     police, and this does not indicate fear. Indeed in  her  oral  evidence
     she conceded that she had never seen the police attack a Kyrgyz.

 27. Obviously the rape occurred because the Appellant is a woman, but  that
     does not comprise a 1951 Convention reason, as we have  explained.  The
     Adjudicator concluded on the  evidence  that  the  rape,  for  all  its
     horror,  was  a  single  opportunistic  event  that  was  not  racially
     motivated. He was entitled to reach that  conclusion  for  the  reasons
     stated.  Ms Cronin submitted that if the rape were  considered  in  the
     context of the other attacks on the Appellant and her home then plainly
     it demonstrated a concerted campaign against her due to  her  ethnicity
     and her vulnerability as a single woman.  However the  Adjudicator  was
     entitled to his view that the Appellant had exaggerated the connections
     between the different events. There was no  indication  that  the  same
     people were involved in the different events.   The  rape  involved  an
     opportunistic kidnapping off the street.  The other incidents  were  at
     her house.  After the August incident the house  appeared  damaged,  as
     the windows were broken and  unrepaired.  This  could  readily  attract
     adverse attention from hooligans. The Adjudicator was entitled to  take
     into account that although the Appellant  had  complained  of  previous
     discrimination, there had been no incidents in the 28  years  prior  to
     the rape that could  approach  even  cumulatively  the  high  threshold
     required to engage persecution and Article 3.

 28. Contrary to Ms Cronin's further submissions the objective evidence does
     not support the view that the police would not offer a  sufficiency  of
     protection against a woman  threatened  with  serious  physical  attack
     outside the context of marriage. On the facts of this appeal there  was
     little the police could do if the complaint was not made until a  month
     after the rape and the Appellant was unable  to  identify  any  of  her
     attackers.   The  law  imposes  heavy  penalties  against  rapists  and
     traffickers and the evidence is that  it  is  enforced  and  there  are
     prosecutions. It is  not  clear  from  the  determination  whether  the
     Adjudicator properly addressed sufficiency of protection  in  terms  of
     the test described in Horvath. However we can remedy  that  defect  and
     conclude for the reasons we have described in relation to the objective
     evidence that there would be a sufficiency of protection available, had
     the Appellant sought to engage it.

 29. Moreover, even if the Appellant had a specific  problem  with  a  small
     group of non state agents who  had  targeted  her  in  her  home  as  a
     consequence  of  her  ethnicity  and  vulnerability  as  claimed,   the
     Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that this was essentially a  local
     problem and that the Appellant had a viable internal relocation  option
     elsewhere in Tajikistan that would not be unduly harsh.  The  objective
     evidence does not show a real risk that the problems she experienced in
     her home area would be repeated elsewhere, as Ms Cronin has asserted.

 30. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed on all grounds.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
