
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |LM (Acholi - LRA - internal |
|                           |        |relocation) Uganda CG [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00107                 |
|On 28 April 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Mr A Jordan (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Miss L Maroof, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Sills & Betteridge, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Uganda, appeals the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr M C Field) who dismissed her appeal against a decision
      of the Secretary of State to refuse her application for asylum.

2.    The appellant is of the Acholi tribe.   The appeal was  listed  before
      two Vice Presidents in order that  guidance  might  be  given  on  the
      question if appropriate of the availability of the internal relocation
      option for displaced  Acholi.    There  was  an  extensive  background
      bundle  helpfully  prepared  by  those  instructing   Counsel.     The
      representatives had  apparently  been  made  aware  that  this  was  a
      proposed country guidance case.   Counsel apologised for the fact that
      the bundle had been sent  late.   While  no  expert  evidence  on  the
      objective situation had been lodged she was ready  to  deal  with  the
      case on  the  material  which  had  been  made  available  before  the
      Adjudicator and which was before the Tribunal.    Mr McGirr relied  on
      the October 2003 Uganda Country Information report.

3.    The material in the  appellant's  bundle  relating  to  the  objective
      situation is as follows:

        1.  A Human Rights Watch  Report  entitled  "Abducted  and  Abused":
           renewed conflict in Northern Uganda dated July 2003.

       2.   A report by the Church Mission Society (Northern Uganda Subsite)
           entitled "A People living in Fear".

       3.   A further report by the Church Mission Society  entitled  "Child
           Soldiers".

       4.   A Reuters' report dated 25 August 2003 entitled "Uganda's  Lords
           Resistance Army tightens grip on North".

       5.   A  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  dated  29  July  1998  entitled
           "Northern Uganda and Sudan's support for  the  Lords  Resistance
           Army".

       6.    An  Amnesty  International  News  Released  entitled   "Amnesty
           International calls for release of school girls abducted by  the
           Ugandan armed opposition Lords Resistance Army" dated 29 October
           1998.

       7.   A report by Africa Online dated 29 September 2002 entitled "Arua-
           Bound bus burnt, 48 missing".


        8.  An ABC News online report about rebels killing 18  villagers  in
           Northern Uganda entitled 31 October 2003.


       9.   A further ABC News Report concerning Ugandan rebels  killing  60
           according to church officials.   The report is dated 9  November
           2003.


       10.  An IRIN news report on the crisis in Northern Uganda compiled in
           2003.


 4.   The appellant's evidence was that she was abducted from her school  by
      the Lord's Resistance Army on 9 October 1998.   She  remained  in  LRA
      custody until January 1999.    She was beaten, raped and treated as  a
      sex slave.   She escaped to Gulu.   She then returned to her  father's
      village.   She left the village for the refugee camp known  as  Pabbo.
      In 2001 the police asked  who  had  escaped  from  the  rebels.    The
      appellant admitted that she had and  she  was  taken  to  Kampala  for
      questioning.   She was detained for 3 months.   After 3 months she was
      released on condition that she reported to a police  station  in  Gulu
      once a month.   After the appellant's release she did  return  to  the
      camp and reported every  month  at  the  police  station  for  several
      months.

5.     She  joined  an  association  known  as  the  Northern  Uganda  Youth
      Association to fight Torture and Child  Abuse  (NUYATCA).    She  also
      taught English part-time. The appellant was returning to the camp from
      her part-time job on 6 June 2003 when it was attacked. She was able to
      go back to her employers' house which was also in Gulu.    Because her
      employer and the appellant were concerned that the rebels might attack
      the whole village she and her employer left and fled  into  the  bush.
      The appellant's brother was among the rebels and he had in fact killed
      the appellant's mother.   The appellant was told he had also sworn  to
      kill her.

6.    The appellant separated from her employer and  made  her  way  to  the
      refugee camp in Bweyele.    On her way she met her  uncle  who  was  a
      policeman.    He  told  her  (see  paragraph  14  of  the  appellant's
      statement) that as the appellant had not reported during the past  few
      months the police had prepared a letter to arrest  her.    The  letter
      was dated 26 May 2003.   The Uncle made arrangements for the appellant
      to leave the country.    Meanwhile the appellant remained in hiding at
      his house.   On 7 June 2003 the appellant left Bweyele  and  travelled
      by truck.  She boarded an aircraft on 18 June 2003.    She arrived  in
      the United Kingdom the following day and  applied  for  asylum.    The
      decision under appeal was taken on 6 August 2003.

7.    The Secretary of  State  considered  the  appellant's  account  to  be
      implausible and rejected it for reasons set out in the letter refusing
      the application.    The  Secretary  of  State  was  not,  regrettably,
      represented at the hearing before the Adjudicator.

8.    At the hearing the appellant confirmed and  adopted  the  contents  of
      her  interview  record  and  statement  with  two  amendments  to  the
      interview record.

9.    There was before the Adjudicator a report by Dr Lesley Lord  detailing
      areas of scarring on the appellant.

10.   Having reviewed the evidence and having  correctly  addressed  himself
      on the burden and standard of proof and other relevant  legal  issues,
      the Adjudicator concluded his determination as follows:

       "Credibility

      9.    I do not find the latter part  of  the  appellant's  account  on
           which she based her fear of the authorities to be credible.  The
           cumulative effect of  inconsistencies,  implausible  claims  and
           unreliable documents completely undermined her claim to fear the
           police and the authorities.  As  for  her  claim  to  have  been
           abducted,  ill-treated  and  abused  by  the  LRA   my   initial
           reservations have been allayed by the  medical  report  and  the
           consistency of her account with the objective evidence.


      Medical Report


      10.   Dr Lesley Lord detailed 13 areas of scarring of which she  found
           11 to be "consistent with" the history give by the appellant and
           the remaining 2 could have been caused in the way  described  by
           the appellant.  Whilst "consistent with" is low on the scale  of
           causation I find that the number and variety of trauma  is  such
           that the cumulative effect is compelling.  I find it likely that
           the appellant was ill-treated and abused  and  in  the  way  she
           claimed.  Dr Lord gave no  unequivocal  diagnosis  of  PTSD  but
           noted symptoms (flashbacks and lack of concentration) associated
           with PTSD.  I noted that the appellant told Dr Lord that she was
           a  Muslim  (inconsistent  with  her  answer  in  the   screening
           interview 1.12): and that after her escape in January 1999 and 2
           night in the displaced persons where she stayed until June 2003.
            This was inconsistent with the appellant's previous account and
           omitted any mention of arrest and detention by the police.


      Objective Evidence


      11.   The section on the 'Latest LRA attacks' in the  CIPU  Assessment
           ends in March 2003 (6.137/8).  I note the July 2003 Human Rights
           Watch report which refers to attacks by  the  LRA  in  May  2003
           among others.  I also  note  news  reports  of  LRA  attacks  in
           September, October and November 2003.  In the latter  report  it
           was alleged that more than 60 people were killed in villages and
           schools in Lira  district.   I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the
           substance of these reports even if the  figures  for  fatalities
           are not accurate.


      12.   The inconsistencies in the appellant's accounts include:


           (i)   on her own original account she did not meet up  with  her
                 uncle until 6 June 2003 as prior to that she had  not  been
                 sure where he was staying.  She did not meet him  by  prior
                 arrangement but he just happened to  have  a  copy  of  the
                 warrant for her arrest  (issued  in  Kampala  a  couple  of
                 hundred kilometres away) and to have raised  money  by  the
                 sale of cattle and land in order to pay an  agent  to  take
                 her out of the country.


           (ii)  she gave no credible reason for ceasing to report  to  the
                 policy monthly in  Gulu  when  she  remained  in  the  same
                 refugee camp.


           (iii) she maintained that the LRA attacked Pabbo  camp  in  June
                 2003 whereas the  objective  evidence  indicates  that  the
                 attack was in June 2002 (see CIPU 6.124).


           (iv)  her failure to have mentioned detention for 3 or 4  months
                 by the police to Dr Lord  is  consistent  with  that  claim
                 having been invented.


           (v)   the appellant claimed that she  joined  NUYATCA  in  2002;
                 her answer was recorded in interview as "2001"; whereas the
                 date of issue of her membership card was 24 May  1999,  see
                 annex A1.


           (vi)  the passport (B1) with the appellant's correct details  of
                 date and place  of  birth  and  profession  was  issued  on
                 27.11.2002, over 6  months  before  the  events  which  she
                 claimed caused her to run away to her uncle; and  the  visa
                 (B2) was issued more than 2 weeks before the claimed attack
                 on the camp where she was staying.


           (vii) the letter from the International Summer  School  (B3)  is
                 dated 1/4/03, more  than  2  months  before  the  appellant
                 claimed to have thought of leaving Uganda.


           (viii)      the purported  warrant  of  arrest  is  of  doubtful
                 provenance, no credible reason having been  given  why  the
                 appellant's uncle should have been provided with  it.   The
                 document has not been authenticated and is in a form  which
                 can be easily concocted.  I find it  to  be  an  unreliable
                 document of no evidential value.


           (ix)  I do not accept that it is credible that the police  would
                 have waited until May 2003 to  obtain  a  warrant  for  the
                 appellant's arrest for treason.   On  the  appellant's  own
                 account there were no grounds on which  to  accuse  her  of
                 treason.


      13.   Having observed the appellant give evidence I am  not  persuaded
           that her concentration is defective to any  significant  degree.
           I do not accept that the scale of inconsistencies  displayed  in
           her different accounts were likely to have been attributable  to
           lack of concentration.  Whilst it may be that a  number  of  the
           above criticisms might not on their own give rise to an  adverse
           credibility finding, the cumulative effect, in my view, is fatal
           to the appellant's credibility in respect of her claimed fear of
           the authorities.


      Internal Relocation


      14.   The objective evidence shows that the situation  is  still  very
           dangerous  in  the  appellant's  home  area  both  for  innocent
           civilians and members of the government and the security forces.
            It is clear that the authorities are making a serious effort to
           provide protection for civilians but its adequacy is thrown into
           doubt by the frequency of successful rebel attacks (CIPU  6.61).
           I find it likely that the authorities are not  able  to  provide
           adequate  protection  for  civilians  such  as  the   appellant.
           However, the objective evidence indicates that  members  of  the
           Acholi such as the appellant are free to live anywhere in Uganda
           including Kampala where there is adequate protection.  The  only
           real objection to relocation by the appellant  was  her  claimed
           fear that she was wanted by the authorities.  In the light of my
           finding that such fear, if it exists, is baseless, I  find  that
           it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  relocate  to
           Kampala or some other area away from the north."


11.   In the grounds of appeal it was submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to give proper reasons for dismissing part of  the  appellant's
      account.   The Adjudicator had failed to take into  account  that  the
      appellant's uncle was a police officer.    With  regard  to  paragraph
      12(ii) the appellant had explained in oral evidence why she had ceased
      to  report.    Concerning  the  passport  and  the  letter  from   the
      International  Summer  School  (paragraph  12  vi)   and   (vii)   the
      Adjudicator had failed to take into account  that  the  documents  had
      been supplied by an agent.    Besides referring to take  matters  into
      account, the Adjudicator had noted  irrelevant  considerations  -  the
      failure to include her account of  detention  by  the  police  in  the
      account given to the doctor, for example.  Such discrepancies as there
      were in the appellant's  account  were  peripheral.     The  objective
      material had not been properly taken into consideration.

12.   Counsel submitted that the omission from the  medical  report  of  the
      history at the police station was not as significant as it might  have
      been had the omission been in a statement.   The appellant  would  not
      have the opportunity to comment on  what  was  in  a  medical  report.
      The  discrepancies  regarding  the  date  of  joining   NUYATCA   were
      irrelevant.   Proper reasons should have been given for rejecting  the
      arrest  warrant.    The  Adjudicator  had  not  considered  that   the
      appellant's uncle was a police officer and would have  access  to  the
      warrant.   Counsel relied on the grounds  of  appeal.   She  submitted
      that the appellant would be suspected of treason.   Her brother was  a
      member of the Lord's Resistance Army.   The police knew she had  spent
      time with the rebels.   She had been released conditionally.

13.   Reference was made to  the  Human  Rights  Watch  report.    The  Gulu
      branch of the Legal Aid Project had received complaints  that  Ugandan
      government authorities,  mostly  the  UPDF  had  arbitrarily  detained
      people on treason charges.   The population of Northern Uganda was  in
      a precarious situation.    They were restricted to  camps  where  they
      were vulnerable to LRA attacks and famine or they  risked  arrest  for
      alleged rebel collaboration for trying to return to  their  homes  and
      fields to plant or harvest food crops.     The  Adjudicator's  finding
      that the appellant had not been charged was flawed in the light of the
      objective material.   The soldiers arrested arbitrarily.

14.   Counsel accepted there was scant information about Acholi in  Kampala.
       There was no mention of Acholi relocating to Kampala.   There was  no
      evidence of any facilities for them  there.    The  government  had  a
      policy of displacement.   The main problem facing the displaced people
      in the camps was from the LRA.

15.   Counsel submitted it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
      relocate as a young woman from the Acholi tribe.   She had  been  kept
      as a prisoner and sex slave.   The doctor had diagnosed post traumatic
      stress disorder.    Her family had been killed.   She had  someone  to
      assist her in the shape of her uncle but he did not leave in  Kampala.
       She would have nowhere to live.   Although  the  country  information
      report referred to the Acholi living in Kampala there was no reference
      to displaced Acholi living there.    The  country  information  report
      also referred to distinct tensions between ethnic groups.   There  was
      no evidence of support or assistance with re-integration.

16.   Mr McGirr submitted  there  had  been  an  attempt  to  resurrect  the
      evidential value of the warrant.  It was  apparent  that  the  alleged
      warrant had been  prepared  by  a  Magistrate  although  it  had  been
      suggested in the witness statement that the police  had  prepared  the
      letter.   There was no stamp on the arrest warrant which  casts  doubt
      on its authenticity.  The majority of the grounds of appeal were  just
      expressions of disagreement with the Adjudicator's conclusions.    The
      Adjudicator had not relied  on  irrelevant  considerations.    He  was
      entitled to consider the history set out in the medical report.    The
      appellant had had the opportunity to correct the account prior to  the
      Adjudicator hearing  and  had  indeed  at  the  hearing  made  certain
      amendments but had not referred to the history and the medical report.

17.   The objective material, particularly the Human  Rights  Watch  report,
      dealt with the situation in the North.   It was to be noted  that  the
      arrest warrant had been issued in Kampala.    Reference  was  made  to
      the Home Office Country Information report.  There was no evidence  to
      suggest that internal relocation  was  not  possible.     Kampala  was
      outside the influence of the Lord's Resistance Army.    The Acholi  on
      the evidence enjoyed a normal way of life in Kampala.    Kampala was a
      multi-ethnic city and there was no evidence of discrimination or  ill-
      treatment or of denial of medical and other services.    The  tensions
      between  ethnic  groups  did  not   manifest   themselves   in   civil
      disturbances.   The appellant could accordingly live safely in Kampala
      and there  was  the  possibility  of  some  support  provided  by  the
      appellant's uncle.     The  medical  evidence  did  not  disclose  any
      particular mental condition requiring treatment.   There was a passing
      reference to post traumatic stress disorder but  not  a  diagnosis  of
      such a disorder.    There  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  appellant's
      appeal.   Internal relocation would not be  unduly  harsh.     It  was
      speculative to suggest that she would be returned  to  a  camp.    The
      camps were mostly in the north.   It was not a  likely  prospect  that
      she would be returned there.

18.   Counsel submitted that even if the arrest  warrant  were  false,  that
      did not mean that the appellant's account should be  dismissed.   Many
      suspects were detained without trial.

19.   The fact that the CIPU report referred to  distinct  tensions  between
      ethnic groups could not be swept aside.   What was unusual  about  the
      appellant was the fact that her brother was a  member  of  the  Lord's
      Resistance Army and the police  were  aware  of  that.    It  was  not
      submitted that it would be certain that the appellant would be  forced
      to return to a camp but there was such a policy and there was no other
      system of support.   The  appellant  would  suffer  a  breach  of  her
      Article 3 rights in the camp.

20.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      The evidence from the country information  reports  concerning  ethnic
      groups in general and the Acholi people in particular is as follows:

      Ethnic Groups

      6.65  The constitution prohibits discrimination based  on  factors  of
           ethnicity; however, the  government  did  not  enforce  the  law
           effectively  in  matters  of  locally  or  culturally   accepted
           discrimination against certain ethnic groups.  Race  was  not  a
           factor in national politics.   The continued instability in  the
           north led to violations of the rights of some Acholi, an  ethnic
           group, which comprises a significant  part  of  the  population.
           Most violations of Acholi rights resulted from LRA actions.

      6.66  There are over 20 ethnic groups of which Baganda, Banyankole and
           Basoga are the largest.  Approximately 99% of the population  is
           of African origin, and 1% European or Asian.

      6.67  There is a major ethnic division between Bantu groups  who  live
           mainly in the south, and Nilotic groups who live mainly  in  the
           north.  The main Bantu groups which make up about two thirds  of
           the population are the Ganda, (Baganda, the largest  tribe  with
           16% of the population), Soga (8%), Nyoro, Nkole (Banyankole 8%),
           Toro, Chiga (Kiga), Gisu, Gwere and Nyole (Banyuri).   The  West
           Nile tribes have only 6% of the population and are divided  into
           the Lugbara, Alur and Madi tribes plus the smaller Kakwa.   This
           smaller ethnic group ruled the country from 1971 - 1979.


      6.68  There are distinct tensions between  ethnic  groups  in  Uganda,
           particularly between the north and the south, and  this  is  one
           element used to explain the relative wealth and  development  in
           the south as opposed to the poverty and lack of resources in the
           northern districts.  Membership of a marginalised Ugandan ethnic
           group does not automatically imply exclusion or discrimination.


      6.69  The principle Nilotic groups are the Acholi, Langi,  Karamojong,
           Teso, Madi and Kakwa.  In the early years of independence  there
           was an important community of about 70,000 Asian of  Indian  and
           Pakistani origin and about 10,000 Europeans.  However, since the
           expulsion of "non citizens" (as they were described by the  Amin
           Government) in 1972, both these groups have fallen to negligible
           sizes.  The most widely spoken indigenous  language  is  Luganda
           (the language of  Baganda)  although  English  and  Swahili  are
           widely used as common languages.


      Acholi


      6.70  The Acholi account for around 4.6% of Uganda's population.  They
           live primarily in the districts of Gulu and Kitgum, in  northern
           Uganda where communications are poor and villages isolated.


      6.71  Civil strife in the north led to the violation of the rights  of
           members of the  Acholi  tribe,  who  primarily  resided  in  the
           northern districts of Gulu and Kitgum.  Both  government  forces
           and the LRA terrorists,  who  themselves  largely  were  Acholi,
           committed abuses.  LRA fighters in particular were implicated in
           the  killing  and  kidnapping  of  Acholi  tribe  members.   The
           Government has responded  by  setting  up  "protected  villages"
           which are guarded  by  UPDF  forces.   Whilst  there  have  been
           reports of criticism of the UPDF for the sometimes heavy  handed
           way in which they operate in protecting the population, there is
           little evidence to dispute that the "protected  village"  tactic
           has resulted in  fewer  attacks  and  abductions  of  civilians.
           However, they  do  generate  problems  of  their  own,  such  as
           preventing farmers from tending their land or planting crops.


      6.72  There is no credible evidence to  suggest  that  the  Government
           persecutes the Acholi people or that  UPDF  personnel  routinely
           target Acholi people as  being  rebels  or  rebel  sympathisers.
           There are Acholi living in Kampala, a multi-ethnic city, and  in
           all areas of Uganda.  All citizens, including Acholi,  are  free
           to reside anywhere they wish and there is no  formal  obligation
           to register with the local authorities.  All citizens, including
           Acholi, are entitled to vote.  There are a number of Acholi MPs,
           some of whom are outspoken critics of the  Government,  such  as
           Norbert Mao (MP for Gulu Municipality) and Ronald  Reagan  Okumu
           (sic) (MP for Aswa District).


      6.73   There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that   the   Acholi   are
           systematically denied access to education  or  medical  services
           although attacks by  the  LRA  on  schools  and  hospitals,  for
           example can interrupt the delivery of  such  services.   Nor  is
           there evidence to suggest that the Acholi are  singled  out  for
           questioning about terrorism.  In Acholiland it is  obvious  that
           investigations into acts of terrorism  by  the  security  forces
           will naturally involve interviewing Acholi,  but  it  should  be
           noted that the Acholi  are  predominantly  the  victims  of  LRA
           terrorism.


      6.74  A full examination of the conflict in northern  Uganda  and  the
           position of the Acholi is  contained  in  "The  Bending  of  the
           Spears", which is attached as source.  The continued instability
           in the north led to violations of the  rights  of  some  Acholi.
           Most violations of Acholi rights resulted from LRA actions.


21.   Counsel referred to distinct tensions between ethnic groups in  Uganda
      but it is of course right to read the last sentence at paragraph  6.68
      -  membership  of  a  marginalised  Ugandan  ethnic  group  does   not
      automatically apply exclusion or discrimination.

22.   Counsel accepted there was  scant  evidence  about  treatment  of  the
      Acholi people outside the northern areas.  Those  instructing  Counsel
      have been diligent in forwarding evidence and have  supplied  detailed
      material concerning what can only be described  as  an  unsatisfactory
      situation for those in refugee camps in the  north  of  Uganda.    The
      IRIN report (compiled by a UN Humanitarian Information Unit) refers to
      the fact that about 80% of the entire Acholi population are internally
      displaced,  living  in  camps  with  no  food  and  poor   sanitation.
      According to recent estimates over 800,000  people  have  been  forced
      from their homes.   It is reported that while the UPDF have  attempted
      to protect the camps by stationing small detachments in  the  vicinity
      "they have found protecting such a massive displaced population spread
      over such  a  large  area  to  be  extremely  difficult".   There  are
      difficulties with distributing aid, etc.

23.   We do not see evidence, however,  of  forced  repatriation  of  Acholi
      from Kampala to the camps.    The evidence in the country  information
      report is if anything the reverse of this -  it  is  stated  that  all
      citizens including the Acholi are free to reside anywhere  they  wish.



24.   We do not accept that simply as  an  Acholi  the  appellant  would  be
      targeted by the government in Kampala or that the LRA would be able to
      get their hands on the appellant, as it were, there.

25.   Counsel submits that the appellant is in a  different  position.    In
      the grounds of appeal issue was taken with the Adjudicator's findings.
        It is clear that the Adjudicator looked at the material  before  him
      as a whole and he makes the point that not each observation he had  of
      the evidence would have given rise to an adverse  credibility  finding
      taken by itself.  He had  considered  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
      various points relied on - see the conclusion of paragraph 13  of  the
      determination.

26.   We do not accept that the Adjudicator  overlooked  the  obvious  point
      that the appellant's uncle was a policeman.   The Adjudicator  clearly
      had that well in mind - he refers to the uncle being  a  policeman  in
      paragraph 3 of the determination.

27.   The Adjudicator was in our view entitled to rely on the omissions  and
      history given to the doctor.   The appellant had had ample opportunity
      to comment on the matter prior to the hearing.   She had made comments
      on the evidence as indicated in paragraph 7 of the  determination  and
      had expressed no reservations about the history given to  the  doctor.
      We do not accept that the Adjudicator  took  into  account  irrelevant
      considerations or  based  his  determination  unfairly  on  peripheral
      issues.    We do not accept that he took  points  which  were  unfair,
      against the weight of the evidence, or not properly  open  to  him  to
      rely upon.   We  have  looked  at  the  purported  warrant  of  arrest
      ourselves and have to say we agree  entirely  with  the  Adjudicator's
      observations upon it.

  28. We do not disagree with the way in which  the  Adjudicator  considered
      the position for the appellant on return.   He was  entitled  to  find
      the situation, while dangerous in the appellant's home area,  did  not
      render it unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to other areas of
      Uganda including Kampala.  He was entitled to find there was  adequate
      protection there.   He noted and was entitled to note  that  her  only
      claimed fear of residing in Kampala was that she  was  wanted  by  the
      authorities.  The Adjudicator properly concluded that  any  such  fear
      was baseless.


  29.  Accordingly,  we  affirm  the  adjudicator's  determination.  On  the
      material before us we find, for the reasons given above, it is not  in
      general unduly harsh for Acholi to relocate, for example  to  Kampala.
      It is of course  always  necessary  to  consider  the  facts  of  each
      particular case to ascertain whether the individual would  face  risks
      or whether, for that individual, the internal flight option would  not
      be viable.


                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President
                                                                  6 May 2004
