
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |DM (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection _ PSG _ Women    |
|                           |        |_Domestic Violence) Albania |
|                           |        |CG [2004] UKIAT 00059       |
|On 15 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|1 April 2004                                                      |
|Given orally in court                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Mrs C J Lloyd                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mrs C Charlton-Little, Counsel, instructed by S
                       Osman Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent is a citizen of  Albania  born  on  3  April  1980  who
      entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 8 June 2002, according  to
      her account.  She was at all events here on 10 June 2002 when she made
      an asylum application.

2.    Following submission of a statement of  evidence  form  and  interview
      the Secretary of State refused that application for  the  reasons  set
      out in a letter dated 29 July  2002.   On  6  August  2002  he  issued
      directions for her removal to Albania  as  an  illegal  entrant  after
      refusal of her asylum application.

3.    It is perhaps appropriate to note at this point  that  the  respondent
      had married in Albania a Mr Sami Mema who is a  Kosovan  Albanian  and
      enjoys indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  having  been
      granted refugee status here on 5 June  1999.   There  was  a  previous
      application for entry clearance so that she  might  join  him  as  his
      spouse here but that was unsuccessful and was not  appealed.   We  are
      not currently concerned today with  any  issues  arising  out  of  the
      marital relationship to someone permanently settled in  this  country.
      We are concerned only with the issues of whether as  the  Adjudicator,
      Miss C M Glenn, who heard the appeal on 17 January 2003 found that the
      respondent succeeded both under her asylum and Article 3 human  rights
      claims.

4.    The basis of the respondent's claim is aptly recorded in  the  reasons
      for refusal letter at paragraph 4 as follows:

           "You claim  to  have  ended  a  relationship  with  your  former
           boyfriend  in  August  1999  but  he  refused  to   accept   the
           relationship was over and began to harass you and  your  family.
           You state you reported these incidents  of  harassments  to  the
           police but the police would not take  any  action  because  they
           considered  it  a  personal  matter.   You  claim  your   former
           boyfriend became worse  after  you  met  your  current  husband,
           ordering you to leave him or he would kill you and your  family.
           You state that in March 2002 you were knocked off your bike by a
           car driven by your former boyfriend and while you were lying  on
           the floor he approached you and  threatened  to  kill  you  next
           time.  You claim that you reported the incident  to  the  police
           and he was arrested but was released  the  following  day.   You
           state that following this incident you went to your uncle's home
           in Tirana but your former boyfriend followed you  and  continued
           to threaten you.  You claim that fearing for your life you  fled
           Albania."

5.    The  respondent  had  in  fact  submitted  a  full  statement  to  the
      Secretary of State in support  of  her  asylum  application  which  is
      contained within the statutory bundle before  us  and  this  deals  in
      somewhat greater detail with the various incidents to which she refers
      and in particular the incident of 13 March 2002 when she says she  was
      knocked off her bicycle by a car driven by her ex-boyfriend, resulting
      in her sustaining bruising to her left  arm  and  right  shoulder  and
      other smaller bruises on her elbow.   She  says  in  relation  to  the
      treatment of the boyfriend by the police:

           "I was taken to hospital by my father and immediately thereafter
           we  reported  the  incident  to  the   local   police   station.
           Apparently my ex-boyfriend was arrested that same evening but we
           learned on the following week the  police  would  not  take  any
           action against him because, according to them,  my  ex-boyfriend
           was with a passenger at the time and  both  of  them  had  given
           statements to the effect that I fell over  because  I  had  lost
           control of my bicycle and that his car did  not  hit  me  or  my
           bicycle."

6.    The Adjudicator found that the respondent was credible in  her  claims
      and it was submitted to her on behalf of the respondent that she was a
      member of a particular social group in Albania, namely women, and that
      her  Convention  reason  for  fear  of  persecution  arose  from   her
      membership of that particular social group.  It was also submitted  on
      her behalf that to return her to Albania would be  in  breach  of  her
      protected human rights under Article 3 of the European Convention.

7.    The Secretary of State appeals, with leave, against the  Adjudicator's
      findings and the  sustainability  of  those  findings  is  challenged.
      Insofar as they are challenges to the  findings  in  relation  to  the
      factual  history,  we  see  no  basis  on  which  to  say   that   the
      Adjudicator's findings in that respect are unsustainable.  He had  the
      advantage of seeing and hearing the respondent  give  evidence  before
      him and there was also produced to him a document which  he  accepted,
      presumably against the background evidence from the respondent  as  to
      her history in Albania, which purported to be a certificate  from  the
      Chief of Police in the  Department  of  Shkoda,  a  city  in  Northern
      Albania where she lived. recording that she had made over  ten  formal
      complaints to the police against her former  boyfriend,  Freddy  Ndoya
      who was alleged "to have continually horse and  menace  for  including
      threats to kill due to various severe shortages".  That clearly cannot
      be  an  accurate  translation,  or  if  it  is  the   certificate   is
      meaningless.  We suspect and are prepared to approach  the  matter  on
      the basis  that  it  reveals  a  series  of  complaints  made  by  the
      respondent to the police department about the conduct  of  her  former
      boyfriend who would not accept that the relationship had ended and was
      acting in the nature of what is now commonly referred to as  stalking.
      The reference to various severe shortages we are equally  sure  is  in
      fact intended to refer to the continuation of that certificate so that
      it should read "due to various severe shortages  it  is  a  matter  of
      policy of this Department not to refer any  of  these  complaints  for
      further action".  At all events it is clear that  the  police,  beyond
      the prompt action which they had taken on 13 March 2002, did not  take
      any further  formal  steps  and  are  on  record  as  saying  in  that
      certificate that

           "the complainant's allegations are mainly  non-serious  and  are
           considered personal in nature which do not  warrant  the  police
           intervention.  The citizen Desara Shpuza is protected under  the
           law like all citizens and the  police  cannot  provide  her  any
           additional protection which exceeded the ability or resource  of
           the police department to so provide."

8.    The position is  therefore  to  be  considered  against  that  factual
      background.   It  is  the  Secretary  of   State's   case   that   the
      Adjudicator's findings as to the law are unsustainable and we  are  in
      agreement with that challenge.  We have carefully listened to what Mrs
      Charlton-Little had to say as to the issue  of  whether  or  not  this
      respondent can be said to form a member of a particular  social  group
      for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.  In this respect it was  a
      broad submission that women generally were so disadvantaged under  the
      system applying in Albania that they formed a particular social  group
      and that this particular respondent was entitled to be so regarded for
      the purposes of her own claims.  That is a  matter  which  rests  very
      specifically upon background evidence.  It is quite wrong to  construe
      the judgments in Islam & Shah  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [1999] Imm AR 283 as providing any broad basis  for  saying
      that women generally are to  be  regarded  as  capable  of  forming  a
      particular social group for Refugee Convention purposes.  The point is
      aptly made by Lord Steyne giving the leading  judgment  of  the  House
      early in his judgment where at page 285 he says:

           "Generalisations about  the  position  of  women  in  particular
           countries are out of  place  in  regard  to  issues  of  refugee
           status.  Everything depends on the evidence and findings of fact
           in  the  particular  case.   On  the  findings   of   fact   and
           unchallenged evidence in the present case, the position of women
           in Pakistan is as follows..."

      He then goes on to consider the specific situation in Pakistan at  the
      date of the hearing before their Lordships.  The distinctive  features
      which he notes are that women are unprotected by the  state  and  that
      discrimination against women in Pakistan is partly  tolerated  by  the
      state and partly sanctioned by the state.  This arises  in  particular
      under  the  statutory  provisions  in  Pakistan  which  were  accepted
      explicitly to discriminate against women  as,  for  example,  in  some
      cases allowing only the evidence of men to be heard and not of  women,
      and that the Zena Ordinance had eroded women's rights and denied  them
      equal protection by the law.  There was specific evidence that arrests
      made under the Zena Ordinance could be made without a magistrate first
      investigating whether there was any basis for the charge and issuing a
      warrant so that women in Pakistan have  often  been  held  under  that
      Ordinance for years although no evidence had ever been  produced  that
      they had committed any offence.  It  was  found  that  men  frequently
      brought charges against their former wives, daughters  or  sisters  in
      order to prevent them marrying or re-marrying against the man's wishes
      and that most women remained in gaol for two  to  three  years  before
      their cases were decided, often on the basis of  no  evidence  of  any
      offence.

9.    We have set out those matters from  the  judgments  in  Shah  &  Islam
      because they illustrate the very specific circumstances under which it
      was held that there was a lack of sufficiency of protection for  women
      generally in Pakistan.  It is quite clear from that  that  there  were
      legal processes which could  be  set  in  motion  against  them  which
      rendered them virtually powerless and subject to considerable  periods
      of imprisonment before trial with possibly severe sentences at the end
      if matters ever came on for trial.   That,  it  seems  to  us,  is  an
      entirely different situation from that which is propounded in relation
      to Albania (as to which, see paragraphs 15 to 17 below).

10.    The  Adjudicator  dealt  with  matters  at  paragraph   21   of   his
      determination as follows:

           "The US State Department and CIPU reports confirm that  violence
           against women remains a serious  problem  and  that  the  police
           response is lax.  Trafficking in women is a problem  and  police
           corruption and involvement is  an  issue.   Again,  this  police
           behaviour is significant when  considering  the  sufficiency  of
           protection in this case.   The  fact  that  Albanian  women  are
           unable  to  access   effective   protection   because   of   the
           discriminatory attitudes  of  men  results  in  a  causal  nexus
           between the Convention reason and the  harm  suffered,  as  here
           where the appellant's complaints were not treated  seriously  by
           the police - as in Shah & Islam."

      With all respect to the  Adjudicator  it  seems  to  us  that  he  has
      gravely misunderstood the effect  of  Shah  &  Islam  in  that  rather
      generalised approach which does not suggest any active undermining  of
      the position of women in Albania by the provisions of the law.  We  do
      not therefore consider that his finding that the respondent forms part
      of a particular  social  group  for  refugee  protection  purposes  in
      Albania is sustainable.

11.    There  is  a  further  major  difficulty   with   the   Adjudicator's
      determination.  At no point in the determination does he consider what
      is meant by persecution.  He does not refer to any  of  the  case  law
      dealing with issues of persecution nor to the high threshold which has
      to be reached before action can be said to be persecutory in nature or
      potentially in breach of Article 3 rights.  He simply appears to  make
      the assumption that what he has  found  is  sufficient  to  amount  to
      persecution.  Again we do not agree with  him  in  that  approach  and
      regard it as being unsustainable.

12.   We are therefore concerned to consider whether on  the  basis  of  the
      accepted  factual  matrix  this  respondent  is  able  to  engage  the
      protection either  of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  of  the  European
      Convention.

13.   We note that in the period of nearly three  years  from  the  date  on
      which she broke up with her former boyfriend there was only  a  single
      act where she claimed to have been injured, namely the incident on  13
      March 2002.  Since she and her boyfriend lived in the same city and it
      is clear that he was able  to  access  her  and  her  family  to  make
      threats, which we wholly accept must have been  very  unsettling  from
      her point of view, it seems to us of cardinal importance that  matters
      never got beyond this and that the one occasion when it is  said  that
      there was a positive action to harm her is clearly  from  the  extract
      from her own statement which we have set out above,  one  where  there
      were at least two sides to the story, both of which were considered by
      the police on complaint leading to the arrest  and  detention  of  the
      former boyfriend whilst they carried out those  investigations.  Their
      decision was that it was not appropriate to take  any  further  action
      because of the clear conflicts of evidence as to what had taken place.
       It seems to us that that is not a decision which can in  any  way  be
      held to suggest an absence of protection on the part  of  the  police.
      It is often overlooked that the police have  to  behave  even-handedly
      and that they have to have regard for the rights of suspects  as  much
      as for the rights of the victim.  In this country a prosecution is not
      mounted unless there is  a  more  than  equal  prospect  of  it  being
      successful and it would certainly hardly be surprising that here, on a
      similar factual  background,  no  action  would  have  been  taken  in
      relation to that particular occurrence.

14.   We are therefore satisfied that, upsetting though they may have  been,
      the actions of the former boyfriend did not amount to  persecution  or
      prohibited treatment for the purposes of Article 3 as  they  were  not
      engaging a sufficiently high threshold to do so.  But if we are  wrong
      in that, we have to consider whether in any event the state provides a
      sufficiency of protection for the respondent.

15.   In this connection we have been referred by Miss Brown to  the  latest
      October  2003  Albania  Country  Report  produced   by   the   Country
      Information and Policy Unit.  This is a fully sourced report.  It  was
      before Mrs Charlton-Little.  She did not seek to make any  submissions
      to us that it was not to be relied on.  Miss Brown drew our  attention
      to paragraph 5.32, which was formerly paragraph 5.36 in the version of
      the report which was  before  the  Adjudicator.   That  confirms  that
      police officers have been receiving training since September  2000  on
      issues  of  gender  and  have  been  provided  with   guidance   under
      international conventions and domestic law on the treatment  of  women
      who are victims of domestic violence and trafficking.  It  also  notes
      that an Advisory Board consulted in  the  development  of  the  course
      included members from local NGOS and  human  rights  specialists  from
      UNHCR.  The training had become part  of  the  International  Criminal
      Investigative Training Assistance Programme sponsored  by  the  United
      States State Department  Training  Supervisor  and  Mid-Level  Manager
      Police  Officers.   To  that  extent  she   rightly   criticised   the
      Adjudicator's finding at paragraph 20 of the determination that police
      "received no training in domestic violence and are more concerned with
      crimes  perceived  as  dangerous  to  society  as  a   whole".    More
      importantly she drew our attention to the  section  dealing  with  the
      position of women at paragraphs 6.59  to  6.66  of  the  current  CIPU
      report and we note the following points from that.

16.   Firstly, at paragraph 6.62 that there  is  no  current  definition  of
      domestic violence in the Albanian law nor  any  specific  law  against
      domestic violence, but  that  there  are  laws  against  violence  and
      violent behaviour that can be used in that context  so  that  domestic
      violence is prosecuted under general assault laws.   In  the  case  of
      this respondent, of course, the general assault laws would  have  been
      even more applicable as she was not  complaining  of  a  situation  of
      domestic violence in the sense that this is meant in  the  section  of
      the report to which we refer.  If there  is  a  complaint  of  such  a
      nature the Prosecutor or  judicial  police  are  made  aware  and  can
      initiate a criminal prosecution.  But, at  paragraph  6.64,  it  notes
      that if a woman reports a crime and the police do nothing she can file
      a criminal law suit against the police as well as  a  request  against
      them via the People's Advocate Office for  violation  of  her  rights.
      Moreover, since 1997 the Women's Bar  Association  has  been  offering
      legal aid and legal  counselling  for  women  having  legal  problems.
      There are attorneys working to defend and represent clients  in  court
      and the association  has  branches  in  Shkoda  where  the  respondent
      resided.  That is a service said to be free of charge and held by  the
      source from which this part of the report is  derived  to  be  a  very
      professional one.  That source is the  South  Eastern  Europe  Women's
      Legal Initiative in their report on "Criminal Code Report Albania" and
      was accessed by the makers of the current report in September 2003.

17.   At paragraph 6.63, having looked at the mode  of  prosecution,  it  is
      emphasised, again from that report, that there are  no  discriminatory
      court procedures concerning women victims of  violence.   It  is  also
      noted at paragraph 6.65 that there is in Albania an entire NGO network
      called  "Network  Against  Gender  Violence  and  Trafficking"   which
      provides many direct and indirect services to abused women.

18.   As we are  dealing  with  actions  by  an  individual  who  cannot  be
      regarded as an agent of the state for these purposes, it is  important
      to consider whether the  state  offers  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      against this sort of conduct.  It seems to us clear in principle  from
      the matters which we have noted above that the state does so.  We  are
      also mindful of the decision of the European court in Osman  v  United
      Kingdom [2000] 29 EHRR 245. There the Osman family brought a complaint
      against the United Kingdom because of the failure, as  they  said,  of
      the police to provide adequate protection for them in  the  particular
      circumstances where there was a  known  threat  by  somebody  who  was
      regarded as being at least unstable and  which  in  fact  led  to  the
      killing of Mr Osman Senior and of the son of  the  headmaster  at  the
      school at which both Mr  Osman  Junior  and  the  assailant  had  been
      respectively  pupil  and  teacher.   There  was  clear   evidence   of
      continuing requirements for the police to take some sort of action  of
      a pre-emptive nature but it was held  that  even  in  connection  with
      Article 2 rights safeguarding  life  one  had  to  bear  in  mind  the
      difficulties involved in policing modern society, the unpredictability
      of human conduct, and the operational choices which had to be made  in
      terms of priorities and resources,  so  that  such  an  obligation  to
      provide protection had to be interpreted in a way which did not impose
      an impossible or disproportionate burden  on  the  authorities.   That
      seems to us to be very much  the  response  of  the  immediate  police
      department in the certificate which has been issued  where  they  make
      specific reference to the ability or resource of the department making
      it impossible to provide protection additional to  that  which  exists
      under the law.  The protection under the law  we  have  already  dealt
      with in our assessment of the CIPU report.

19.   For all those reasons, even if the conduct on the part of  the  former
      boyfriend amounted potentially to persecution, we do not consider that
      there was a lack of sufficiency of protection in  the  state  so  that
      again, for that reason, the respondent would not be  entitled  to  the
      protection either of the  Refugee  Convention  or  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention.

20.   For the above reasons we are satisfied that the Secretary of State  is
      entitled to succeed before us and we accordingly allow his appeal.





                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President

