
MM (Art 8- Shala - Delay) Serbia and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT 00016




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                             Date heard:   23 October   2003
                                            Date notified.:6th February 2004

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                  MR G WARR

                                                       Between

                                              Appellant



                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This case is being reported in order to provide guidance  on  the  proper
scope of what has come to be referred to as  the  Shala  "delay"  point.  It
should be read in the light of the recent determination in  the  case  of  M
[2003] UKIAT 00179 (Croatia), a case in which Mr Justice Ouseley,  President
of the Tribunal, presided.

2. The  appellant,  a  national  of  Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia,  has
appealed with leave of the Tribunal against a determination of  Adjudicator,
Mr C B Kealy, dismissing the appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary
of State giving directions for removal having refused asylum.  Mr  J  Martin
of Counsel instructed by Raja & Co Solicitors appeared  for  the  appellant.
Ms J Sigley appeared for the respondent.


3. The appellant's  immigration  history  is  important  in  this  case.  He
entered the UK clandestinely accompanied by his dependent spouse  and  three
dependent minors (dates of birth, 26 July 1993, 27 May  1997  and  7  August
1998) and claimed asylum when detected at port on 21 August 1999. A SEF  was
issued to him on 20 April 2001 to fully complete and return by 3  May  2001,
but he failed to return it. On 7 June 2001  his  asylum  claim  was  refused
under paragraphs 336 and 340  of  HC395.The  respondent  considered  he  had
failed without reasonable explanation to make a prompt and  full  disclosure
of the facts of  his  claim  and  as  a  result  of  this  failure  had  not
established his claim.

4. The claimant was a farmer who as a sideline played drums in  an  Albanian
folk band. His home was in Medvede in southern  Serbia.  The  basis  of  his
asylum claim was that he would be at risk on return  because  of  his  mixed
ethnicity.  The basis of his Art 8 claim was that the delay of one year  and
8 months in the Home Office making a decision in his case meant that he  had
been unfairly denied a grant of refugee status or ELR.

 5. The adjudicator noted that at the hearing the  respondent  was  prepared
to accept the appellant`s  explanation  for  his  failure  to  disclose  any
asylum case prior to the hearing and did not  challenge  credibility.  There
was, in his words, a "bizarre set of circumstances" (He set them out thus:

       "By the time the SEF letter was  sent  out  he  had  moved  from  his
      notified address and his solicitors though aware of his move  had  not
      notified the Respondent. He had, however, in  fact  received  the  SEF
      letter almost  immediately  and  taken  it  to  his  solicitors.  They
      produced, he says, a letter purporting to come  from  the  Respondent,
      and purporting to grant him asylum. The letter is an obvious  forgery.
      The Appellant then states that the solicitor  discarded  the  SEF  and
      proceeded to apply for a travel document on the Appellant`s behalf  on
      the strength of the letter. An acknowledgement is said  to  have  been
      received from the Respondent for that application  form.  There  is  a
      letter dated 13 June 2001 in which  the  solicitors  make  the  claim.
      Those solicitors have subsequently ceased to do immigration work  (the
      Appellant says they have closed down). Their letter to  the  Appellant
      so informing him is dated 10 July 2001 and also refers to the grant of
      refugee status. Despite his belief that he had  been  granted  refugee
      status  he  seems  to  have  decided  nonetheless  to  instruct  other
      solicitors immediately and has been represented by Raja & Co since  26
      July 2001. The latter seem  not  have  made  direct  enquires  of  the
      Respondent until March 2002 but  were  eventually  informed  that  the
      grant letter was a forgery and that the Appellant`s asylum  claim  had
      in fact been refused".)

6. In such circumstances he did not consider it would be  right  to  take  a
different view. There is no challenge to this aspect of his approach to  the
case.

7. In relation to the appellant`s asylum grounds of appeal, the  adjudicator
was prepared to accept that the appellant`s family home  had  been  attacked
by Albanians who perceived his father as pro-Serbian. He was  also  prepared
to accept that his remaining family may have  been  killed  after  he  left.
Whilst doubting, in view of his ability to receive invitations  to  play  at
weddings, that the appellant himself  continued  to  be  a  target,  he  did
accept that it was "not at all unlikely that his father became a  target  of
the UCPMB". However, he considered that after  the  adoption  of  the  Covic
Plan in 2001 there  had  been  a  significant  change  of  circumstances  in
southern Serbia, with the establishment of a multi-ethnic police  force.  He
concluded that neither the appellant`s  mixed  ethnicity  nor  the  fact  of
having a pure Albanian wife would  place  him  at  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm.

8. The Vice President who granted permission  to  appeal  did  not  consider
that the asylum grounds were arguable. We agree. The appeal  before  us  was
properly confined to the Art 8 issue.

9. In granting permission to appeal in  this  case,  Vice  President  Barnes
said:

      "I do not consider that the limited exception  created  by  Shala  can
      arguably be claimed to extend to the wholly different situation  where
      the claimed effect of delay is simply  that  had  the  decision-making
      process been carried  out  more  speedily  a  different  result  might
      arguably  have  resulted.  The  Refugee  Convention   contains   clear
      provision for cesser of  refugee  status  when  the  conditions  which
      brought it about no  longer  exist,  and  whatever  the  Secretary  of
      State`s practice in granting greater status  than  applies  under  the
      Refugee Convention may be, it does not seem to me that it can arguably
      be right to claim that this should impose a  requirement  to  consider
      refugee status on a retrospective basis simply because the constraints
      of handling a numerically large number of applications mean that  each
      application cannot be dealt with as quickly  as  the  applicant  might
      wish. "

      For the above reasons I do not consider that  the  grounds  of  appeal
      raise  any  arguable  issues  having  a  real  prospect  of   success.
      Nevertheless, in light of Shala, it is  requisite  that  the  Tribunal
      should have the opportunity of giving guidance to adjudicators  as  to
      the limits to be placed upon its ambit and  for  that  reason  only  I
      grant permission to appeal limited to the issued raised at ground 2 of
      the grounds of appeal".

10. The adjudicator dismissed the Art 8 grounds of appeal. In assessing  the
relevant  circumstances,  he  identified   two   as   requiring   particular
consideration. The first concerned delay. He noted that  there  had  been  a
delay of some 18 months in the Home Office reaching a decision in his  case.
However, he did not think this period was unacceptable. The  principles  set
out in the Shala case and in the Xhacka case did not, he said,  apply  here.
In these two cases the claimants had changed their  marital  status  in  the
interval  between  arrival  and  decision,  so  that   removal   potentially
threatened to separate husband and wife. In this case, he stated, the  whole
family arrived together and would be removed together.

11. The second circumstance  - or set of circumstances - had to do with  the
children. He stated at para 10.4:


      " I accept that even if family life would not be  interfered  with  by
      removal, his private life would  be  interfered  with.  The  remaining
      factor on which the Appellant relies heavily is the effect of  removal
      on his children. The youngest was only just one year old when  he  was
      brought from Serbia to the UK  (quite  possibly  one  of  the  factors
      underlying the decision to leave in the first place) and the eldest is
      now aged almost ten. It will undoubtedly be a wrench for  them  to  be
      torn away from their English friends and schools and have to  readapt,
      in Sead`s case, to life in Serbia from which he has been away since he
      was about six, but they are a Serbian family with no legal right to be
      here and are at an age when adaptation is recognised to be  relatively
      easy. I have a great deal of sympathy  for  the  children's  position,
      especially Sead, but on a careful balancing of the whole circumstances
      the Respondent has satisfied the burden placed on him by  Art  8.2  to
      show that on balance removal would  not  be  disproportionate  to  the
      legitimate needs of the UK. I am satisfied that removal in  this  case
      is within the range of reasonable responses and would not be unlawful.
      The human rights appeal is therefore dismissed".

12. It was his conclusion, therefore,  that  as  the  children  were  of  an
adaptable age, removal of the appellant (together  with  his  family)  would
not be a disproportionate measure.

13. The grounds of appeal maintained that the adjudicator had been wrong  to
distinguish the case from Shala  [2003] INLR 349, [2003] EWCA Civ 233 CA  in
which, while accepting the general applicability of  Mahmood  [2001]  1  WLR
840, [2001] INLR 1 and Isiko  [2001] INLR  175,  the  Court  held  that  the
circumstances and duration of a claimant's presence in the  UK  could  be  a
powerful factor outweighing the  respondent's  undoubted  right  to  control
immigration, a right to which greater deference would normally be due.  They
argued that the appellant and family had fled Serbia at a  time  when  there
was a real risk of persecution: they were genuine refugees  when  they  left
and continued to be refugees for a further two  years,  until  the  fall  of
Milosevic in Serbia.

14. Before proceeding further we would make two observations.

15. Firstly, there was one obvious error in the  adjudicator's  approach  to
Art 8. At para 10.4 he had said that this case  was  "within  the  range  of
reasonable responses and would not be unlawful". No doubt  he  had  in  mind
here the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 840  which
held that when dealing with  Art  8  grounds  of  appeal,  adjudicators  are
confined to considering whether the conduct of  the  balancing  exercise  by
the Secretary of State was  "within  the  range  of  reasonable  responses".
However, as the Court of Appeal  subsequently  clarified  in  Razgar  [2003]
EWCA Civ 840  and  most  recently  in  Djali  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1371,  this
restriction on the review function of  adjudicators  only  arises  in  cases
where the Secretary of State when making his  decision  has  considered  the
position under Art 8, i.e. has carried out the balancing exercise.  In  this
case, however, the Reasons for Refusal letter made no specific reference  to
Art 8. Although Art 8 had been mentioned in  the  appellant`s  statement  of
additional grounds, the respondent did not issue any revised decision.

16. It was mentioned in argument that since the Presenting Officer acted  as
the Secretary of State's representative the approach set out in Edore  still
required adjudicators to limit themselves to reviewing whether the  decision
of the Secretary of State as addressed by  the  Presenting  Officer  in  the
course of an  appeal  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable  responses.  A
Presenting Officer, of course, is normally at a rank senior to that  of  the
official who has made the decision appealed against. Whilst we  consider  it
is arguable that some limited degree of deference is  due  to  the  position
taken by a Presenting Officer on Art 8 matters  not  previously  considered,
it is clear from the Court of Appeal judgments  in  Razgar  and  Djali  that
when the decision appealed against is one where no  consideration  has  been
given to proportionality:

1) the adjudicator must conduct that balancing exercise for himself; and


2) that it is an error for him to  treat  his  review  as  confined  to  an
   assessment of whether the  case  is  "within  the  range  of  reasonable
   responses". The judgment in  Djali is particularly  in  point  since  in
   that case (as here) the Secretary of State had never taken a decision on
   the proportionality of the appellant`s removal. As Simon Brown,  LJ  put
   it:

      "It was not until the appeal to the  Adjudicator  that  the  appellant
      sought to rely on  Art  8.  Even,  therefore,  were  I  to  accept  Ms
      Giovannetti`s submission that the essential facts  here  were  not  in
      dispute - and that submission  too  has  its  difficulties  given  the
      contrast between paragraph 14 of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
      letter and what Mr de Mello suggests was the objective evidence before
      the IAT as to the availability of psychotherapy in Kosovo  -  I  would
      not regard this case as falling within the Edore  principle.  Although
      no doubt the Secretary of State at some point in  the  course  of  the
      appeal proceedings must be taken  to  have  decided  the  question  of
      proportionality against the appellant, the appeal  process  itself  is
      necessarily directed to his earlier decision".

17. However, we do  not  consider  that  this  error  on  the  part  of  the
adjudicator fatally flawed his determination. Even had he  fully  understood
that he had to strike the fair balance required under Art 8 for himself,  we
do not consider his conclusion would have been materially different.

18. The second observation we would make is that it was unfortunate that  in
paragraph 10.4 the adjudicator appeared to imply that whilst there had  been
an interference in this case with private life, there may not have been  any
interference with family life: he  had  written:  "...even  if  family  life
would not  be  interfered  with  by  removal,  his  private  life  would  be
interfered with". We say that this mixed finding  was  unfortunate  because,
certainly in the way he  set  it  out,  it  tended  to  suggest  he  falsely
compartmentalised the "family life" and "private life" issues in this  case.
As already noted, he had in fact accepted that elements of family life  (the
existence of a viable family unit) as well as  of  private  life  (e.g.  the
oldest child's schooling) were engaged in this case. Hence, even if he  very
properly considered that family life issues as such were  less  significant,
he should not have decided the issue of interference solely by reference  to
whether the decision amounted to a disruption  in  the  appellant`s  private
life. As the Tribunal has emphasised in  Nhundu  and  Chiwera  (01/TH/0613),
the right protected under Art 8 is a composite one and elements  of  private
life and family life require to  be  considered  cumulatively.  To  approach
matters otherwise would risk creating a situation  in  which  the  decision-
maker in relation to Art 8 had to conduct not  one  (step-by-step)  exercise
dealing with private and family life elements considered  cumulatively,  but
two separate (step-by-step) exercises, one dealing with  private  life,  one
dealing with family life. In our view that  would  unnecessarily  complicate
and compartmentalise the real issues. It may be that in certain cases it  is
effectively just factors  relating  solely  to  family  life  or  solely  to
private life that are relevant. But whenever elements of  both  are  at  all
involved, the protected right under Art 8 (1) which  underlies  them  should
be understood as a composite one. A decision as to whether  there  has  been
an interference should be made in relation to the protected  right  in  this
inclusive sense.

19. However, once again, we do not consider that any possible error  on  the
part  of  the  adjudicator  in  this  respect   significantly   flawed   his
assessment. Indeed Mr Martin conceded that  the  only  two  factors  of  any
significant weight in this case related to the issue of  delay  and  to  the
position of the children and that, whether these factors  were  analysed  in
family life or private life terms,  the  appellant  could  only  succeed  if
these were seen to require  the  balance  being  struck  in  favour  of  the
appellant.

20. Dealing first with the adjudicator's assessment of the position  of  the
children,  we  consider  he  was  quite  entitled  to  conclude  that  their
interests were not sufficiently weighty. At the date of hearing  before  the
adjudicator, all three were still under  12  years  old  and  were,  as  the
adjudicator justifiably noted, of an adaptable age. It was to  their  credit
that the eldest was doing well at school, but their right  to  education  as
such was not placed under  any  real  threat  by  removal  from  the  UK  to
southern Serbia.  Whilst the adjudicator did not specify all the factors  he
took into consideration, it is clear that, apart from  the  possible  impact
of the Shala point, the appellant`s case  was  one  in  which  there  was  a
preponderance of factors in favour of the interests  of  the  state  in  the
effective maintenance of immigration control. The appellant and  his  family
had only been in the UK some 4 years. Even accepting (as the  adjudicator  -
at least at paragraph 10.4  -  did not)  that  when  they  left  Kosovo  and
arrived in the UK they had genuine  asylum  motives,  they  understood  that
their immigration position was precarious and that their future hinged on  a
favourable decision been made by the respondent. There  were  no  particular
difficulties to do with the health of the family.  The  decision  to  remove
the appellant would not disrupt the unity of the family,  since  they  would
be returned together. It was not  arguable,  therefore,  that  the  decision
amounted to a disproportionate interference with the  appellant`s  right  to
respect for private and family life  - unless his case fell under the  Shala
exception.


The issue of delay and the Shala point

21. Generally speaking the issue of  delay  insofar  as  it  arises  in  the
context of an  Art  8  appeal  is  really  only  about  unreasonable  delay.
Furthermore, it is important  to  clarify  that  it  has  two  aspects,  one
ordinary, one special. It is important to clarify this  because  Shala  only
concerned special delay.

22. By ordinary delay we mean this. In  conducting  the  balancing  exercise
under Art 8 the existence of any unreasonable period of delay is  ordinarily
a relevant factor. That is not to say that it is necessarily a  decisive  or
even a major factor. But it is certainly a relevant one. Strictly  speaking,
it is not a factor to be weighed in favour of the  individual  whose  Art  8
rights are asserted; it is rather a factor varying the weight to  be  placed
on the interests of the state in the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
control: see  Beqiri  [2002]  UKIAT  00725.  Where  unreasonable  delay  has
occurred in the processing of an asylum appeal and it is delay  attributable
to the Secretary of State rather than to the appellant, the interest of  the
state in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is  properly
assessed as being less strong than in cases where it has sought  enforcement
speedily. Even so, the  interests  of  the  state  must  still  be  accorded
considerable weight. The margin of discretion afforded to the  Secretary  of
State plainly encompasses the  fact  that  for  administrative  reasons  the
processing of asylum claims cannot always be swift.

23. Thus, given the legitimate importance to the  interests  of  the  United
Kingdom government in maintaining a proper system  of  immigration  control,
for delay to  become  unreasonable  it  would  normally  have  to  be  quite
excessive. Since much will depend on the  particular  circumstances,  we  do
not think it helpful to  quantify  periods  of  time  as  excessive  or  not
excessive; but, given the high volume of applications for asylum  which  the
Home Office has had to deal with in the past decade or so, we do  not  think
that periods of delay even several  years  could  be  considered  excessive,
unless accompanied by other special circumstances which disclose  particular
prejudice to a claimant. We shall return to this matter at the  end  of  our
determination.

24.  That  brings  us  to  delay  underpinned  by  special  or   exceptional
circumstances. That in our view is the only type of delay with  which  Shala
was concerned. The appellant in Shala had arrived in the  UK  in  June  1997
claiming asylum the same day. He had arrived when his  country  was  in  the
middle of a dreadful civil war in  which  there  were  campaigns  of  ethnic
cleansing. He did not receive a decision  refusing  him  asylum  until  July
2001. During the period of just over 4  years  between  his  claim  and  the
respondent's decision on  it,  the  appellant  had  met  a  woman,  a  Czech
national who was also an asylum seeker. They first met in October  1998  and
in December 1998 they began cohabiting. She  and  her  sons  by  a  previous
relationship were granted refugee  status  in  May  2000.  They  married  in
October 2001. When the case came before  an  adjudicator,  it  was  accepted
that family life could not realistically be enjoyed  in  Kosovo  because  it
was impossible for his wife and her children to move there. Consequently  it
was only in this country that such a family life could be maintained.

25. The adjudicator concluded nevertheless that the decision to  remove  the
appellant did not amount to a disproportionate interference with  his  right
to respect for family life since he could return to  Kosovo  and  apply  for
entry clearance as a spouse from there. The Tribunal upheld the decision  of
the adjudicator.

26. The Court of Appeal concluded that the Tribunal was wrong. At  paragraph
14 Keene, LJ wrote:

      "What is striking about both the decision of the Tribunal and that  of
      the Secretary of State is that in each the position of  the  appellant
      has been equated with that of  any  normal  applicant  who  wishes  to
      obtain leave to enter on marriage grounds...But as  Mr  Blake  QC  has
      rightly pointed out, the appellant`s case has an exceptional  feature,
      namely that had his asylum  application  been  dealt  with  reasonably
      efficiently, he would have been  likely  to  have  obtained  at  least
      exceptional leave to remain as a Kosovo refugee,  thereby  giving  him
      the ability to apply from within the UK for a variation  of  leave  on
      the grounds of his marriage. The Tribunal  does  not  appear  to  have
      considered that submission, which was clearly put before it...In other
      words, but for the remarkable delay on the part of the Home Office  in
      dealing with his asylum claim, the appellant  would  not  have  fallen
      into the category where the applicable policy requires an  application
      for leave to enter to be made from outside this country.


      15. The facts of this case bear a  marked  similarity  with  those  of
      Genti Xhacka [2002] UKIAT 03352 (unreported) 31 July  2002  where  the
      Tribunal was presided over by Collins, J. There the appellant was also
      an ethnic Albanian from Kosovo whose claim for asylum  was  not  dealt
      with for some 2 [and a half] years.  During  that  time,  he  met  and
      married a British woman, though the adjudicator found that there  were
      no insurmountable obstacles to the family living together  in  Kosovo.
      The Tribunal took the view that the claim under Art 8 should have been
      allowed, Collins J saying at para [3]:

           "In the circumstances  of  this  case,  the  fact  is  that  the
           appellant did have a legitimate claim to enter, namely  that  he
           was at that time a refugee, and that coupled with the  delay  in
           dealing with his claim  as  an  unaccompanied  minor  until  the
           situation  changed,  is  capable  of  amounting  to  exceptional
           circumstances and does in the circumstances of this case justify
           a decision that he is entitled to remain here because to  remove
           him would be a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR".
      ...
      The significance is that, both in Genti  Xhacka  and  in  the  present
      case, the appellant did have a legitimate claim to  enter  at  a  time
      when, on any reasonable basis, his claim should have been  determined.
      Put another way, the fact that  the  delay  by  the  Home  Office  has
      deprived him of that  advantage  should  be  seen  as  an  exceptional
      circumstance which takes the appellant`s case out of the normal run of
      cases where a person with no leave to enter seeks such  leave  on  the
      basis of marriage; see Mahmood..."

27. What is clear first of all from the above passages is that the Court  of
Appeal saw its reasoning in Shala as a gloss on the general  principles  set
out by the Court of Appeal in Mahmood  and  in  particular  on  the  Mahmood
principle that, unless there are exceptional  circumstances,  a  person  who
seeks leave to remain in the UK on the basis of marriage should be  expected
to apply for entry clearance from abroad. Absent exceptional  circumstances,
the interests of the state  in  the  effective  maintenance  of  immigration
control would normally trump the interests  of  the  individual  in  staying
put.  Secondly, it is also  clear  that  the  primary  point  in  Shala  was
predicated on three things:

   a) the fact that the appellant had a legitimate claim  to  enter  at  the
      time when, on  any  reasonable  basis,  his  claim  should  have  been
      determined; and
   b) the fact that, had his asylum application been dealt  with  reasonably
      efficiently, he would have been  likely  to  have  obtained  at  least
      exceptional leave to remain [as a Kosovo refugee];and
   c) the fact that the appellant`s private of family life had  only  become
      significantly established as a result of the time spent in the UK when
      he met someone here. Accordingly possession of ELR,  if  it  had  been
      granted when it should have been, would thereby  have  given  him  the
      ability to apply from within the UK for a variation of  leave  on  the
      grounds of his marriage.


28. Plainly (a) and (b) on their own would not have been enough,  since  the
Court only found that special circumstances  existed  because  of  the  very
real consequences it had  for  the  appellant  himself:  being  able,  if  a
decision had been made earlier, to apply to vary  leave  to  remain  on  the
basis of marriage. Thus the Shala point depended on  the  existence  of  all
three preconditions. We stress that the effect of the  delay  in  Shala  was
that it deprived the appellant of the  opportunity  of  applying  in-country
for variation of his leave on the basis of his marriage.

29. We need to note one other matter raised by the particular  circumstances
of this case. Unlike the position in Shala or Xhacka (or indeed  Ala  [2003]
EWC 521 (Admin)), the appellant in this case did not base his claim  on  any
marriage application he could have made. However, the Tribunal has  extended
the Mahmood principle (the  need  to  pursue  the  viable  option  of  entry
clearance unless  there  exist  exceptional  circumstances)  to  other  than
marriage cases (e.g. to claims made under Art 8 from  dependent  relatives).
Therefore, it would only be logical, in our view, to apply the  Shala  point
by extension to other types of family relationships. Thus  in  principle  it
is a point as capable of assisting a person who bases his Art 8 claim  on  a
close family relationship as it is to someone who bases it  on  marriage  or
intended marriage.

30. As we shall see, however, even  read  with  this  extension,  the  Shala
point cannot assist the appellant in this case.

31.  We  will  assume  the  appellant  fulfilled   (a),   i.e.   the   first
precondition. We are not entirely clear that in this  case  he  did  have  a
legitimate claim to enter the UK when he did. We say this because  in  Shala
reference was made to the government  policy  of  granting  ELR  to  Kosovan
refugees as continuing until "mid-1999". The appellant in this case did  not
claim to have entered the UK until 12 August 1999. However, Miss Sigley  did
not take this point against the appellant and it  is  not  in  dispute  that
when the appellant left Kosovo he was fleeing  from  persecution  which  had
targeted his family. In the circumstances we consider we should assume  that
the appellant did have a legitimate claim to enter when he arrived.

32. We will also assume, for similar reasons, that the  appellant  met  (b),
i.e. the second precondition. That is to say, had an earlier  decision  been
made in his case, he would have been granted ELR.

33. Before continuing we would observe that in  being  able  to  meet  these
first two preconditions the appellant  was  in  an  unusual  position.  Most
asylum seekers are not able to meet them. That is because it is unusual  for
the Secretary of State to adopt policies which  recognise,  on  a  group  or
nationality basis, that at  the  time  appellants  left  their  country  and
arrived in the UK, conditions there were such  that  all  those  fleeing  it
faced a real risk of persecution or at least of  generalised  violence.  The
Shala point will not therefore avail an  asylum  seeker  who  simply  argues
that, had an earlier decision on his asylum claim being made, the  Secretary
of State might or would have reached a  more  favourable  decision  than  he
subsequently did. In this context, we entirely agree with the  point  quoted
earlier from Vice President Barnes` grant of permission to appeal.

34. However, despite (unusually) meeting the first  two  preconditions,  the
appellant plainly did not meet the  third  precondition.  His  was  a  self-
sufficient family unit. He has not at any stage pointed to  any  respect  in
which an earlier grant of ELR would have enabled him  to  make  a  realistic
application  under some Art 8-related category of the Immigration Rules.  In
particular, he did not maintain that he would have wished to apply  to  stay
so as to be or remain part of some other or wider family unit.

35. Having concluded that there was no delay of  a  special  or  exceptional
kind in this case, it remains to consider whether the  period  of  delay  in
this case in itself constituted a weighty factor.

36. Here again, we  consider  the  adjudicator  was  perfectly  entitled  to
conclude that the delay of under  two  years  [was  not]  unreasonable.   As
noted earlier, each case has to be looked at in the light of the  particular
circumstances. For example, even  a  delay  of  several  years  may  not  be
excessive if most of it is attributable to the claimant's conduct. But  even
where no significant period of delay is attributable to the  claimant,  much
will depend on the particular case and  context.  In  Shala  the  period  of
delay was just over four years. In Xhacka it was some  31  months.  Further,
as already noted, in both those cases the delay was underpinned  by  special
or exceptional circumstances. In this case, by contrast, the delay was  less
than two years and there  were  no  special  or  exceptional  circumstances.
Accordingly  we  consider  that  it  fell  far  short  of  being  excessive,
particularly bearing in mind that during the relevant period  the  Secretary
of State had to process a high volume of asylum  applications,  including  a
significant number from Kosovans. Accordingly, the adjudicator did  not  err
in deciding it was not a decisive factor when it came  to  striking  a  fair
balance  between  the  interests  of  this  individual  appellant  and   the
interests of the state.

37. Our conclusion, therefore, is that the adjudicator was quite correct  to
conclude that the considerations set out in the Shala case  and  the  Xhacka
case did not apply in this case.  In  these  two  cases  the  claimants  had
changed their marital status in the interval between arrival  and  decision,
so that removal potentially threatened to  separate  husband  and  wife.  In
this case, as the adjudicator put it,   " the whole family arrived  together
and would be removed together". Furthermore,  unlike  the  period  of  delay
involved in these two cases  (in excess of 30  months  in  each  case),  the
period of delay in this case was under two years.


Summary of conclusions on the Shala "delay" point

38.
     i) In conducting the balancing exercise under Art 8 the  existence  of
        any unreasonable period of delay is ordinarily a  relevant  factor,
        although given the margin of discretion accorded to the interest of
        the Secretary of State in the maintenance of effective  immigration
        control, this will rarely be a decisive factor  unless  accompanied
        by other special circumstances which disclose particular  prejudice
        to a claimant.


    ii)  The  Shala  point  can  be  extended  to  apply  to  close  family
        relationships other than marriage relationships.


   iii) The Shala  point  only  covers  delay  underpinned  by  special  or
        exceptional circumstances and which is predicated on three things:


           a) the fact that the appellant had a legitimate claim  to  enter
              at the time when, on any reasonable basis, his  claim  should
              have been determined;
           b) the fact that, had his asylum  application  been  dealt  with
              reasonably efficiently, he would have  been  likely  to  have
              obtained at least exceptional leave to remain;
           c) the fact that his private or  family  life  had  only  become
              significantly established as a result of the  time  spent  by
              him in the UK where he  formed  a  relationship.  Accordingly
              possession of ELR, if it had been granted when it should have
              been, would thereby have given him the ability to apply  from
              within the UK for a variation of leave on the grounds of  his
              relationship.


                Thus the Shala point depends on the existence of  all  three
preconditions and has little or no application in other contexts.

 39. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.





DR H H  STOREY
VICE-PRESIDENT


