

YL YL SN (Abandonment - Work-Permit Holders' ILR) China [2004] UKIAT
                                               00083                     | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 31st March 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                              .26 April 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr J Barnes (a Vice President)
                     Mr L V Waumsley (a Vice President)

Between:

                                                                  APPELLANTS

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellants, who are citizens of China,  appeal,  with  permission,
     against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J  P   McClure,
     dismissing their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
     Secretary of State on 22nd June 2000 refusing them indefinite leave to
     remain in the United Kingdom. Before  us  today,  the  Appellants  are
     represented by Mr de Mello, instructed by Christine Lee & Co, and  the
     Respondent is represented by Mr Deller.  We are very grateful to  them
     both for their assistance in this rather complex appeal.

  2. The basis of the Appellants' claim is that the principal Appellant, Mr
     Yeun Oi Lee, has  been  employed  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
     provisions of the Work Permit Scheme for such a  period  as  ought  to
     have entitled him under paragraph 134  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to
     indefinite leave to remain.  That paragraph reads as follows:

           "134. Indefinite leave to remain may be granted  on  application
                 to a person admitted as a work permit holder provided:
                 (i)   he has spent a continuous period of four years in the
                       United Kingdom in this capacity;
                 (ii)   he  has  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph   131
                       throughout the four year period;   and
                  iii) he is still required for the employment  in  question
                       as certified by his employer."

  3. There have been a considerable number of subsidiary arguments in  this
     appeal but we may condense the relevant facts to the  following.   The
     principal Appellant was indeed admitted to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
     work permit holder.  The work permit was issued in August 1992 and  he
     was admitted on 28th December 1992.  The period of the work permit was
     thirty-six months and he was therefore given leave to enter until 28th
     December 1995.  There was then a period during which he  had  no  work
     permit but he was issued with a further three-month  work  permit  and
     there was consequential leave to remain as a work permit holder  which
     expired on 26th April 1996, that apparently being as  a  result  of  a
     decision of the Secretary of State on 26th January 1996 to  allow  the
     extension.

  4. There was then a period whose precise status is uncertain;  but it  is
     accepted by Mr de Mello on behalf of the Appellants that there was  no
     continuous period of four years as a work permit  holder  before  22nd
     June 2000.  The reason for the importance of that date  is  of  course
     that it is the date of the Secretary of State's decision  giving  rise
     to this appeal.  On behalf of the Appellant, Mr de  Mello  has  argued
     that the date of 22nd June 2000 is not crucial.  He argued first  that
     the way the Rule is framed shows that what is of importance is not the
     date of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  but  the  date  of  the
     Adjudicator's determination of any appeal  from  that  decision;   and
     secondly that issues of foreseeability should be part of  the  process
     of determination, bearing in mind that the period of  four  years  (or
     indeed any period) is a period which is foreseeably more likely to  be
     fulfilled as time passes.  In fact, as we have heard during the course
     of the hearing, the Appellant has now been granted  further  leave  to
     remain as a work permit holder.  That leave was granted in 2003 and is
     for five years expiring some time in 2008.

  5. On the basis of that last fact,  Mr  Deller's  argument  is  that  the
     appeal to the Tribunal has been abandoned.  The reason for that is  in
     Mr Deller's submission as follows.   This  appeal  is  an  old  appeal
     brought under the provisions of section  14  of  the  1971  Act.   The
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (Commencement No 6) (Transitional  and
     Consequential Provisions)  Order  2000  (SI  2000/2444)  contains  the
     following provisions in Articles 3 and 4:

           "3.   Transitional provisions


           (1)   Subject to Schedule 2 -
                 (a)   the new appeals provisions are not to have effect  in
                       relation  to  events  which  took  place  before  2nd
                       October 2000 and, notwithstanding their repeal by the
                       provisions of the 1999 Act commenced by  this  Order,
                       the old appeals provisions are to  continue  to  have
                       effect in relation to such events;
                 (b)   the new procedural provisions are to apply to appeals
                       under the old appeals provisions as well as  the  new
                       appeals provisions; and
                 (c)   references in the new procedural  provisions  to  the
                       new appeal  rights  (however  expressed)  are  to  be
                       construed as including a reference to the  equivalent
                       provision of the old appeal rights."

      In Article 4, the "new appeals provisions" are defined in such  a  way
      as to include the principal appeal provisions of the 1999 Act, but the
      "new procedural provisions" are defined as follows in Article 4(1)(c):


           "(i)  subsections (5) to (10) of section 58 of the 1999 Act; and

           (ii)  paragraphs 6 to 8 and 21 to 24 of Schedule 4 to  the  1999
           Act."


  6. Mr Deller conceded that the application of subsections (5) to (10)  of
     section 58 of the 1999 Act might not be entirely apposite because,  as
     he pointed out, there are circumstances in which a person could appeal
     under section 14 but could not appeal under the equivalent  provisions
     in the 1999 Act.  But we are assisted in addition by paragraph 1(3) of
     Schedule 2 to the Order, which reads as follows:

           "Subsections (5) to (10) of section 58 (pending appeals) are  to
           apply to appeals under Part II of the 1971 Act, section 8 of the
           1993 Act and section 3 of the 1996 Act as  they  do  to  appeals
           under Part IV and -

                 (a)    references  to  "this  Part"  are  to  be  construed
           accordingly; and

                 (b)   when an appeal is made under section 14 of  the  1971
                       Act, the reference to section 61 in  subsection  (10)
                       of section 58 is to include a reference to section 14
                       of the 1971 Act."

  7. In our view, those provisions put it beyond doubt that  the  grant  of
     further leave to remain to the present  Appellants  has  caused  their
     appeals to be abandoned.  It follows that we have no  jurisdiction  to
     decide any further issues but in deference to the arguments that  have
     been put to us we give our views on them.

  8. As  we  think  Mr  de  Mello  essentially  accepted,  his  submissions
     supporting the Appellants' case depend on a construction of  paragraph
     134 which is of the utmost difficulty.  It is clear from the words  of
     that paragraph that indefinite leave to remain is to be  granted  only
     to a person who has spent the period of four years in question.  It is
     quite extraordinarily difficult to  see  why  those  words  should  be
     interpreted so as to imply either foresight of the completion  of  the
     period of four years after the date of the decision or indeed to refer
     to a period expiring not at the date of the potential  grant,  but  at
     the date of some future decision by an Adjudicator.  We therefore hold
     that paragraph 134 applies only to a person who, at the  date  of  the
     decision, has spent the continuous period of four years as required by
     that Rule.

  9. We would if we needed to do so, however, reject Mr Deller's submission
     that the period of four years must already have  been  passed  by  the
     date of the application.  It is clear that the Secretary of State has,
     under paragraph 134, no obligation to convert limited leave as a  work
     permit holder to indefinite leave to  remain  without  an  application
     being made.  But  we  do  not  read  paragraph  134  as  implying  any
     conditions which must be fulfilled before  the  application  is  made.
     What is clear (as appears from the history of this appeal) is that  if
     the application is made  too  early,  it  may  be  refused  inevitably
     because the four years has not passed by the  date  of  the  decision.
     That may affect the applicant's future status in the United Kingdom.

 10. However that may be, so far as this appeal is concerned,  if  it  were
     before us we should have dismissed it for the reasons we have given on
     the interpretation of paragraph  134.   But,  for  the  reasons  given
     earlier, we consider that the appeal is not before us.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
