
JH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 16 June 2004            |        |AN (Rwanda Prominent MDR    |
|                           |        |family) Rwanda [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00334                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|12 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Mr P R Lane (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr T A Jones                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For the appellant:           Mr I Huffer, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Dicksons HMB, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, a citizen of Rwanda, appeals with permission against
        the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  D  J  Salmon,  sitting  at
        Stoke-on-Trent, in which he dismissed on asylum  and  human  rights
        grounds  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
        respondent  on  8  September  2003  to  give  directions  for   the
        appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

     2. The appellant, born in 1978,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  16
        August 1999 and applied for asylum the same day.   He  completed  a
        statement of evidence form on 26  August  1999  and  filed  written
        statements both in that year and in 2001.  He  was  interviewed  by
        the Home Office in August 2003.

     3. The Adjudicator appeared to accept the following  facts.   In  1995
        the appellant's uncle  was  killed  by  RPF  soldiers  and  in  the
        following year three of the appellant's cousins disappeared and are
        assumed to have been killed.  In 1997  the  appellant  himself  was
        arrested by RPF soldiers who were looking for Hutu men to  send  to
        fight in Zaire.  After he was abused he was starved and beaten  and
        released  after  about  three  months.   During   this   time   the
        appellant's father had also been arrested and tortured.   By  1998,
        the appellant thought that it  was  safe  to  return  to  study  in
        Kigali.  However,  once  again,  RPF  personnel  came  looking  for
        recruits to fight in the war in  the  DRC  (as  it  now  is).   The
        appellant therefore returned to Cyngugu with money provided by  his
        parents. He went to Kenya and made his way to the  United  Kingdom,
        arriving here in August 1999.

     4. That much the Adjudicator appears to have accepted  (paragraphs  34
        and 35 of the determination).

     5. Where the  Adjudicator  got  into  difficulties,  however,  was  in
        assessing the veracity of the appellant's alleged present  fear  of
        returning to Rwanda.  Essentially,  what  the  appellant  told  the
        interviewing officer on 27  August  2003,  was  that  his  family's
        involvement  in  the  political  party  known  as   the   Mouvement
        Democratique Republiqain (MDR) had brought them  into  difficulties
        with the authorities  during  2003.   The  appellant's  father  had
        disappeared; one of his uncles, Cyiza Augustin, had  been  abducted
        and killed and another uncle, Kabutse Leonard,  had  been  detained
        (Determination, paragraph 12).

     6. Before the Tribunal, Mr Saville accepted that there were  a  number
        of failures on the part of the Adjudicator to find relevant  facts.
        Essentially, the Tribunal finds that those failures related to -

           (a)   whether the  authorities  were  reasonably  likely  to  be
                       seeking the appellant himself, as he said his  mother
                       had told him;

           (b)         whether his father had disappeared;  and,

           (c)   whether an uncle of the appellant  had  been  detained  in
                       connection with MDR involvement.

   7. In an Amnesty International release of 4 September  2003  (appellant's
      bundle, D3), we find that:-

        "Leonard Kavutse, a man known as Gatete  and  another  called  Jean
        Uhishakiye remain  in  detention  and  are  possible  prisoners  of
        conscience.  Leonard Kavutse is a former member of Parliament,  and
        a founding member of Adep-Mizero, a political group that was denied
        legal status as a political party on the basis that it  contravened
        the constitution and was receiving funding  from  abroad.   He  was
        held at Gikondo Police Station  in  the  capital,  Kigali  from  19
        August until 28 August, when he was transferred to  Kigali  central
        prison.  On 28 August, he was  made  to  appear  on  television  to
        "confess" that he had written a letter  to  presidential  candidate
        Faustin Twagiramungu, accusing the ruling Rwandese Patriotic  Front
        (RPF) of being a criminal organisation.  He reportedly  added  that
        the language used in the letter might incite the Rwandese public to
        violence.  His televised confession appears to have  been  intended
        to discredit Faustin Twagiramungu, who himself had been accused  by
        the authorities of encouraging racial divisions in non- Rwandans."




     8. In order to set this  incident  in  context,  it  is  necessary  to
        observe that, as noted in an Amnesty  International  Report  of  14
        October 2003, the attitude of the ruling  RPF  towards  the  mainly
        Hutu MDR substantially hardened during 2003  when  a  Parliamentary
        Commission reported that the MDR had been  involved  in  "divisions
        which had characterised Rwandese  history".   46  individuals  were
        named  in  the  Commission's  report  as  supporters  of  the   MDR
        "divisionist" ideology.  Certain of those mentioned in  the  report
        fled; others were arrested or "disappeared".  The report called for
        the banning of the MDR and the Rwandese legislature appears to have
        accepted its recommendations.  At this point,  the  MDR  fragmented
        into three factions, one of which  is  Adep-Mizero.   Only  one  of
        these factions, the Party for Peace and Concorde (PPC) was  allowed
        to register as a new political party (see also Annex B to the April
        2004 CIPU report on Rwanda).

     9. The Adjudicator, at paragraph 31 of the determination,  noted  that
        unlike previous years, in 2002 there were no reports of politically
        motivated disappearances in Rwanda.  Although the  Adjudicator  did
        not have before him the  materials  which  have  subsequently  been
        placed before the Tribunal, it is manifest that the same could  not
        be said of 2003.  Indeed, at paragraph 6.132 of the CIPU report  it
        is noted that (quoting the US State  Department  Report  for  2003)
        there were reports of politically motivated  disappearances  during
        that year.  In April 2003, "at least 6 persons,  one  of  whom  was
        named in the Report[(see above] disappeared, 4 were senior  members
        of the government".  Further disappearances of people named in  the
        report are described at paragraphs 6.133 and 6.134.

    10. A number of birth certificates and an MDR Membership Card  relating
        to the appellant's father were before the Tribunal.

    11.   The Tribunal heard oral evidence in English from  the  appellant,
        in relation to these documents and,  in  particular  on  the  issue
        (which was disputed by  Mr  Saville)  as  to  whether  the  Leonard
        Kavutse referred to in the  Amnesty  International  Report  was  in
        truth the uncle of the appellant.

    12. The appellant told us that the birth certificates, relating to  his
        father and uncle,  had  been  obtained  by  him  from  the  uncle's
        daughter, currently in Kenya.  Mr Saville suggested that there  had
        been a discrepancy in the oral evidence given by the  appellant  to
        the Tribunal, concerning the point in time at which this lady  left
        for Kenya.  The Tribunal accepts, however, that the  appellant  was
        genuinely confused as to the nature of the question being asked and
        that he stated (and intended to state) that the  lady  in  question
        had left after her uncle had been detained.

    13. The appellant gave detailed and, we find, persuasive evidence as to
        the various names of the grandfather, father and uncle, whereby the
        uncle bears one of the  appellant's  grandfather's  names  and  his
        father bears another.  We find that his evidence in this regard  is
        such as to show, to the requisite lower standard of proof, that  he
        is the nephew of Leonard Kavutse.

    14. At the time the appellant gave his interview in August  2003,  when
        he spoke about the detention of Leonard Kavutse, that detention had
        occurred only a matter of days before.  In our view, it  is  highly
        implausible that the appellant could  have  learnt  this  otherwise
        than by hearing about it from his mother in Rwanda, as he said  was
        the case.  Furthermore, it is unlikely that the appellant could  at
        that stage have predicted that international observers would in due
        course record the detention of Leonard Kavutse.

    15. In short, the Tribunal finds that, looking at  the  evidence  as  a
        whole, the appellant has shown that he is the nephew of the Leonard
        Kavutse who was detained in August  2003  in  connection  with  MDR
        involvement,  who  was  compelled  to  "confess"  his   crimes   on
        television and who, as far as we are aware, remains in detention.

    16. Given this finding, the Tribunal turns to consider whether, on  the
        basis of it and the other matters accepted by the Adjudicator,  the
        appellant can be said to be at real risk of persecution if returned
        today to Rwanda.

    17. At paragraph 6.46 of the October 2003 CIPU Report, a British/Danish
        fact finding delegation to Rwanda is reported as being told that "a
        person may be at risk of persecution irrespective of which party he
        or she is affiliated with.   The  issue  is  whether  a  person  is
        considered  to  support  the   opposition   against   the   present
        government."  That the attitude of the Rwandese Government  towards
        the two would-be off-shoot parties of the MDR  is  hostile  can  be
        ascertained  from  the  passages  from  the  Amnesty  International
        documents and the April 2004 CIPU, to which we have referred.

    18. As both the US State Department Report  and  the  April  2004  CIPU
        Report observe, the Government's human rights record remained  poor
        and it continued to commit serious offences.   "Police  often  beat
        suspects.  Prison  conditions  remained  life-threatening"  (CIPU):
        paragraph 6.1).

    19. Mr Saville  submitted  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  objective
        evidence to show that family members of MDR members, or members  of
        the would-be successor parties, are at risk from  the  authorities.
        As  a  general  proposition,  that  is  no  doubt   correct.    The
        circumstances of the present case, however, are such that,  looking
        at the evidence overall, it is simply  not  possible  to  say  that
        there is no reasonable likelihood of the appellant  having  imputed
        to him the political opinion of his  uncle  (or,  rather,  uncles).
        Whether or not the appellant's father himself had  a  high  profile
        within the MDR we do not know.  The position of those other  family
        members, however, is such that upon his  return  the  appellant  is
        likely to run into difficulties with the Rwandese authorities.   He
        will have been absent from Rwanda for a significant period of time.
         It is accepted that the authorities will,  in  the  circumstances,
        wish to question him.  Regardless of the issue of nomenclature,  we
        find it is reasonably likely that his family position will come  to
        light relatively quickly.   Despite  improvements  in  many  areas,
        Rwanda is a place where, once in detention, a person is  likely  to
        suffer extreme hardship.

    20. Accordingly, we find that, in the circumstances of this case  which
        are, we must emphasise,  somewhat  exceptional,  the  appellant  is
        today at real risk of persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment if he
        were to be returned to Rwanda.

    21. In the light of that finding, the Tribunal is  compelled  to  allow
        the appellant's appeal outright.  The admitted deficiencies in  the
        Adjudicator's findings regarding whether the authorities personally
        sought the appellant and whether his father has disappeared are, in
        the circumstances, not determinative.  Had we found them to be  so,
        the appeal would have had to be remitted  for  proper  findings  of
        fact on those issues.

    22. This appeal is allowed.



                                                   P R Lane
                                                   Vice President


Approved for electronic promulgation











