
H-MC/12-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |JM (Monrovia - Risk on      |
|                           |        |Return) Liberia [2004] UKIAT|
|                           |        |00111                       |
|On 23 April 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|18 May 2004                                                       |
|Given orally in court                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. J. Barnes - Chairman                                          |
|Professor B.L. Gomes Da Costa JP                                  |
|Mrs. E. Hurst JP                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For  the  Appellant:            Mr.  S.F.  Khan,   Counsel   instructed   by
                  Goldkorn Mathias Gentle.
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Liberia  born  on  29  April  1972  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 January 2003 and claimed  asylum  on
    10  January  2003  after  staying  in  the  airport  terminal  in   the
    intervening period.  He submitted a Statement of Evidence Form and  was
    subsequently interviewed on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  who
    refused his application for the reasons contained in a letter dated  21
    February 2003.  On 25 February  2003  the  Secretary  of  State  issued
    directions for his removal to Liberia following  refusal  of  leave  to
    enter after refusal of his asylum  application.   He  appealed  against
    that decision on both asylum and human rights grounds  and  his  appeal
    was heard jointly with that of his wife. who had claimed separately  in
    her own right on 6 June 2003, by Mr. Rex  Billingham,  an  Adjudicator.
    The Adjudicator did not find the Appellant and his wife to be  credible
    in their claims and for this reason he dismissed  the  appeal  on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds.  The Appellant now appeals with  leave
    to us against that decision.

2.    The  Adjudicator  makes  it  clear  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    Appellant's account which is necessarily implausible having  regard  to
    the country background situation at the time of the events to which  he
    refers. It was essentially his claim that  he  had  from  1994  been  a
    member of the Lofa Defence Force, which  was  a  government  associated
    force intended to repel rebels coming from French Guinea into that part
    of Liberia.  He said  that  in  the  course  of  such  service  he  had
    initially been arrested by government troops who suspected that he  was
    a rebel and then by rebel insurgents who ousted the  government  troops
    whilst he was still imprisoned.  After a considerable journey  he  made
    his way back to Monrovia where his family come from and where his  wife
    then was where he was reunited  with  them.  But,  fearful  of  further
    arrest he says that he stayed more or less in hiding in  his  home  for
    the next nine months  until  in  September  2002  he  was  arrested  by
    government agents, detained and severely ill-treated until he was  able
    to escape.

3.    As we have said the Adjudicator did not  accept  the  credibility  of
    that claim but having looked at the reasons which he  gives  for  those
    findings at paragraph 12 we are bound to say that it  is  not  entirely
    clear whether the Adjudicator accepted that he may at some  point  have
    been the subject of arrest even if not precisely in  the  circumstances
    which he claimed. We consider that there are certainly arguable  issues
    raised in the grounds of appeal as to  the  overall  sustainability  of
    those findings.  We put it no higher than that because we do  not  need
    to do so in  the  present  case  by  reason  of  there  having  been  a
    substantial change in country conditions since  the  events  which  the
    Appellant said took place in Liberia.  The former President Taylor left
    Liberia in August 2003 and there is now a  United  Nations  Mission  in
    Liberia (UNMIL) which is  deployed  as  a  multi-national  peacekeeping
    force in Liberia under Resolutions 1497 and 1509 of the United  Nations
    of 2003.

4.    This Appellant, as we say, originates from Monrovia  where  he  spent
    much of his life and where he returned on his own account for the  last
    nine months of his stay in his country in order to rejoin his wife  and
    family who had remained there.
5.    The Tribunal has considered in the recent decision  of  [2003]  UKIAT
    00164 T (Liberia) whether there is a current real risk  of  persecution
    or of treatment in breach of protected human rights in Monrovia,  where
    the Appellant would be returned and which as we  say  we  can  properly
    regard as being his home area.  That determination holds on  the  basis
    of the evidence in the October 2003 CIPU  Report,  supplemented  by  an
    Amnesty International Report produced to the Tribunal, that there is no
    such current risk and sets the matter out in these terms  at  paragraph
    8:

      "Drawing the threads of these accounts together it seems to us to  be
         tolerably clear that the position  if  a  person  is  returned  to
         Monrovia is not such any longer  as  to  engage  Article  3.   The
         situation in Monrovia is tense but it is under control.   Monrovia
         is an area where there are UN troops in numbers and they are  able
         to keep the peace in that city.  Further it is apparent  from  the
         fact that internal displacement camps have been visited by Amnesty
         International both that such camps function and further that  they
         are open to outside scrutiny.  There is no criticism of the safety
         of the people who are in those camps at present.  We are confident
         that if Amnesty International had discovered that there  were  any
         security problems  for  those  who  are  at  present  in  internal
         displacement camps they would have said so in this report.  In the
         absence of such evidence we feel that we  are  in  a  position  to
         conclude that if returned to Monrovia this  claimant,  although  a
         Mandingo and a Muslim, would be at  no  particular  enhanced  risk
         over and above that run by other Liberian  citizens.   Further  we
         come to the conclusion that the ordinary Liberian citizen  himself
         if in Monrovia or in the camps near there is at no  real  risk  of
         Article 3 harm".

6.    Mr. Khan recognised that in light of that decision he was  placed  in
    some difficulties since  even  if  we  accepted  everything  which  the
    Appellant had claimed as being true the decision in T  would  point  to
    the conclusion that the Appellant would no longer have a current  well-
    founded fear of persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason  or  of
    treatment in breach of his protected human rights under  Article  3  if
    now returned to Monrovia.  He submitted to  us,  and  we  accept,  that
    outside Monrovia the situation may well still be different but  we  are
    not concerned with that provided that a safe return to Monrovia can  be
    effected.

7.    We have been referred to the briefing paper issued  by  Human  Rights
    Watch entitled "'The guns are in the bushes'  -  Continuing  abuses  in
    Liberia".  This appears to have been produced in  late  2003  or  early
    2004 and to cover the position for the year 2003.  There is a section V
    entitled "Protection  of  civilians  and  UNMIL"  which  considers  the
    current  situation  following  the  arrival  of  the   United   Nations
    peacekeeping force.  It points to  there  having  been  some  occasions
    which have caused difficulty and some lack of confidence on the part of
    the Liberians, these being specifically concerned with earlier attempts
    at putting into effect a controlled programme  of  disarmament  by  the
    surrender of arms in return for payments to rebels, particularly  those
    associated  with  LURD.   We  accept  that  it  is  clear  that   those
    arrangements did  go  wrong  and  caused  a  localised  and  short-term
    disturbance in early December 2003 but it is  said  that  these  events
    occurred by  reason  of  poor  advance  planning  of  those  particular
    exercises and there is nothing to show that they were other than short-
    term and localised in the way we have noted.  The report makes it clear
    that a further  increase  in  the  numbers  of  UNMIL  peacekeepers  is
    required in order to spread stability from Monrovia into the regions of
    Liberia but  it  notes  that  in  December  2003  an  additional  2,000
    Ethiopian and Pakistani troops arrived who it describes  as  "a  hugely
    welcome addition to the UN force and one which enabled the UN to deploy
    its first troops to Tubmanburg, Gbarnga and Tappeta".

8.    It is anticipated that there will be  further  increases  which  will
    enable the peacekeeping mission to be extended further  within  Liberia
    but what is certainly clear from that report is that  the  position  in
    Monrovia has not in general terms deteriorated from that referred to in
    the Tribunal decision in T (Liberia) and  has,  if  anything,  improved
    save for the two localised incidents to which we referred above.

9.    There is therefore no evidence before us which would lead us to  take
    a different view of  current  risk  from  that  already  taken  by  the
    Tribunal in T (Liberia).  It follows from this that  even  were  we  to
    accept the Appellant's claims as to his history in Liberia it would not
    enable him to succeed before us because we are obliged to look  at  the
    position as it is today in arriving at our findings as to whether there
    is a real risk on return.

10.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                   J. BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


