
                                                                AT (Not
Family Visit) Uganda  [2004] UKIAT 00030
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 2nd February 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            24 February 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                                Miss B Mensah
                               Mr P R Moulden

Between:

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KAMPALA
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer Kampala.  He appeals with
     permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A  McGrade,
     allowing the appeal of the Respondent, a citizen  of  Uganda,  against
     his decision on 8th April 2003 refusing  her  entry  clearance  for  a
     visit.  Before us the Entry Clearance Officer  is  represented  by  Mr
     Mullen.  The Respondent, (the Applicant to the Entry Clearance Officer
     and the Appellant before the Adjudicator) was not represented and  did
     not appear.

  2. There are a number of matters which  give  rise  to  concern  in  this
     appeal.  The primary one is the way in which the papers were  produced
     by the Entry Clearance Officer.  This is very far from being the first
     time, even the first time today, that we have seen an Entry  Clearance
     Officer's treatment of a visit visa application which leaves  a  great
     deal to be desired.  In the present case, it is  quite  apparent  from
     the papers  now  before  the  Tribunal  that  the  transcript  of  the
     Officer's interview of the  Applicant  to  him  was  produced  in  two
     separate versions.  One of them ends at question 26 with the  question
     "Are you still fit and well?" to which  the  answer  was  "Yes".   The
     other version goes  on  to  question  34,  that  is  to  say  contains
     additional questions and ends again with the question "Are  you  still
     fit and well?".  We do not know whether there is in fact in  existence
     a  third  or  other  versions  that  are   longer   still.    In   the
     circumstances, we can, of course, have no confidence that  the  second
     version is any more accurate or complete than the first.   Visit  visa
     applications, although they may be seen by the Entry Clearance Officer
     as small beer, are of great importance to those who make them  and  we
     take the view that every one deserves proper consideration.

  3. The Entry Clearance Officer's principal ground of appeal in this  case
     is that the Adjudicator, having found that the Applicant to the  Entry
     Clearance Officer was not related  to  the  sponsor  as  she  claimed,
     should have found further that he could  not  be  satisfied  that  she
     genuinely intended a visit for the limited time stated  by  her.   The
     burden of that ground is that if the  Applicant  was  not  related  as
     claimed to the sponsor, her credibility was in the severest  of  doubt
     and that it followed that other matters  which  were  not  so  readily
     capable of being checked were ones on which she was  not  entitled  to
     credit.

  4. We prefer to look at this issue from another viewpoint.  The Applicant
     claimed to be the mother-in-law of the sponsor, Maureen Kiconco.   The
     sponsor was pregnant and the purpose of the visit was said  to  be  to
     assist at the birth.  Having looked at the evidence,  the  Adjudicator
     wrote in paragraph 14 as follows:

           "I am not satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  he
           Appellant and Maureen  Kiconco  are  related  as  the  Appellant
           claims."


      He went on, at paragraph 17, to say this:


           "Although I have rejected the  Appellant's  account  as  to  her
           relationship with Maureen Kiconco, I am satisfied on the balance
           of probabilities that the purpose of this  visit  is  to  assist
           Maureen Kiconco after the  birth  of  her  child  and  that  the
           Appellant intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  her
           visit."


      At the end of his determination, he wrote as follows:


           "I allow the appeal.


           I direct that entry clearance be granted to the Appellant."


  5. That decision creates difficulties because the  right  of  appeal  for
     those refused entry clearance as a visitor is limited.  Under  section
     60 of the 1999 Act which is headed "Limitations on  Rights  of  Appeal
     under Section 59", we find the following:

           "(4)  Subsection (5) applies to a person who seeks to enter  the
                 United Kingdom:
                 (a)   as a visitor."

      We do not need to read the rest of that  subsection.   Subsection  (5)
      reads, as follows:


           "(5)  That person:
                    a) is not entitled to appeal under section 59 against  a
                       refusal of an entry clearance unless he is  a  family
                       visitor."

      Subsection (6) reads:


           "The Secretary of State  may,  by  regulations,  make  provision
           requiring a family visitor appealing under  section  59  to  pay
           such fee as may be fixed by the regulations."


      Subsection (10):


           "'Family visitor' has such meaning as may be prescribed."

  6. As is well known, fees were indeed fixed under  regulations  but  have
     since been revoked.  However, there are  still  in  force  regulations
     prescribing the meaning of a family  visitor.   The  regulations  that
     govern this appeal are the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) (No 2)
     Regulations 2000 SI 2000 No 2446.  Regulation 2, paragraph 2, of those
     Regulations reads as follows:

           "For the purposes of Section 60(10) of the Act, a family visitor
           is a person who applies for entry clearance to enter the  United
           Kingdom as a visitor in order to visit:
           (a)   his spouse, father, mother,  son,  daughter,  grandfather,
                 grandmother,  grandson,  granddaughter,  brother,   sister,
                 uncle, aunt, nephew, niece or first cousin;
           (b)   the father, mother, brother or sister of his spouse;
           (c)   the spouse of his son or daughter;
           (d)   his  step-father,  step-mother,  step-son,  step-daughter,
                 step-brother or step-sister;  or
           (e)   a person with  whom  he  had  lived  as  a  member  of  an
                 unmarried couple for at least two of the three years before
                 the day on which his application for  entry  clearance  was
                 made."


  7.  That  gives  family  visitor  a  wide  definition,  but  there  is  a
     distinction between those who fall within those categories  and  those
     who  do  not.   The  consequence  of  the  Adjudicator  rejecting  the
     relationship claimed by the Applicant to the sponsor is that there  is
     no evidence (and there was no evidence before  the  Adjudicator)  that
     the Applicant fell within the category of a "family visitor".   Having
     reached the conclusion, therefore, that he was not satisfied that  the
     Applicant was related as  claimed  to  the  sponsor,  the  Adjudicator
     should  have  proceeded  immediately  to  decide  that   he   had   no
     jurisdiction to hear the Applicant's  appeal.   It  follows  that  his
     purported allowing of the appeal and direction that entry clearance be
     granted were made without jurisdiction and are entirely without force.
  8. For those reasons, and to that extent, we allow  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer's appeal.  The decision made by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
     therefore stands.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
