
Heard at Field House
On      2 June 2004
Written                    3                    June                    2004


                                  BK (Blood Feud) Serbia and  Montenegro  CG
[2004] UKIAT 00156

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . 10/06/2004 . . . .
. . .


                                   Before

                         Mr K Drabu (Vice-President)
                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                                Mr R Hamilton



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr J Gulvin, Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Baker, instructed by Chartwell & Sadlers



                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a  citizen  of  Serbia  &  Montenegro  (Kosovo).  The
     Appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator, Mr C C Wright, allowing the  Respondent's  appeal  against
     the decision of  the  Appellant  on  24  July  2003  to  issue  removal
     directions and refuse asylum

  2. The Respondent's claim can be summarised as follows. He  is  an  ethnic
     Albanian from Pristina who fled from Kosovo on 15 May 1998 to the UK to
     escape the adverse attention of the Serbian  authorities.  However  his
     current fear of return is based upon a telephone  conversation  between
     him and his father in Kosovo, some three weeks  after  UNMIK  and  KFOR
     entered Kosovo in June 1999. His father told  him  that  he  and  other
     family members were leaving Kosovo because of a threat to the  life  of
     the Respondent's grandfather and other members of  his  family  by  the
     Kacanik family of Gjakova. This arose from a blood feud going back some
     fifty years, when the  Respondent's  grandfather  apparently  killed  a
     member of the Kacanik family. The Respondent has  not  heard  from  his
     father again but believes he went to America and remains there now.

  3. The Adjudicator accepted that the claimant was a credible  witness  and
     this included his account of the telephone call from his  father.   The
     Respondent had not mentioned this matter until his  interview  in  2003
     because it was not uppermost in his mind when he completed  the  papers
     for the original asylum claim.  The Adjudicator thus accepted that  the
     Respondent was the subject of a blood feud. He allowed  the  appeal  in
     respect of asylum and under Articles 2 and 3 because he held  that  the
     authorities in Kosovo would be unable to offer  him  a  sufficiency  of
     protection. In so concluding, he said  that  he  preferred  the  expert
     report of Mr Standish to the objective evidence recorded  in  the  CIPU
     document submitted to him. He offered extensive quotations  from  both,
     but did not say why he preferred Mr Standish's report.

  4. The grounds upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  raise  four
     matters. First, the Adjudicator erred  in  his  conclusion  that  there
     would be no sufficiency of protection available from the authorities to
     the Respondent arising from a blood feud. Second, the evidence accepted
     of a single phone call in 1999, without any further indication that the
     blood feud was being pursued was insufficient  to  establish  any  real
     risk for the Respondent on return today. Third, there was  insufficient
     reasoning as to why the Kacanik family would five years  later  attempt
     to find the Respondent, or would even  be  aware  of  his  return.  The
     Adjudicator was therefore in error  in  concluding  that  the  claimant
     could not live in  Pristina  or  could  not  seek  internal  relocation
     elsewhere in Kosovo.  Finally the Adjudicator  erred  in  allowing  the
     appeal under Article 2 as the evidence did not show that there  was  "a
     near certainty of loss of life," this being the threshold described  by
     the ECHR in Bahaddar v Netherlands.

  5. To a considerable extent these issues overlapped in the way  that  they
     were argued before  us  and  depend  upon  the  sustainability  of  the
     Adjudicator's assessment of Mr Standish's report particularly as to the
     availability of sufficiency of protection within the terms described in
     Horvath. Before turning to that report however, we have had  regard  to
     the Tribunal's latest country guidance on blood feuds in Kosovo, in  KS
     (IFA - Albanian blood feud) Kosovo CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00208.  This  was
     promulgated on 5 November  2003,  the  same  date  as  the  Adjudicator
     determined the appeal before us.  It was not therefore produced to him.
     We must acknowledge at once, as Mr Baker submitted, that  the  Tribunal
     in KS Kosovo did not have a report from Mr Standish before it.  It  did
     however have a fair  amount  of  objective  evidence  concerning  blood
     feuds, including much of the evidence that was before  the  Adjudicator
     in this appeal, and some that has been relied upon by Mr Standish.  The
     Tribunal assessed this evidence carefully. The relevant parts state  as
     follows.
        "7. At page 78 of the Tribunal  bundle,  is  an  extract  from
        Kosovo: A Short History by Noel Malcolm.  Here,  we  find  the
        nature of  the  Northern  Albanian  blood  feud  described  as
        follows:-
           '[The blood feud] is one of the most  archaic  features  of
           Northern Albanian society resembling the codes that  govern
           other isolated societies in the Mediterranean region  (such
           as Corsica) or the Northern  Caucasus.  What  lies  at  the
           heart of the blood feud is a concept alien  to  the  modern
           mind, and more easily  learned  about  from  the  plays  of
           Aeschylus than from the works of modern  sociologists:  the
           aim is not punishment of a murderer,  but  satisfaction  of
           the  blood  of   the   person   murdered,   or   initially,
           satisfaction of one's own honour when it has been polluted.
           If retribution were the real aim then only those personally
           responsible for the  original  crime  or  insult  would  be
           potential  targets;  but  instead  honour  is  cleansed  by
           killing any male member  of  the  family  of  the  original
           offender, and the spilt blood of that victim then cries out
           to its own family for purification.

           Since honour is of the essence, there are strict rules  for
           every step of the feud: one who 'takes  blood'  to  satisfy
           his (or his family's) honour must announce that he has done
           so; a formal truce or best for a set period must be  agreed
           to, if requested for a proper reason (this is a special use
           of 'bese' the general term for a man's word of honour); and
           so on...the tradition of the blood feud has never died  out
           in Kosovo: innumerable small-scale feuds have  combined  in
           the remoter villages and not all of them were ended by  the
           great  series  of  mass  reconciliations  arranged  by   an
           inspirational settler of blood feuds, Anton  Setta  in  the
           early 1990s'.


        8. In a further extract from a book, Religion and the Politics
        of Identity in Kosovo, by Ger Duijzings found at  page  82  of
        the bundle, we note the following:-
           'The judicial means of regulating property and  land  sales
           have been ineffective, and thus conflicts  over  land  have
           been endemic, resulting in a rising number of blood  feuds:
           among the Albanians in  Yugoslavia  the  number  of  crimes
           committed in vendettas is not only on the  decline  but  is
           even rising...there are such feuds in almost every  one  of
           the Communes of the province of Kosovo, most of them in the
           remote villages'......


        10. An extract from the Sunday Times of August  2001  mentions
        the murder of  almost  the  entire  membership  of  a  Kosovan
        Albanian family. This is referred to in  the  context  of  the
        'lawless state that Kosovo is in', with 245 murders  in  2000,
        'many of them revenge  attacks  on  the  Serbian  minority  by
        ethnic Albanians, angered by years of repression'. In 2001, up
        to the date of the article, 'the number of murders has dropped
        to...77, but it includes a particular brutal  outrage,  eleven
        Serbs killed in a bus bombing in February'. As for the killing
        of the Albanian family the report notes that ' Albanian  feuds
        spare women and children' and  that  the  killing  'is  almost
        certainly linked to the fact that Hamza,  Pranvera's  50  year
        old father used to be a policeman under Serbian rule'.

        11. On page  87  we  find  an  UNMIK-KFOR  press  briefing  of
        February 2001 where 'two murders were reported overnight,  one
        in Malishevo - a Kosovo Albanian killed another in an apparent
        blood feud dating 25 years'.

        12. Ms Jolly also submitted a copy from a website  article  of
        21  August  2003,  emanating  from  an   organisation   called
        'Reliefweb'. The subtitle of the article is  'Murders  on  the
        increase in Western Kosovo but no-one is prepared to  identify
        the killers'. The particular  incident  in  question,  when  a
        number of people were shot in a gun attack on a car and  shop,
        appears to have 'had  something  to  do  with  rival  business
        interests'. There are said to have been 22 murders in the Peja
        region of Kosovo during 1993. The causes of the crimes 'vary -
        some of the killings  involve  organised  crime  and  business
        rivalries, while others  stem  from  traditional  blood  feuds
        between Albanian families'. The article goes on to  note  that
        'ethnic violence involving Albanians and the pockets of  Serbs
        still living in the area remains a disturbing trend. Two young
        Serbs...were shot dead on 13 August'. UNMIK police are  quoted
        as complaining that witnesses to crimes such as these are hard
        to come by. Another report from the same website of 19  August
        2003 notes 'escalating violence in Kosovo [which] has led to a
        new war of words between Serbian and Albanian politicians  and
        raised tension between their respective communities'.


        13. Against this background, the Tribunal is in no doubt  that
        the Adjudicator was perfectly entitled to  conclude  that  the
        Appellant would not be at real risk upon return to Kosovo as a
        result of his uncle's murder of the  brother  of  the  Serbian
        informer and Collaborator Palok Gjeloshi.

        14. Reading the documentation in the Appellant's  bundle,  and
        the Kosovo Country Assessment of April 2003,  it  is  manifest
        that the situation in Kosovo has changed  fundamentally  since
        the time of the events in 1999, when the  Serbian  authorities
        held sway in the province. According to paragraph 4.48 of  the
        Assessment, it appears that  less  than  half  of  the  former
        200,000 or so Serbs who were resident in  Kosovo,  now  remain
        there. Most of the remaining Serbs 'are  concentrated  in  the
        Northern part of the city of Mitrovica'.  Ethnic  Serbs  'have
        been the principal targets for ethnically motivated attacks'.

        15. The Tribunal  is  also  aware  that  UNHCR  consider  that
        potential returnees, with special  protection  needs,  include
        ethnic Albanians who may have been involved with the  previous
        Serb administration.  As  paragraph  6.91  of  the  Assessment
        observes 'there have been reports of  ethnic  Albanians  being
        targets of harassment and violence in retribution with alleged
        association  or  collaboration  with   the   Serbian   regime,
        particularly in the months following the war of 1999-2000.  In
        some cases such accusations may have been based on little more
        than the fact that the person had done business with the Serbs
        in the past or  that  his  house  was  not  targeted  by  Serb
        forces'.

        16. The  Tribunal's  attention  has  not  been  drawn  to  any
        utterance by the UNHCR, since the end of the Kosovan  war,  to
        the effect that those in need of  special  protection  include
        those who claim to fear retribution from a blood feud.......

        18. The evidence on blood feuds  in  Kosovo  clearly  suggests
        that the practice  exists  within  the  more  rural,  isolated
        communities. The Tribunal has been presented with no  evidence
        to show any significant  blood  feuding  within  the  capital,
        Pristina, The Adjudicator's finding that, if it were necessary
        to do so, the Appellant could relocate there with  his  family
        is, in the Tribunal's view, wholly justified."


  6. Much of what the Tribunal said in KS Kosovo about  the  background  and
     practice of blood feuds is reflected also in Mr Standish's  report  and
     comes  from  similar  sources.  There   are   however   some   material
     differences. The Tribunal did not deal with the question of sufficiency
     of protection, because it concluded there  was  no  real  risk  as  the
     problem related mainly  to  rural  areas  and  there  was  an  internal
     relocation option to Pristina, where "there  was  no  evidence  of  any
     significant blood feuding." Mr Standish rejected  the  availability  of
     any sufficiency of protection  for  the  targets  of  blood  feuds  and
     concluded that there was no viable internal relocation option  anywhere
     in Kosovo. It is these differences that are of central concern  in  the
     appeal before us.

  7. Mr Standish has set out his credentials.  He is a Fellow of  the  Royal
     Institution and of the Royal Anthropological Institute. He is  a  tutor
     at Durham University and is chairman of the board  at  the  Centre  for
     Research into Post Communist Economies. He is  evidently  a  man  whose
     opinions must be assessed seriously.

  8. His overall conclusions  are  contained  in  paragraphs  52-57  of  his
     report, the relevant passages of which can be summarised as follows.
           If  the  Adjudicator  were  to  make  a  positive   finding   on
           credibility then in my view it would be appropriate to  consider
           the cultural background to the practice of blood feud in Kosovo.
           My opinion is that, unless such a blood feud were to be  settled
           by negotiation between the elders of  both  respective  families
           and a "bese declaration" made,  then  there  is  a  genuine  and
           substantial risk to the male members of such  families,  and  an
           indirect - though no less serious - risk to  the  male  members.
           Indeed in recent years instances of blood  feuds  being  pursued
           abroad  have  been  documented  by  police  in  Italy,   Greece,
           Switzerland, Germany and the UK.
           As far as the question of sufficiency of protection is concerned
           I would commend to  the  Adjudicator's  attention  the  specific
           concerns over the standard of policing raised by  UNMIK's  human
           rights Ombudsman in his 2002 Report on Kosovo  as  well  as  the
           findings of the most recent Council of Europe report. In my view
           the evidence contained in the 2001 US  State  Department  report
           also gives cause for concern that UNMIK  may  tolerate  informal
           settlement of blood feud violence,  rather  than  taking  active
           steps to bring those responsible for the courts. On the evidence
           of what is  taken  place  in  Kosovo  since  June  1999  and  is
           continuing to occur in the province, I do  not  have  confidence
           that the Kosovo police service  can  be  relied  upon  to  of  a
           meaningful degree of protection or security to those individuals
           at risk from blood feuds.  UNMIK's own  evidence  is  that  such
           attacks to occur - often many years after the initial incident -
           and on occasion individuals are killed or seriously injured.
           Since blood feuds are province wide problems and cases have been
           documented across  Kosovo,  I  do  not  consider  that  internal
           relocation  could  offer  any  additional  degree  of  security,
           particularly in view of the small size  of  both  population  of
           Kosovo and the geographical boundaries of the province itself."


  9. Pausing at this point,  we  can  see  no  objection  to  Mr  Standish's
     conclusion that if the credibility of  a  claim  of  a  blood  feud  is
     accepted, then the claim must be viewed in the context of the  cultural
     background to the practice of  the  blood  feud.  In  this  appeal  the
     Adjudicator accepted that the telephone call of 1999 was credible  even
     though the issue of the blood feud was not raised with  the  Respondent
     for a further four years. However, as Mr Baker confirmed, there  is  no
     further evidence beyond that  telephone  call  concerning  whether  any
     action was taken after the call in pursuance of the blood feud.  Indeed
     there is very little evidence about what  the  blood  feud  itself  was
     originally about and whether anything much happened in pursuance of  it
     over the previous fifty years. These are important matters in terms  of
     risk  assessment  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  explore.  Mr  Baker
     suggested that blood feuds were suppressed  by  the  previous  Yugoslav
     government, and that is why there is no such evidence.  That  does  not
     seem to accord with the history by Mr Malcolm described above.  A  more
     consistent view is that it may have been because the feud was  resolved
     in the mass reconciliations of the early 1990s.  However,  as  we  have
     said the Adjudicator did not explore this matter  further  and  in  the
     absence of any challenge by Mr Gulvin to the  Adjudicator's  assessment
     of credibility, we have accepted  the  Adjudicator's  finding  at  face
     value - that some threat was made and in the cultural context will  not
     expire with time. Whether the evidence is sufficient to  demonstrate  a
     real risk within the terms of persecution and Article  3  is  a  matter
     that we shall return to later.

 10. Mr Standish bases the conclusions concerning sufficiency of  protection
     that we have quoted above on some earlier passages  in  his  report  as
     follows.
           33. The issue which would then follow  is  whether  the  present
           authorities  in  Kosovo  (UNMIK,  KFOR  and  the  Kosovo  police
           service) are capable of providing adequate protection  to  those
           ethnic Albanians who are "in blood" with another family  in  the
           province.  In my opinion the current security situation  remains
           far from satisfactory although  there  has  been  an  undeniable
           improvement in the general level of  security  for  most  ethnic
           Albanians.  However there has also been a significant number  of
           killings  and  kidnappings  committed   by   members   of   both
           communities - Albanian and Serb - in Kosovo since June 1999  and
           recent evidence provided by objective sources  (including  UNMIK
           itself) is that there has been a significant upsurge of violence
           within the ethnic Albanian community.
           34. There is also disturbing evidence  cited  by  the  US  State
           Department in its Human Rights report on Yugoslavia (Kosovo) for
           2000 that UNMIK has, at least on occasion, failed to enforce the
           law, preferring to allow the process of informal blood mediation
           to take the place of prosecutions
                 "In early December unknown  assailants  attempted  to  kill
                 Hajvas Berisha, a former commander of the  KLA  and  a  KPS
                 member in Pristina.  UNMIK arrested three  of  the  alleged
                 assailants; however, because the  case  involves  a  family
                 feud, no charges were filed against the assailants  because
                 the case was  settled  out  of  court  through  traditional
                 Albanian feud mediation methods.
           35. In my view this statement raises legitimate questions  about
           the extent which UNMIK and its  police  effectively  collude  in
           such  informal  out-of-court  settlements  in  order  to   avoid
           provoking  tension  between   the   ethnic   Albanian   majority
           population and UNMIK police, an  increasingly  large  number  of
           whom are ethnic Albanian recruits.  Intervention in blood  feuds
           by other ethnic Albanians - even police officers - tends  to  be
           avoided owing to the potential risk to the individuals and their
           own families.
           36. In my opinion this evidence suggests that UNMIK has been, at
           least in certain cases, willing to allow informal settlement  of
           violence committed in the  pursuit  of  blood  feuds  in  Kosovo
           rather than taking appropriate steps  to  enforce  the  law  and
           bring perpetrators justice in the courts.  I would suggest  that
           traditional  Albanian  feud  mediation  methods  can  hardly  be
           regarded as an appropriate means  of  law  enforcement  in  21st
           century Europe [as per the Horvath test]."

 11. This is a particularly important part of Mr Standish's  report  because
     he bases much of his opinion on  sufficiency  of  protection  upon  the
     evidence described in it.   The  only  specific  example  he  cites  in
     support of an unwillingness by the authorities to provide a sufficiency
     of protection is that of Hajvas Berisha. However  we  do  not  consider
     that this quoted report bears the interpretation he placed upon it.  It
     shows that an attack was made in pursuance  of  a  blood  feud.   UNMIK
     responded by arresting  three  persons  in  connection  with  it.  That
     certainly shows a willingness to act by UNMIK. However the fact that no
     charges were filed does not mean that the UNMIK was unwilling to pursue
     the matter. It reflects the  fact  that  the  parties  to  the  dispute
     resolved it between themselves and  did  not  wish  to  pursue  it  any
     further and did not file charges. No prosecution  can  succeed  in  the
     absence of evidence. Moreover this event was in the early days  of  the
     UNMIK presence and as we have seen from the material  described  above,
     there have been improvements in policing with the passage of time.

 12. This issue of willingness of the authorities to act is a matter that is
     central to the question of  sufficiency  of  protection.  We  therefore
     asked Mr Baker whether he could point us to anything in  the  objective
     evidence to show that, since the arrival of the international forces, a
     target of a blood feud has applied to the  authorities  in  Kosovo  for
     protection and had been refused.  He fairly acknowledged  that  he  was
     unable to point us to any specific example of his at any point in their
     mandate. This is  a  huge  gap  in  Mr  Standish's  argument  that  the
     Adjudicator did not apparently identify or weigh. Mr  Standish  appears
     to have misunderstood the significance  of  the  Berisha  incident  and
     there is no other example before us showing any  unwillingness  by  the
     authorities to act against criminal violence, whether in  pursuance  of
     blood feuds  or  inter  ethnic  violence.  Moreover  the  Tribunal  has
     assessed the general question of sufficiency of  protection  in  Kosovo
     since the intervention of the international community in many be of its
     determinations from Kacaj onwards. It has concluded overwhelmingly that
     there is in general terms a sufficiency of protection available.  There
     are exceptions relating to the specific categories identified by  UNHCR
     as being in need of international protection, and even then  a  careful
     assessment on a case-by-case basis is needed. We note that  UNHCR  does
     not identify targets of blood feuds in Kosovo as being amongst those in
     need  of  international  protection.  Despite  this,  Mr  Standish   is
     effectively  stating  that  the  general  sufficiency   of   protection
     available in Kosovo is not available in relation to  blood  feuds,  but
     offers no specific examples that can properly support his  proposition.
     That is  not  in  our  view  a  sustainable  opinion  on  the  evidence
     available.

 13. It is true of course  that  there  has  been  an  upsurge  of  criminal
     violence in Kosovo. There are  a  number  of  examples  of  it  in  the
     evidence  before  us.  However  relatively  little  of  this   has   an
     identifiable connection with a blood feud, though some do. Mr  Standish
     seems to incorporate violence generally in Kosovo into  his  assertions
     about blood feuds. That is not a sustainable view either. We would have
     expected a clear and properly sourced attempt to identify how  many  of
     the acts of violence can reasonably be attributed to  blood  feuds.  We
     are aware, from  news  reports  and  the  objective  evidence,  of  the
     emergence of organised criminal  gangs  and  the  incidence  of  inter-
     communal ethnic violence. However this not in pursuance of blood  feuds
     and cannot be conflated with it when assessing the extent  of  risk  in
     general or in any particular case. The reality as it appears to us from
     the material available is that attacks in pursuit  of  blood  feuds  in
     Kosovo do happen, but are relatively few in number and mainly relate to
     the rural areas.

 14. Moreover, under the Horvath test, the fact of violence  does  not  mean
     there is no sufficiency of  protection  from  the  authorities.   Crime
     exists in every country including the UK. Indeed Mr Standish identifies
     the UK as a place where Albanians in  pursuit  of  a  blood  feud  have
     committed crimes. That  does  not  mean  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
     protection here.

 15. The authorities in Kosovo face  considerable  difficulties  as  do  the
     authorities in many  countries  faced  with  rising  levels  of  crime.
     However the evidence before us demonstrates that there is a  system  of
     criminal law, which makes violent attacks  by  persecutors  punishable,
     and a reasonable willingness to enforce that law on the part of the law
     enforcement agencies. There are many examples confirming their  ability
     to do so. Reading Mr Standish's report with care and in the context  of
     the evidence as a whole,  he  has  failed  adequately  to  support  his
     opinion that there is no sufficiency of protection available in  Kosovo
     from the authorities for targets of blood feuds. We therefore  conclude
     that the Adjudicator was wrong on the objective evidence before him  to
     rely upon Mr Standish's report in concluding that  there  would  be  no
     sufficiency of protection available in general or in relation or to the
     Respondent in particular. It follows from this that  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions, being based upon the absence of sufficiency of protection,
     are flawed and must be set aside.

 16. We should add that even if there is  some  risk  to  targets  of  blood
     feuds, before they can engage international  protection  they  have  to
     establish a real risk to them. This necessarily engages the  reasonable
     likelihood of their being discovered  and  attacked.  We  have  already
     observed that the number of attacks  identified  with  blood  feuds  is
     fairly small and mainly occurs in rural areas. Whilst  we  accept  that
     Kosovo is a relatively small place,  that does not mean that there  are
     no internal relocation  options  available.  Indeed  the  Tribunal  has
     frequently found that such options do exist especially in Pristina, the
     capital.

 17. In this appeal, the only information relating to the blood feud derives
     from a telephone conversation with the Respondent's  father  some  five
     years ago.  Whilst we accept that there is no time  limit  to  a  blood
     feud, the fact that there is no further  evidence  about  it  does  not
     suggest that it has been pursued in the past with any vigour  or  would
     be in the future. There is no reason in the evidence  why  the  Kacanik
     family who live in Gjakova would be aware of the Respondent's return to
     Pristina.  The observation by Mr Standish  that  the  Respondent  would
     have to register and disclose his birth certificate to the  authorities
     is not a viable basis for concluding that a person  with  a  relatively
     common Albanian name would be identified as a target of blood feud  and
     information would be passed on  to  the  Kacanik  family.  We  conclude
     therefore  that  irrespective  of  the  question  of   sufficiency   of
     protection, the Respondent  has  plainly  failed  on  the  evidence  to
     establish that there would be a real risk to him on return to Pristina.
      This is not question of internal relocation because Pristina is  where
     the Respondent came originally. Again the Adjudicator erred in  relying
     on Mr Standish's inadequately reasoned and sourced contrary opinion.

 18. For the reasons described above, we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator's
     unexplained  preference  for  Mr  Standish's  report  over  the   other
     objective evidence,  in  respect  of  the  issues   of  sufficiency  of
     protection, real risk and internal relocation, is unsustainable on  the
     evidence. His allowing of the appeal in respect of asylum and Article 3
     must be set aside. We would add that the very high  threshold  required
     to engage Article 2 is that of the near certainty of loss of life,  and
     the evidence in this appeal does not remotely support such a  level  of
     risk.  Accordingly the allowing of the appeal under Article 2 also must
     be set aside.

 19. This appeal is allowed.  The Adjudicator's conclusions are  set  aside.
     The Appellant's original decision is upheld.





                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
