
ar

ZR (Risk on Return - Deterioration of Mental State  -  Medical  Facilities)
Albania [2004] UKIAT 00086


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing  : 19 January 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               27 April 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                             Mr D R Bremmer, JP


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
Miss E. Dubicka of Counsel, instructed  by  Gregg  Latchams  Quinn  for  the
appellant;    Mr  S.  Walker,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for   the
respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is an ethnic  Albanian  and  a  Muslim   raised  in  the
      Lipjan region of Kosovo.  Although  the  appellant's  previous  appeal
      against refusal of his asylum  claim  had  been   rejected  in  August
      2002, the Adjudicator in that case had largely  accepted  his  account
      was credible and in particular had accepted that he had been subjected
      to terrible difficulties in  Kosovo  and  that  his  family  had  been
      dispersed.

2.    By the time the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  came  before  the
      Adjudicator, Miss A.D. Baker, in March 2003, there was a  considerable
      amount  of   evidence   concerning   the   appellant's   psychological
      difficulties. The Adjudicator reviewed this evidence and reached a two-
      pronged conclusion. On the one hand she found it:
             "not established that the  appellant  suffers  from   anything
             more serious than mild to moderate depression."

3.    On the other hand she stated that:

             "I  specifically  reject  the  credibility  of  the  worsening
             presentation as  a  result  of  this  depression,  leading  to
             diagnosis of PTSD and the credibility of the  presentation  of
             being unable to answer questions and to communicate verbally."

4.    She justified these negative findings  by  reference  to  "conflicting
      evidence concerning the appellant's presentation".

5.    She found that "there is evidence  of  an  improvement  in  self-care"
      largely based on his ability to  effectively  communicate  in  January
      2003 with nurse Phil Harrison.

6.    The grounds of appeal raised several contentions.

7.    The first was that  unfairness had been caused  to  the  appellant  by
      the delay in promulgating the decision : the  hearing was on 11  March
      2003 whereas there was no promulgation until 16 June 2003. However, we
      do not consider this ground is made out . Whilst  the  delay  of  just
      over three months is regrettable, she signed it on 6 June 2003 and  we
      do not find in the  circumstances of this  case  that  it  caused  any
      failure on the part  of  the  Adjudicator  to  adequately  recall  the
      evidence.

8.    The second was that there was now to  hand  further  medical  evidence
      which it had not been possible to obtain in time for the hearing.  The
      view of Dr Caroline  Steere,  Clinical  Psychologist,  and  Dr  Alison
      O'Connor, Consultant Psychiatrist, was now that the  appellant  cannot
      function independently and cannot cope unless he has  social  support.
      There were also indications  of  learning  difficulties  which  was  a
      separate issue from mental illness. Reference was also made  reference
      to suicidal thoughts.

9.    The third contention was that on the documentary  evidence  "there  is
      an almost total lack of community services other than those associated
      with conflict trauma in Kosovo".

10.   We are prepared to  accept,  in  the  light  of  the  further  medical
      evidence that the Adjudicator's findings on the medical evidence  were
      questionable. To some degree she cannot be blamed for    doubting  the
      claims made about his medical condition because his  doctors  had  not
      found it easy to examine and diagnose him properly. But given the very
      specific  assessments  made  by  Drs  Steere  and   O'Connor,  we  are
      satisfied that the appellant's medical condition has to be  looked  at
      in the light of their latest medical opinions.

11.   Nevertheless we do not consider, even on  the  basis  of  the  current
      medical evidence, that the appellant has shown that  the  decision  of
      the  Secretary of State to remove him is disproportionate.  Ms Dubicka
      cited the case of Janusi, but as she recognised, the  Court of  Appeal
      has since given more specific guidance on cases involving  ill  health
      in N [2003] EWCA Civ, [2003] EWCA Civ and Djali [2003] EWCA Civ  1371.
      In the light of the principles set out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      these two cases, it is clear that the appellant could  only  show  the
      decision was disproportionate if it posed  a  serious  threat  to  his
      physical and moral integrity. We do not consider that it can  be  said
      to pose such a threat.

12.   In the first place, although his current condition  is  the  cause  of
      some concern, it is not in the  category  of  the  extremely  serious.
      Although his depression is  now  severe  rather  than  being  mild  to
      moderate, he is still able to self-medicate at home. There is  plainly
      a concern that he cannot function independently or cope on his own. If
      removal were to leave him isolated and without any support, then  this
      aspect of his condition could become more consequential. However,  for
      the reasons we go on to give, we do not think it is reasonably  likely
      that removal would have that effect.

13.   In the second place, although he has clearly been in need  of  support
      since he began to manifest symptoms of mental  illness,  it  does  not
      appear to be crucial  to  his  mental  state  that  the  treatment  he
      receives is specifically given by UK medical experts.  Neither doctors
      Steere and O'Connor nor other medical experts who have done reports on
      this appellant described their  professional  care  and  treatment  as
      being singularly essential to  management of his mental difficulties.

14.   These aspects of the appellant's situation are  particularly  relevant
      in this case because of the likely situation he would face  on  return
      to Kosovo.

15.   Miss Dubicka has sought to persuade us that on return to  Kosovo   the
      appellant would effectively be denied appropriate  medical  treatment.
      She described an almost total lack of  community  services.  She  also
      emphasised that the appellant had learning  difficulties  which  would
      require a distinct type of  social and educational support facilities.

16.   Ms Dubicka urged us to assess the  likely  facilities  this  appellant
      would have available to him by reference to  his  home  area,  Gadime.
      However, in our view there is no valid  basis  for  so  confining  the
      issue of available medical facilities. Her submissions  on  behalf  of
      this appellant were to the effect that he  had  not  lived  in  Kosovo
      since he was ten and now had no  family  to  return  to.  However,  if
      indeed he had  no  family  left  in  Kosovo,  then  it  was  perfectly
      reasonable to expect him upon return to go to whichever area of Kosovo
      would offer him the best available treatment facilities: according  to
      Research Fellow James  Korovilas  whose  report  was  adduced  by  the
      appellant, most medical facilities are concentrated in Pristina.

17.   Ms Dubicka may well be right that there remains a shortage of  medical
      professionals in Kosovo  as a whole.  She relies in particular  on  Mr
      Korovilas's  assessment  of  September  2002  that  "publicly   funded
      treatment for psychological disorders such as  PTSD  is  in  extremely
      short supply and  can  only  be  obtained  privately  at  considerable
      expense.   [In the psychiatric hospital in Pristina] [t]he main  types
      of treatment used for patients suffering from psychiatric disorders of
        PTSD    are   sedations  and  incarcerations".   However,  the  only
      relevant question concerning medical and community facilities in  this
      case is whether it is reasonably likely this appellant would  be  able
      to access such facilities.  We are  satisfied he would. Not  only  are
      there specific centres set up to cater for victims of trauma, but  the
      objective country materials do not demonstrate  that persons  who  are
      victims of war trauma are turned away.  Nor do they  demonstrate  that
      the assistance given to  victims  of  trauma  does  not  extend,  when
      needed, to include social support.

18.    There  has  been  some  suggestion  in  the  medical   evidence   and
      submissions made in this case that we should consider  that  the  mere
      fact of return to Kosovo would re-traumatise the  appellant.  In  this
      regard it is salient in our view  to  repeat  what  was  said  by  the
      Tribunal in P (Yugoslavia) [2003]  UKIAT  00017:

             '39. This brings us directly to  the  issue  of  the  risk  of
                 suicide.


             40. We would note  two  particular  features  of  the  medical
                 evidence relating to this issue.


             41. One is that  it  falls  short  of  stating  the  appellant
                 represents a real suicide risk regardless of his  location.
                 Indeed,  it  maintains  that   the   appellant's    current
                 environment in the UK is assisting him in  maintaining  the
                 level of psychological equilibrium he does have.


             42. Another is that in  alluding  to  problems  the  appellant
                 would face upon return, the report is  somewhat  equivocal.
                 It contains passages which appear to state  that  the  mere
                 fact of return to  the  appellant's  country  (the  Federal
                 Republic of Yugoslavia) would  psychologically  destabilise
                 the appellant. But its underlying logic would appear to  be
                 that return there is only seen to give rise to a real  risk
                 of suicide because: (i) within that country  there  is  the
                 place where the appellant  suffered the events which caused
                 him to become traumatised:  (ii) having to return to such a
                 place would compel him to re-experience that  trauma  in  a
                 way  he  could  not  cope  with   (in  Annette    Goulden's
                 experience that trauma in a way he could not cope with  (in
                 Annette  Goulden's  words  "[f]acing  the  traumatic   past
                 without the support of a stable  home  environment,  social
                 network and therapeutic  setting  may  be  intolerable  and
                 precipitate a severe avoidance reaction such as  suicide");
                 and (iii) he would  not  have  the  necessary  medical  and
                 social support in order to be sure he can cope.


             43. As regards (i) and (ii), we would not question that return
                 to Kosovo will cause  the  appellant  to  recall  traumatic
                 events in a different way than he does at present: he  will
                 be back in the  country  where  his  traumatic  experiences
                 occurred.  But we do not see that the mere fact  of  return
                 to the country of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or to  the
                 region  of  Kosovo  entails  that  the  appellant  will  be
                 compelled to revisit the scene of his trauma in the village
                 of Matcan,  north-east  of  Pristina.  For  one  thing  the
                 appellant, whatever he subjectively believes now, will  see
                 for himself upon arrival  in  Kosovo  that   the  Serbs  no
                 longer pose a threat to ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and that
                 there had been a  considerable improvement in the political
                  and security situation in  Kosovo.  None  of  the  medical
                 evidence suggests that he would be incapable of  perceiving
                 such realities. For another it will be  entirely  a  matter
                 for him whether he chooses to visit his old  house  in  the
                 village of Matcan:  indeed, it is implicit in what is  said
                 in the  medical reports that he will not  want  to  revisit
                 the scene of his trauma  for  some  considerable  time,  if
                 ever.


             44. Viewed in this light  it  is  clear  that   the  principal
                 medical reports wrongfully equated return to a country with
                 return to a scene of trauma. Thus, to the extent  that  the
                 medical reports postulated a re-exposure to  the  scene  of
                 the trauma, they go well beyond the limits of  a  realistic
                 appraisal. So long as the appellant seeks medical help when
                 he returns, and again the medical evidence does not suggest
                 he would not seek medical help, his return will not  be  to
                 the scene of his trauma but into the hands of  medical  and
                 related services  whose  focus  will  be  on  treating  his
                 trauma,  not  reactivating  it.  Those  administering   the
                 medical help will be persons very familiar with victims  of
                 trauma arising out of the Kosovan conflict.'

19.   For similar reasons we do not consider it established  that  the  mere
      fact of return to Kosovo for  this  appellant  will  re-traumatise  or
      further traumatise him.

20.   Our conclusion is that there is no  good  reason  to  think  that  the
      appellant  would  not  be  able  to  access  appropriate  medical  and
      community facilities  in  Kosovo.   This  conclusion  also  serves  to
      explain why we see little force  in  Miss  Dubicka's  submission  that
      there was a real danger in the  appellant's  case  that  he  would  be
      misdiagnosed and institutionalised. In our  view  that  submission  is
      unduly speculative.

21.   As regards the need the  appellant  appears  to  have  for  help  with
      learning disabilities, we have not been  able  to  find  any  specific
      reference in the objective country materials to  the  availability  of
      such help in Kosovo. But even if the appellant would get no or minimal
      help with such disabilities, that would not in our  view  imperil  his
      physical and moral integrity such as to make his removal  contrary  to
      Article 3 or Article 8.

22.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT

