

                AK (Russia-Chechnya deserter) Russia [2004] UKIAT 00294
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 18th May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                     ..29th October 2004....


                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr M Gill QC and Mr R Alomo, instructed by
                 Bart
                       Williams & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is a Russian citizen born  in  1977.   He  came  to  the
     United Kingdom in February 2000 and claimed asylum  immediately.    He
     had deserted from the Russian Army in  Grozny,  in  Chechnya,  shortly
     after being sent there.  He was serving in a combat surveillance  unit
     and deserted his post at night whilst his unit was  on  a  search  for
     rebels who were thought to be threatening  an  attack.   He  had  been
     called up for service after deferments and had received  three  months
     training.  He objected to serving in the war in Chechnya on a  variety
     of grounds:  he saw no reason to fight the Chechens  or  to  risk  his
     life unnecessarily in doing so;  he objected to the war as politically
     motivated and although he had no in  principle  objection  to  war  in
     circumstances such as those of the Second World War,  he  objected  to
     one in which he said that he  would  be  required  to  "kill  innocent
     civilians and destroy property in a  reprehensible  manner".   He  had
     other fears about the poor conditions of  service  and  the  treatment
     which he would receive as a deserter who was likely to  be  imprisoned
     for a disproportionately long term in bad conditions.

  2.  The  Adjudicator,  Mr  D  J  Boyd  QC,  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a
     determination dated 20th December 2001.  He accepted  the  Appellant's
     account as credible but pointed out that he had no objection to war in
     general and could only qualify for refugee status  if  he  could  show
     that the war in Chechnya  had  been  condemned  by  the  international
     community as contrary to the basic rules of human  conduct,  but  that
     there was no evidence to that effect.  He accepted that the  Appellant
     would be sentenced to a term of imprisonment were he to be  prosecuted
     for desertion which the Adjudicator did not regard as disproportionate
     nor did he think that the conditions of imprisonment would breach  the
     Appellant's human rights.

  3. On appeal to the Tribunal, Mr Freeman and Mr  Hamilton  dismissed  the
     appeal.  It disagreed with the earlier Tribunal decision in  Foughali,
     holding  that  it  was  necessary  for  a  conflict   to   have   been
     internationally condemned before punishment for refusal to participate
     in it could be a ground for  seeking  asylum.   The  Court  of  Appeal
     rejected that approach, [2004] EWCA Civ 69.  It preferred Foughali and
     the subsequent analysis by the Tribunal in B (Russia)  v  SSHD  [2003]
     UKIAT  00020,  paragraphs  42-48,  subject  to  modest  qualification.
     Potter LJ said in paragraph 37:

           "In my view, the crimes listed above, if committed on a systemic
           basis as an aspect of deliberate  policy,  or  as  a  result  of
           official indifference to the  widespread  actions  of  a  brutal
           military, qualify as acts contrary to the basic rules  of  human
           conduct  in  respect  of  which  punishment  for  a  refusal  to
           participate will constitute persecution within the ambit of  the
           1951 Convention."


  4. The crimes which he had listed from various international  Conventions
     related to those who were not taking any active part  in  hostilities,
     whether civilians or prisoners.  The Conventions applied  to  internal
     conflict.  They covered violence to the life, health and well-being of
     civilians or prisoners, taking them hostage,  collective  punishments,
     acts of terrorism and outrages upon their  personal  dignity  such  as
     humiliating and degrading treatment and rape.  The deliberate  killing
     and targeting of the civilian population was prohibited.

  5. The qualification  to  the  test  propounded  in  B  is  reflected  in
     paragraph 37 of Potter LJ's judgment.  The words "in which he  may  be
     required to participate" should be used instead of "with which he  may
     be associated" because that emphasised:

           "that the grounds should be limited to reasonable  fear  on  the
           part of the objector that he will be personally involved in such
           acts, as opposed to a more  generalised  assertion  of  fear  or
           opinion based on reported examples of individual excesses of the
           kind which almost  inevitably  occur  in  the  course  of  armed
           conflict, but which are not such as to amount  to  the  multiple
           commission of inhumane acts pursuant to or in furtherance  of  a
           state policy of authorisation or indifference."

  6. Although the question of whether a conflict had  been  internationally
     condemned would be evidence of the commission of crimes prohibited  by
     basic rules of human conduct, the existence of  such  condemnation  or
     its absence was not crucial to the answering of the relevant question.
      Potter LJ said in paragraph 51:

           "If a court or tribunal is satisfied  (a)  that  the  level  and
           nature of  the  conflict,  and  the  attitude  of  the  relevant
           governmental authority towards it, has reached a position  where
           combatants are or may be required on a  sufficiently  widespread
           basis to act in breach of  the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct
           generally recognised by the international  community,  (b)  that
           they will be punished  for  refusing  to  do  so  and  (c)  that
           disapproval of such methods and fear of such punishment  is  the
           genuine reason motivating the refusal of  an  asylum  seeker  to
           serve in the relevant conflict,  then  it  should  find  that  a
           Convention ground has been established."


  7. Rix LJ emphasised the need for the Claimant to show that he  would  be
     required to participate in  the  condemned  acts  because  in  certain
     instances a soldier might be able to  stand  back  from  participation
     without being punished.

  8. Accordingly, the appeal was remitted to the Tribunal for rehearing  on
     the correct legal basis.

  9. Mr Gill QC for the Appellant submitted  that  the  framework  for  our
     consideration of the appeal should be  as  follows.   First,  was  the
     Appellant or may he have been required to participate in actions which
     violated the basic rules of human conduct during service  in  Chechnya
     had he stayed?  Second, would he be punished for any refusal to do so?
      Third, was his refusal to serve motivated by his disapproval of  such
     actions and by his fear of punishment for that refusal?

 10. We accept that those are the relevant questions.  We accept Mr  Gill's
     point that the first question has to be answered by reference  to  the
     way in which the conflict was  being  carried  on  in  1999-2000,  the
     period when the Appellant was in Chechnya.   It  is  not  relevant  to
     examine how the conflict is now being carried on save  to  the  extent
     that that provides evidence as to how it was then  being  carried  on.
     It is against what the Appellant experienced  or  anticipated  at  the
     time when he refused to continue serving that the  fear  and  risk  of
     punishment must be judged.  For he would be punished for that refusal,
     not for refusing to serve in the  war  in  the  way  in  which  it  is
     currently being carried on.  There is no evidence  that  desertion  is
     dealt with in this sort of case by returning a soldier  to  the  front
     without more ado, even though service in Chechnya may be used in other
     circumstances as a military punishment.

 11. The Tribunal decision in B, although upheld in its legal  analysis  by
     the Court of Appeal in Krotov, does not constitute  an  analysis,  let
     alone one which that Court  adopted,  of  the  conditions  of  war  in
     Chechnya at the time relevant for this case;  B relates  to  a  period
     two years later and it was not necessary for Mr Gill to take prolonged
     issue with its conclusion that the evidence did not identify that  the
     scale of abuses then was  or  was  likely  to  become  widespread  and
     endemic.   There  was  also  a  compelling   lack   of   international
     condemnation.  We accept that the Tribunal  decision  in  B  does  not
     preclude a different conclusion in relation to this Appellant  in  the
     light of his combat role, unlike the communications function of B, and
     having regard to the time at which this Appellant made his decision to
     desert, which was early on in the second Chechen war, when  the  major
     part of the more conventional fighting was undertaken.

 12. We also accept Mr Gill's point  that  if  the  answers  to  the  three
     questions are  all  in  his  favour,  it  does  not  matter  that  the
     conditions of imprisonment may not themselves breach Article 3.  It is
     the fact of punishment which matters, apart from anything which  could
     fairly be described as insignificant.

 13. Mr Gill's submissions and the Secretary of State's response focused on
     the nature of the conflict and whether or not it was  being  conducted
     in breach of the basic rules of human conduct.  It was not at issue on
     the second question but that the  Appellant  would  be  likely  to  be
     punished for his desertion.  It was not really at issue on  the  third
     question but that, thin though the evidence of the Appellant as to his
     motivation on this aspect was, at least  a  significant  part  of  his
     motivation for desertion  was  his  disapproval  of  the  actions  and
     methods of  fighting  of  the  Russian  forces  and  by  his  fear  of
     punishment.  We say that the evidence was thin because  the  Appellant
     disapproved of the war itself regardless of how it was  conducted  and
     did not want to die in its cause;  his disapproval of  the  manner  of
     its conduct was expressed only  in  the  brief  terms  which  we  have
     summarised in paragraph 1 and was clearly only part of  his  thinking.
     His evidence relied on  what  various  organisations  said  about  the
     conduct of the war, without elaboration  of  his  rejection  of  those
     methods.  We make that point because no specific finding was  made  by
     the  Adjudicator  on  the  significance  of  those  matters  for   the
     Appellant's thinking.  It cannot be assumed,  because  a  war  may  be
     conducted in  breach  of  the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct,  that
     desertion without more evidence as to the particular attitude  of  the
     Claimant, shows that a Claimant is a refugee.  However, in  the  light
     of the stance taken by the Secretary of State before us which  focused
     on the conduct of the war, we accept that it should be inferred that a
     significant part of the motivation behind  the  Appellant's  desertion
     was disapproval of the way in which the war was conducted and his fear
     of punishment for refusal to participate in such actions.

 14. That brings us to the first question.  This contains two  parts:   did
     the actions of the Russian forces breach the rules of human conduct at
     the relevant time?  If so, was the Appellant required or may  he  have
     been required to participate in them?  We  emphasise  that  there  are
     those two aspects because the second was to  a  large  extent  glossed
     over by both parties before us, with the  focus  of  both  submissions
     being on the first part.

 15. The evidence of the conduct of the war in Chechnya in  late  1999  and
     early 2000 is the important period  for  this  case  in  view  of  the
     Appellant's service there;  but it is also the period which covers the
     large-scale operations of what has been called the second Chechen War.
      As the 2001 US State Department Report on Russia for 2000 put it:

           "Attempts by government forces to regain control  over  Chechnya
           were  accompanied  by  indiscriminate  use  of  air  power   and
           artillery, particularly in the fall of 1999 campaign  to  retake
           the capital, Grozny.  There were numerous reports of attacks  on
           civilian  targets,  including  the  bombing   of   schools   and
           residential areas.   In  early  2000,  a  large-scale  offensive
           military campaign by government  forces  continued  against  the
           separatists.  That offensive campaign  largely  ended  following
           federal occupation of most of Chechnya by late spring,  although
           federal forces remained engaged in an intensive  anti-insurgency
           campaign against separatist guerrillas."


 16. That report pointed out that independent observation of conditions and
     confirmation of reports of atrocities was very  difficult  because  of
     restrictions imposed by the Government;  but  nonetheless  there  were
     numerous credible  reports  of  human  rights  abuses  and  atrocities
     committed by federal forces.  Despite Government claims:

           "A wide range of  reports  indicated  that  government  military
           operations resulted in many civilian casualties and the  massive
           destruction of  property  and  infrastructure.   The  number  of
           civilian fatalities caused by federal military operations cannot
           be verified, and estimates of the total number of civilian  dead
           vary from the hundreds to the thousands.
           ...
           In addition to casualties attributable to indiscriminate use  of
           force by the federal armed forces,  many  atrocities  reportedly
           were  committed  by  individual  federal  servicemen  or  units.
           Command and control among  military  and  special  police  units
           often appeared  to  be  weak,  and  a  culture  of  lawlessness,
           corruption  and  impunity  flourished.   This  culture  fostered
           individual acts (by government forces) of violence  and  looting
           against civilians.  For example,  according  to  HRW  and  press
           reports,  on  February  5,  Russian  riot  police  and  contract
           soldiers (men hired  by  the  military  for  short-term  service
           contracts)  executed  at  least  60  civilians   in   Aldi   and
           Chernorechiye, suburbs of Grozny.  The  perpetrators  reportedly
           raped some of the victims and extorted money, later setting many
           of the houses on fire to destroy evidence.
           ...
           According to human  rights  NGOs,  federal  troops  on  numerous
           occasions  looted  valuables  and  foodstuffs  in  regions  they
           controlled.  Many internally displaced persons  (IDPs)  reported
           that they were forced to provide payments to, or were  otherwise
           subjected to harassment and pressure by, guards at  checkpoints.
           There were also widespread reports of the killing  or  abuse  of
           captured  fighters  by  federal  troops,  as  well  as  by   the
           separatists, and a policy of  'no  quarter  given'  appeared  to
           prevail in many units.  ...   Federal  forces  reportedly  beat,
           raped, tortured, and killed numerous  detainees.   ...   Federal
           forces reportedly ransomed Chechen detainees to their families.
           ...
           There  were  some  reports  that  federal  troops   purposefully
           targeted some infrastructure essential to the  survival  of  the
           civilian population, such as water facilities or hospitals."


 17. The Report also refers to the brutal treatment which new recruits  may
     receive although in this case, the Appellant gave no  direct  evidence
     of such experiences  himself.   This  treatment  is  relevant  to  the
     climate of informal control and punishment which may have operated  in
     fighting units in and around Grozny.

 18. The CIPU Reports  of  April  2000  and  2001  contain  much  the  same
     material.  Amnesty International's Report for 2000  claimed  that  the
     Russian forces were directly targeting civilians, attacking  hospitals
     and bombing indiscriminately.  Human Rights Watch, in its 2000 Report,
     made  much  the  same  allegations.   There  were  specific  incidents
     referred to.

 19. The UN Human Rights Commissioner visited Chechnya in Spring  2000  and
     expressed  concern  at  the  allegations  of  mass  killings,  summary
     executions,  rape,  torture  and  pillage.   The  scale   of   serious
     allegations of gross human rights violations  warranted  international
     concern, she said.  At this stage, the Government response was that it
     was carrying out  an  anti-terrorist  campaign  against  ruthless  and
     brutal enemies.  The Commission on Human Rights adopted  a  resolution
     in  April  2000  expressing  concern  at  the  reports  which  it  was
     receiving.

 20. The scale and gravity of  the  allegations  prompted  the  Council  of
     Europe to request Russian to provide explanations as to the conduct of
     the war  in  Chechnya.   In  what  was  seen  by  the  Council  as  an
     unsatisfactory reply, Russia said that the circumstances  in  Chechnya
     were exceptional and recognised that there were "problems" with regard
     to respect for human rights.  This may be  seen  as  an  admission  of
     sorts.  Much of the then and later criticism of Russia related to  its
     failure to investigate the allegations of abuses or to  assist  anyone
     else to do so.  The Parliamentary Assembly of the  Council  of  Europe
     passed a resolution in  January  2001  expressing  concern  about  the
     continuing violations and the lack  of  effective  investigation.   As
     other reports recognised, such international condemnation as there was
     related not to the war in principle but to the disproportionate  force
     used in its conduct.

 21. There are later reports which in part deal with what  was  alleged  to
     have happened in 2000 and 2001, but which also reflect what would have
     been happening at earlier  stages,  eg  with  the  discovery  of  mass
     graves.

 22.  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  for   2001   referred   to   continuing
     disappearances, torture and extra-judicial executions and to continued
     large  scale  and  targeted  sweep  operations   involving   arbitrary
     detentions, ill-treatment, looting and  disappearances  with  some  of
     those being found dead later.

 23. In 2001, as in 2000, the UN  Commission  on  Human  Rights  adopted  a
     resolution expressing grave concern  about  the  violations  of  human
     rights in Chechnya and condemning the use  of  disproportionate  force
     and human  rights  violations  by  Russia.   Russia  continued  to  be
     condemned for its failure to investigate the  allegations  or  to  co-
     operate with those who were seeking to do so.  The USA accused  Russia
     of failing to abide by international Conventions on the conduct of war
     through the use of indiscriminate  force  against  civilians.   Russia
     contended that by the start of 2001 operations were only  on  a  small
     scale.

 24. Mr McGirr for the Secretary of State  referred  us  to  the  US  State
     Department Report for 2003 and Mr Gill relied on it to argue that  the
     appraisal of the conflict in B was wrong.  It contains much  that  was
     said in the Report for 2000 and it is not apparent how much relates to
     the later position.  We are, however, concerned only with the position
     at what we have identified as the relevant time and  do  not  find  it
     necessary to express a view about the later or current position.   For
     that reason, we do not  need  to  refer  to  the  material  which  the
     Appellant submitted after the conclusion of the appeal in response  to
     the Secretary of State's submission of that later US State  Department
     Report.

 25. Our conclusions on this evidence are  as  follows.   The  period  with
     which we are concerned covered the large-scale operations in  Chechnya
     including those to capture Grozny and to  establish  Russian  military
     control over Chechnya as a whole.  It would have been  the  period  of
     intense conflict where artillery bombing of civilians and contact with
     civilians on a large scale would have occurred.  The reports  need  to
     be read bearing in mind that direct reporting was limited and still is
     and that there was no real effort then by the Russians to  investigate
     widespread and serious allegations of breaches of basic rules of human
     conduct.  So there is substance in the point that  the  reports  would
     inevitably be generalised and dependent on allegations which could not
     always be more precisely verified.   Although  certain  practices  are
     likely to have been committed by camp guards rather than the  ordinary
     frontline soldier, and the Appellant was not in such a unit nor in any
     other identified special unit nor  in  an  artillery,  mine-laying  or
     bomber unit, the evidence of breaches of those basic rules shows  that
     they were not confined to such units  but  were  more  widespread  and
     likely to have occurred at that time in frontline units, regardless of
     any particular function.  Some of the breaches would have occurred  as
     a  result  of  specific  tactics  deployed  regardless  of  impact  on
     civilians or even deliberately to cow  and  intimidate  them.   Others
     would have occurred as a result of the brutalising experience of  that
     whole war, as  deliberate  reprisals  by  individuals  or  groups,  or
     through hatred for or indifference to civilian or prisoner  well-being
     from soldiers lacking in training, self-control and discipline, all in
     a climate of impunity.   The  soldiers  themselves  would  often  have
     experienced a brutal training and it is not difficult to envisage that
     operations were conducted with a complete indifference to normal rules
     of behaviour, in a war such as this.

 26. We conclude that at least during this period of large  scale  conflict
     the evidence shows that breaches of those basic rules were widespread.
      They probably had elements of deliberate policy as  well  as  of  the
     random, but not isolated, acts of many soldiers behind them.  We think
     it necessary to adopt a realistic approach to the implications of  the
     limited  investigations  by  the  Russians,  the  imposed  absence  of
     independent observation and investigation and to give some  weight  to
     the various  resolutions  passed.   The  evidence  suggests  that  the
     Russians had something to be ashamed of and, knowing that,  sought  to
     preclude outside scrutiny.  (We point out, however, that most  of  the
     resolutions relate to the quality of investigation and do  not  assert
     that the allegations are made out, whatever  the  suspicions  may  be.
     Nor is the war itself condemned;   the  condemnation  relates  to  the
     absence of investigations and to the manner of the conduct of the war.
      This perhaps adds to the sense of  not  having  a  specific  test  of
     international condemnation for these purposes.)

 27. We turn to the second part of the first question.  It does not  follow
     from the fact that the actions of the Russian forces may have breached
     basic rules even on a widespread basis, as was Mr Gill's case, that  a
     soldier was or may have been required to participate  in  them  during
     his service.  The Appellant's evidence on the risk of  being  required
     to participate in such actions was slight.  He  gave  no  evidence  of
     having participated in any way in or  even  having  merely  seen  such
     actions or of having refused to participate in them and of having then
     suffered any consequences;  he gave no evidence that he had ever  come
     across or heard of anyone suffering such consequences  nor  of  having
     heard of such actions in his service in Chechnya,  short  though  that
     was.

 28. Mr Gill relied on the  range  of  documents,  which  the  Tribunal  is
     familiar with, as country evidence.  But none of those dealt with  the
     consequences of refusal to participate in the variety of such actions.
     It is plain from them that there  are  different  military  units  and
     different circumstances in which actions which breach the basic  rules
     of human conduct in war are undertaken.  These  can  cover  orders  to
     bomb or shell  civilian  areas,  to  kill  or  mistreat  civilians  or
     prisoners in combat areas and orders to  mistreat  prisoners,  whether
     taken legitimately or not, held in camps for one purpose  or  another.
     Artillery units and camp guards,  however,  may  face  very  different
     pressures and punishments for a refusal to obey orders, from those who
     engage in casual brutality in units where the conduct of  soldiers  is
     governed by the prevailing morality and outlook, overlooked higher  up
     and enforced through the informal powers which older  or  more  senior
     men may impose without the formal support of  higher  authority.   The
     position of a new conscript may be very  different  from  that  of  an
     older NCO or an  officer.   Yet,  on  all  of  this,  the  Appellant's
     evidence is silent as to any personal  experience  or  knowledge.   Mr
     Gill essentially relied on  the  asserted  widespread  nature  of  the
     inhuman conduct as demonstrating the reality  of  the  requirement  to
     participate.

 29. It is convenient here  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  concept  of
     "participation".  As Mr Gill said, it is not one with clearly  defined
     edges;  presence at an atrocity without actually committing any of the
     acts may or may not be "participation" in a particular case,  even  if
     the presence was repugnant to the Claimant  and  whether  or  not  any
     active steps to prevent the atrocity or to dissuade  the  perpetrators
     were taken.  Although Rix LJ pointed out that soldiers may be able  to
     decline to participate actively in atrocities without  punishment  and
     it may be that they would escape punishment for  war  crimes  on  that
     account, it is not  necessarily  so  clear  that  those  who  are  not
     punished for not actively participating in repugnant activities should
     be regarded as not persecuted, where their presence is unavoidable and
     they cannot achieve a transfer to a less malevolent unit.  We also  do
     not regard it as impossible for  there  to  be  policies  eg  for  the
     killing or torture of  civilian  resistance  workers,  which  are  not
     formally laid down and breaches of which do not lead to punishment but
     which can lead to  ostracism  by  fellow  soldiers  or  non-promotion;
     those  constitute  pressures  which  should  not  be  ignored  in  the
     assessment of the requirement to participate and the  consequences  of
     not doing so.  It should not  be  assumed  that  the  only  basis  for
     showing a  "requirement"  to  participate  is  a  formal  or  informal
     punishment system.  So Mr Gill is correct to affirm the lack  and  the
     necessary lack of clear definition about the  edges  of  the  relevant
     concepts;  there are too many and varied circumstances  for  precision
     to be desirable.

 30. This second part is more problematic in  the  absence  of  any  direct
     evidence from him on that matter drawing on his own  experiences,  and
     in the absence of evidence in the background material which  addresses
     that issue  specifically,  as  opposed  to  pointing  out  that  these
     breaches occurred on a  significant  scale.   As  we  have  said,  the
     concept of "participation" in this context has  no  clear  definition.
     We think that it can cover those who have no real choice but to  stand
     by and watch without interference, dissent or complaint to  superiors,
     whatever their personal contrary inclinations might  be,  as  well  as
     those  who  feel  obliged  to  assist  in  those  acts  to  avoid  the
     consequences which their comrades might inflict on them.  The  Russian
     forces in Chechnya do not appear on the evidence to have been strictly
     disciplined and controlled by an  effective  and  responsible  command
     structure.  There is also no evidence  which  suggests  that  in  this
     conflict, resistance to orders of debateable legality or to  atrocious
     conduct from officers  or  NCOs  or  indeed  the  ranks  generally  is
     accepted and carried no consequences in terms of formal punishment  or
     informal ill-treatment by other members of the unit.   Given  what  is
     known about the Russian forces in Chechnya, we would require  positive
     evidence  to  establish  that  such  resistance  carried  no   adverse
     consequences.  We do not think that a fairly raw conscript would be in
     any position to resist an order, especially given the evidence  as  to
     the sometimes brutal nature of the  treatment  which  such  conscripts
     receive.  He would be at the receiving end not just of  formal  orders
     given by officers, but those given by NCOs in the absence  of  officer
     control.  He would also be less able to resist the pressures  of  more
     senior privates to engage in the activities which they did.  He  would
     also be at risk of informal but potentially severe treatment from them
     for any such refusal.  The evidence of  widespread  breaches  warrants
     the inference that a  raw  recruit  could  very  well  in  reality  be
     required to participate, at least to the extent of being  required  to
     stand by and not prevent or inhibit others.

 31. In the light of those considerations and on the evidence which we have
     had as to the position at what we have taken as the relevant time,  we
     have concluded that the evidence shows  that  breaches  of  the  basis
     rules of human conduct are sufficiently widespread that it  should  be
     inferred that the Appellant was at a real risk of  being  required  to
     participate in such acts in the broad sense described, that  he  would
     have been formally or informally punished for any refusal to do so and
     that fear of the consequences was a significant part of his claim  for
     asylum.

 32. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.  It is reported for what it  says
     about Chechnya and Russian deserters from 1999-2000.















                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


