
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |FK (Shekhal Gandhershe)     |
|                           |        |Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00127                       |
|On:  15 April 2004         |        |                            |
|Prepared 15 April 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|4 June 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Mr M E A Innes                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss I Sibic of Counsel.
For the respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen  of   Somalia,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R J Manuell,  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the decision made on 20  August  2003  giving  removal
      directions following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 October 2001  using
      a passport to which he was not entitled.  He applied for asylum on 26
      October 2001.   On 9 January 2002 he was interviewed about his  claim
      to be from Somalia. He said that he was a member of the Shekhal  clan
      and the Gandhershe sub-clan.  He submitted a  statement  of  evidence
      form with a further written statement dated 21 January 2002.  He  was
      interviewed about his claim on 21 March 2002.   In  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter dated 6 August 2003 the Secretary of  State  indicated
      that it was his view that the appellant would  not  be  subjected  to
      persecution from the USC militia as the Shekhal were not  a  minority
      clan but were associated with  the  Hawiye.    He  also  doubted  the
      credibility of the account given by the appellant of  the  events  in
      Somalia which had led him to leave.  It was the Secretary of  State's
      view that the appellant did not qualify for  asylum  or  humanitarian
      protection.

3.    The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 11 November
      2003.  The Adjudicator summarised the appellant's  written  claim  as
      follows. He was from the Gandhershe clan, a sub-clan of  the  Shekhal
      tribe which was an ethnic minority.  He had been attacked by  members
      of majority clans on three occasions.  In 1994 members of the  Hawiye
      put a gun to his head and demanded money.  The second incident was in
      1999 and the third time he  was  attacked  was  in  2001.    On  that
      occasion he had been detained in a hole  in  the  ground  of  an  old
      house.  He had managed to escape during  a  gun  battle  between  two
      factions.  Some days later his wife was raped.  He could not continue
      living in that manner and decided to flee to Kenya from Somalia.   He
      could not remain in Kenya because  he  did  not  have  the  necessary
      documents granting him permission to live there.  His wife and family
      had fled to Ethiopia.

4.    In his oral evidence before the Adjudicator the appellant  was  asked
      to clarify the circumstances surrounding the rape of  his  wife.   He
      said that he and his wife were abducted on  the  same  day.   He  was
      picked up from his shop and his wife was picked up from their  house.
      He had been asked for money.  He had forgotten  lots  of  things  and
      sometimes could not say what had happened to him  the  previous  day.
      He could not recall each and every incident.   He had made a  mistake
      in his second witness statement.  His wife had been  raped  in  2001.
      He was asked whether he believed that he had been targeted because he
      was rich or whether he thought there  was  some  other  reason.   The
      appellant replied that rich people within  the  minority  clans  were
      targeted because people thought they were unprotected.   He  had  not
      sought protection from the  majority  clans  because  they  were  the
      attackers.  Although his clan bore  the  same  name  as  the  Shekhal
      majority clan they were not of the same ethnicity.

5.    The Adjudicator commented that the broad  outline  at  least  of  the
      appellant's  testimony  was  plausible.   The  appellant  had  placed
      greater emphasis on  the  clan  involvement  in  his  second  witness
      statement.  In the Adjudicator's view his knowledge of his  own  clan
      was limited.  He suggested he had been  targeted  because  he  was  a
      wealthy member of a minority clan but it seemed  to  the  Adjudicator
      that in any lawless environment the "haves" will  always  be  at  the
      mercy of the "have nots" or simply the greedy.   In  respect  of  the
      incident in 2001 it seemed that two factions were  at  war  with  one
      another which was how the appellant had been  able  to  escape.   The
      incident  appeared  to  be  no  more  than  random  or  opportunistic
      violence.

6.    The Adjudicator found that  the  appellant  had  suffered  the  three
      incidents which he claimed but they were  not  persecutory  incidents
      based upon his membership of a minority clan.   They  were  instances
      of lawlessness or of the tide  of  a  civil  war.   He  regarded  the
      appellant's account of his clan membership as vague and substantially
      embellished.   The appellant was the victim of a civil war who  first
      fled to Kenya where he gave no instance of  any  problem  other  than
      lack of documentation who then came to  the  United  Kingdom  seeking
      better living conditions.  The October 2003 CIPU Assessment indicated
      no deterioration in the general situation in Somalia with  basic  law
      and order the norm in most locations but with sudden changes possible
      as was inevitable when no final peace settlement had been agreed  and
      when large  numbers  of  weapons  remained  in  private  hands.   The
      Adjudicator was not satisfied that the appellant had proved  that  he
      had a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason.   He
      was fortified in those  conclusions  by  the  appellant's  resort  to
      illegal entry to the United Kingdom and his delay in claiming  asylum
      following his arrival.

7.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator was  wrong
      to find that the appellant had  been  the  victim  of  indiscriminate
      attacks.  He had not made a finding that the appellant did  not  come
      from the Shekhal tribe when the Secretary of State had been satisfied
      that he did.   The central issue was whether members of  the  Shekhal
      tribe were a minority group who risked  persecution.   Alternatively,
      it was argued that in the absence of a finding that the appellant did
      not come from the Shekhal tribe  and  that  he  was  a  member  of  a
      majority tribe, the Adjudicator's reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      attacks were indiscriminate were unfounded.    As  the  Secretary  of
      State had not challenged the appellant's tribal membership it was not
      permissible for the Adjudicator to find against the appellant on that
      issue.

8.    Ms Sibic adopted these grounds in her submissions.  The  first  issue
      was whether the Adjudicator was entitled to find that  the  appellant
      did not belong to the Shekhal clan.  She referred the Tribunal to the
      determination in Mohammed [2002] UKIAT 08403. There was  no  evidence
      to contradict the findings in that determination which accepted  that
      the Shekhal Gandhershe was a minority group  at  risk  on  return  to
      Somalia and could properly be regarded as among the Benadiri  groups.
       There would be a continuing risk of  persecution.   The  Adjudicator
      had found that the events described by the appellant had taken place.
       The Operational Guidance Note for Somalia  February  2004  confirmed
      that there was a continuing risk  to  minority  groups  who  remained
      vulnerable.

9.    Mr Blundell submitted that the Secretary of State's view was set  out
      in the reasons for refusal letter.  It was his  contention  that  the
      Shekhal were not a minority  group.   He  conceded  that  he  had  no
      further expert evidence to put before the Tribunal to contradict  the
      findings in Mohammed.  He submitted that nowhere  in  the  background
      evidence  are  the  Shekhal  or  Shekhal  Gandhershe  classified   as
      Benadiri.   The  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  conclude  that   the
      appellant had not been targeted because of his  ethnicity  but  as  a
      result of the general lawlessness in Somalia.

10.   In his determination  the  Adjudicator  said  that  he  regarded  the
      appellant's account of his clan membership as vague and substantially
      embellished.  Ms Sibic argued that  in the light of his findings that
      the broad outline of the appellant's evidence was plausible and  that
      the three incidents described had taken place, there  was  no  proper
      basis for rejecting the appellant's evidence that he was a member  of
      the Shekhal Gandhershe  sub-clan.   Mr  Blundell  conceded  that  the
      Secretary of State had never  sought  to  put  the  appellant's  clan
      membership in issue.   It  had  been  accepted  in  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter.  The Tribunal  note  that  in  the  Somali  screening
      interview the appellant gave  a  number  of  accurate  answers  about
      Somalia.  At the hearing before the Adjudicator  the  respondent  was
      not represented.   In his oral evidence he commented  that  his  clan
      bore the same name as the Shekhal majority clan but they were not  of
      the same ethnicity.   This evidence is consistent with  the  findings
      of the Tribunal in Mohammed which we will refer to below.

11.   In the light of these factors and in particular the  concession  made
      by Mr Blundell that the appellant's  clan  membership  had  not  been
      challenged by the  Secretary  of  State,  the  Tribunal  accept  Miss
      Sibic's submission that there was no proper basis for the Adjudicator
      to reject the appellant's evidence of his clan membership.

12.   The Tribunal will proceed on the basis that the appellant is a member
      of the Shekhal Gandhershe clan.    There  is  very  little  objective
      evidence before the Tribunal about the status of this sub-clan.    We
      have been referred to an extract from the Minority Report of December
      2000  at  A374-376.    According  to  this  information,  one  source
      considers the Shekhal to be a minority group although  other  sources
      consider them as associated to the Hawiye, as a sub-clan or even as a
      separate clan family.   According to one source, the  Shekhal  should
      not be considered as a minority group  but  as  a  Hawiye  clan  that
      seceded from them five to ten  years  ago.   There  is  reference  to
      information from Professor Lewis considering the Shekhal Lobogi as  a
      sub-clan of the Hawiye.   According to a UN  source  in  Nairobi  the
      Mogadishu-based Shekhal Gandhershe is one of the minority  clans  and
      is an unarmed community which has been  receiving  threats  in  their
      traditional areas since 1990.

13.   These issues were considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  Mohammed.   That
      Tribunal had before  it  the  Minorities  Report  and  evidence  from
      Dr Luling.  Paragraph 19 of that determination reads as follows:

           "The Shekhal are not one  but  several  groups  not  necessarily
           related and with different cultures and dialects.  The  word  is
           simply the plural of Sheikh and signifies the lineage  who  have
           an inherited religious status.  They all trace descent from  the
           same ancestor Sheikh Faqi Cumar who travelled around Somalia and
           married wives in each location.

      The Shekhal of Jasira and Gandhershe  are  ethnically  distinct  from
           other groups such as the Shekhal Loboge.  Jasira and  Gandhershe
           are both places  on  the  coast  between  Mogadishu  and  Merce.
           Shekhal in that  area  belong  to  the  light  skinned  Benadiri
           population of Arab descent who are found along the  coast,  like
           the Bravenese and the Reer Hamar of Mogadishu."

14.   Having reviewed all the evidence before it,  the  Tribunal  concluded
      that the Shekhal Gandhershe and  the  Shekhal  Jasira  were  minority
      groups which were not protected by the Hawiye.   The  respondent  had
      failed  to  make  an  important  distinction  between   the   Shekhal
      Gandhershe and the Shekhal Jasira on the one  hand  and  the  Shekhal
      Loboge on the other.  The latter group were protected by the  Hawiye.
       The Shekhal were not one discrete sub-clan  but  were  distinct  and
      separate groups and as such ethnically distinct from the majority  of
      the  Somalis.   The  Tribunal  found  that  members  of  the  Shekhal
      Gandhershe were a minority group then at risk if returned to Somalia.
       It went on to find that a member  of  the  Shekhal  Gandhershe  clan
      would be considered to be a Benadiri and as  such  among  the  groups
      recognised by the Home Office as qualifying for refugee  status.   On
      that basis the appeal was allowed.

15.   The Tribunal heard the appeal of Mohammed  on  18  October  2002  and
      notified its determination on 29 November  2002.    No  evidence  has
      been put before us to show either that the  Tribunal's  finding  that
      Shekhal Gandhershe was a minority tribe was wrong  or  to  show  that
      there has been any particular change in circumstances which would now
      make it safe for members of the Shekhal Gandhershe clan to return  to
      Somalia.

16.   The Tribunal is aware that the Secretary of State now takes the  view
      that membership of a minority clan does not without more  entitle  an
      applicant to refugee status.  In the  Operational  Guidance  Note  of
      February 2004 in paragraph 3.7.5 it is  said  that  most  members  of
      minority  groups  other  than  the  Bajuni,  Bravanese/Benadiri   are
      unlikely to qualify for asylum or humanitarian protection unless they
      demonstrate individual circumstances to the contrary.   There  is  no
      specific risk to members of minority groups  who  originate  from  or
      have been permitted to settle in Somaliland  or  Puntland.   However,
      members of minority groups in southern Somalia are  inevitably  at  a
      greater degree of risk and the circumstances of each individual  case
      needs to be taken into account.

17.   The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had been  the  victim  of
      violence on three occasions.  It was the appellant's claim that  this
      was because of his membership of  a  minority  group.   The  Tribunal
      accepts that the appellant is a member of the Shekhal Gandhershe  who
      can be regarded as being among  the  Benadiri  group.   He  therefore
      falls into the category of someone who is unable to secure protection
      from human rights abuses from the armed militia of  other  clans  and
      remains vulnerable: para 3.7.3.   In the light of these factors,  the
      Tribunal is satisfied that the Adjudicator was wrong to conclude that
      the appellant would not be at risk of persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason on return to Somalia.  He has been a victim of lawlessness but
      there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that this was  because  he
      is an unprotected member of a minority group.  There remains  a  real
      risk of similar treatment on return.

18.   In these circumstances this appeal is  allowed  on  both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President


