
H-VSW-V1
|Heard at Field House       |        |MT (No general restriction  |
|                           |        |on departure) Vietnam [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00105                 |
|On 8 April 2004            |                                     |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein - Vice President                                 |
|Mr G H Getlevog                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representations:
For the Appellant:           Mr P Last - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Vietnam, has been granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Tribunal against the Determination of an Adjudicator  (Ms
    E B Herlihy) who dismissed  his  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of  whether  there  was
    country information that could lead to the  conclusion  that  political
    motives would be attributed to those who had fled or attempted to  flee
    Vietnam.

3.    We have decided to dismiss this appeal.

4.    The Appellant's account was that in 1978 he joined the Army  and  was
    sent to Kampuchea during the war.

5.    Whilst fighting he claims  to  have  become  distressed  at  what  he
    witnessed and as a result deserted and went into hiding in Hanoi for  a
    period of approximately two years.

6.    It is the Appellant's claim that in September 1980  he  attempted  to
    leave Vietnam but was caught  and  imprisoned  for  absconding  without
    trial for three years.  However he claims that in September 1983 he was
    released to a labour camp that was monitored by  the  police.   He  was
    unable to obtain a work permit and was supported by family members  who
    were only allowed to see him occasionally.

7.    The Appellant claims that in July 1984 he again attempted to  escape,
    was arrested, that he was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  It was
    the Appellant's claim that he was imprisoned on the second occasion for
    attempting to leave Vietnam.

   8. It was the Appellant's account that he was eventually  released  from
      prison in 1990 but was subject to a condition that he reported  daily
      to the police station and he was not allowed to move to another area.
       He claimed that following his release he was treated like a criminal
      by the police and was not allowed a work permit and could not  obtain
      any benefits.  The police frequently questioned him  because  he  had
      absconded from the Army.  However the Appellant further claimed  that
      he was harassed by the local Communist Party who did not allow him to
      work and restricted his movements and opportunity to find work.


   9.  The Appellant's parents now live in Canada.  Significantly his  wife
      and children remain in Vietnam.


  10.  The Appellant claimed that if  he  returned  to  Vietnam,  he  would
      receive a life sentence because the Communists governing the  country
      considered he had betrayed them in attempting to leave  the  country.
      He maintained that the fact that he was kept under  surveillance  had
      forced him to leave Vietnam as he felt he could not  live  easily  in
      the country.

  11.   It was the Appellant's account that  he  escaped  from  Vietnam  in
      November 1998 and flew to Russia where he was placed in the back of a
      lorry and brought to the United Kingdom arriving here  on  8  January
      1999.  Significantly the  Appellant  did  not  apply  for  asylum  on
      arrival.  Indeed he did not apply  for  asylum  until  eleven  months
      later on 1 December 1999.

12.   Mr Last relied on the Grounds of Appeal.  They in turn made reference
    to an extract from "Case  Law  on  the  Refugee  Convention"  and  more
    particularly to paragraph 4.29 that where illegal exit from  a  country
    was punished harshly, that reflected the  reality  that  the  exit  was
    perceived by the State to be a political act.  Mr Last maintained  that
    he had drawn such extract to the  Adjudicator's  attention  within  his
    closing submissions.

13.   Mr Last referred to the US State  Department  Report  of  2002  which
    explained that during 2001,  there  were  credible  reports  that  non-
    uniformed security forces had crossed the border to try and capture and
    return those who had fled.

14.   We were referred us to a New Zealand decision of the  Refugee  Status
    Appeals Authority in Re ZWD.  This decision, he explained,  set  out  a
    two-point test. For the sake of  completeness  we  set  out  below  the
    extract from the decision to which Mr Last referred:

         "First, the country of origin must  punish  unauthorised  exit  or
         stay abroad in a harsh or oppressive manner.   The  Appellant  may
         very well expect to  suffer  a  penalty  for  breach  of,  say,  a
         passport law but if that law is fairly administered and  he  faces
         the prospect of but reasonable penalties, the harm feared  is  not
         of sufficient gravity to warrant protection as a  refugee".   (The
         typed emphasis is ours.)


15.   Mr Last submitted that insofar as this Appellant was  concerned,  the
    penalty that he had received for attempting to leave the country namely
    six years' imprisonment was not "a reasonable penalty".

16.   Mr Last referred us to the US State Department Report released on  31
    March 2003 which indeed was the extract quoted in ground 4 to which  we
    have above referred.

17.   We drew to Mr Last's attention however, that  the  extract  from  the
    State Department Report upon which he relied, had to be read in context
    including the preceding paragraph.  It was clear to us that the  Report
    was specifically referring to the situation in Vietnam as it related to
    the Montagnards a Christian group  from  the  Central  Highlands.   The
    Report referred to the fact that in early 2001 over  1,000  Montagnards
    had fled to Cambodia following a crackdown  by  security  forces.   The
    crackdown had followed demonstrations complaining of  appropriation  of
    traditional  lands,  influx  of  ethnic  Vietnamese  into  the  central
    Highlands and religious discrimination.  A tripartite agreement on  the
    Montagnards' repatriation among the Governments of Vietnam and Cambodia
    and the UNHCR was abandoned  by  the  UNHCR  after  Vietnam  restricted
    access and attempted to intimidate  and  pressure  Montagnards  in  the
    UNHCR camps to return.

18.   It was in that context that the Report continued with the passage  to
    which Mr Last had referred us as follows: -

         "During the year, there were credible reports  that  non-uniformed
         security forces crossed the border to try to  capture  and  return
         those who had fled."  (The typed emphasis is ours.)


19.   It was noteworthy that Mr Last acknowledged  that  the  reference  to
    "those who had fled" related  specifically  to  the  Montagnardes.   He
    accepted that this Appellant was not a Montagnarde.


20.   Mr Last produced further objective material which was not before  the
    Adjudicator, namely a Human Rights Watch Press Release of December 2003
    and to the following passage:

         "Montagnarde Christians from  the  Central  Highlands  comprise  a
         significant portion of people  imprisoned  in  Vietnam  for  their
         religious or political views.  Human Rights Watch has  records  of
         124 Montagnardes who are currently serving prison terms of  up  to
         thirteen years  for  non-violent  political  activism,  organising
         Christian  gatherings,  or  for  attempting  to  seek  asylum   in
         Cambodia.  All of the arrests  have  taken  place  since  February
         2001,  when  thousands  of  Montagnardes  peacefully  marched   on
         provincial capitals in the Highlands,  launching  a  movement  for
         return of ancestral lands and religious freedom."


21.   Mr Last significantly  accepted  that  the  above  passage,  referred
    specifically to a situation as it related to the  Montagnardes  in  the
    Central Highlands. He submitted that it was  evidence  that  Vietnamese
    citizens were being sentenced to lengthy prison  terms,  in  this  case
    "thirteen years" for attempting to leave the country and seek asylum.

22.   It was however apparent to us that the passage  upon  which  Mr  Last
    further relied, specifically related to the Montagnardes and  that  the
    13 year prison sentence imposed  encompassed  other  matters  including
    charges of non-violent  political  activism  and  organising  Christian
    gatherings.  There  was  no  evidence  that  leaving  the  country  and
    attempting to seek asylum elsewhere was  the  central  reason  for  the
    length of sentence imposed.

23.   We agree with Ms Holmes that the evidence upon which Mr  Last  relied
    specifically related to the Montagnardes and it was not helpful to make
    comparisons with  their  situation  and  that  of,  for  example,  this
    particular Appellant.

24.   We were persuaded by Ms Holmes' submission that there was "absolutely
    no evidence that that would be the case".

25.   With respect to Mr Last, his submissions as regards the Adjudicator's
    findings, demonstrate a misunderstanding of important elements of  both
    the Appellant's account and the Adjudicator's conclusions.  Contrary to
    Mr Last's  initial  belief,  the  Adjudicator  did  not  find  that  in
    September 1980 the Appellant had  been  imprisoned  without  trial  for
    attempting to leave Vietnam.   Indeed  this  was  not  the  Appellant's
    account.  He was clear that he was imprisoned for absconding  from  the
    Army and further at paragraph 37 of her Determination  the  Adjudicator
    similarly accepted that the Appellant  was  initially  imprisoned  "for
    absconding from the Army in 1980" for three years.

26.   Mr Last further relied upon the  evidence  which  he  understood  the
    Adjudicator to have accepted, that following the Appellant's release in
    1983, he had been sent to a camp and his  movements  monitored  by  the
    authorities.  In fact it was the Appellant's account as recorded by the
    Adjudicator at paragraph 20 of her Determination that it  was  not  the
    Appellant specifically who was monitored, but that the labour  camp  to
    which he was released was monitored by the police.

27.   It is apparent from paragraph 38 of the Adjudicator's  Determination,
    that she believed the Appellant's  account  of  his  attempt  to  leave
    Vietnam in 1984 and she further believed that the Appellant had spent a
    further period of time in prison after 1984 (the Determination  by  way
    of a typographical error refers to 1994) but the  Adjudicator  did  not
    believe this was for attempting to leave Vietnam.

28.   Mr Last submitted that the Adjudicator had failed to give reasons for
    such a conclusion.  We do not agree.  Mr Last initially maintained that
    the Adjudicator only gave one reason for disbelieving  this  aspect  of
    the Appellant's account, namely  that  she  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant would have been imprisoned for a  period  of  six  years  for
    attempting to leave the country because such sentence would  have  been
    unusually harsh.

29.   With respect to Mr Last, such a conclusion formed only a part of  the
    Adjudicator's reasoning.  As the Adjudicator made clear, there was  "no
    objective evidence that it is a criminal offence to  attempt  to  leave
    Vietnam".

30.   We find that the Adjudicator's findings were well reasoned and wholly
    sustainable in concluding that the Appellant  was  not  imprisoned  for
    attempting to leave the country. The Adjudicator rightly, did not  seek
    to speculate  as  to  the  true  reason  for  the  Appellant's  further
    detention.

31.   In taking issue with  the  Adjudicator's  failure  to  refer  to  the
    extract from "case law on the Refugee Convention" Mr Last has failed to
    appreciate that it was for the Adjudicator to  decide  what  weight  to
    attach to the evidence both factual and objective.

  32. Indeed the Adjudicator made reference to the CIPU Country  Report  of
      April 2003 and noted that at paragraph 6.A.54 it was reported that it
      was possible for Vietnamese citizens  to  secure  a  passport  within
      Vietnam and that a report of the Canadian  IRB  could  not  find  any
      reports of passports being withheld to people who had fallen  out  of
      favour with the Government.  Further at paragraphs 6.A.59  to  6.A.62
      it was found that returnees had not suffered ill treatment.


  33.   The UNHCR had repeatedly stated that returned  asylum  seekers  had
      not been prosecuted for exiting Vietnam and although there  had  been
      prosecutions, those were based on existing criminal charges that were
      outstanding in Vietnam before the refugees left the country.

34.   The Adjudicator was entitled to conclude in such  circumstances  that
    the Appellant's profile was not such that he would be  of  interest  to
    the authorities should he be returned to Vietnam.  As she rightly noted
    this Appellant had not been involved in any unauthorised  political  or
    religious  activities.   The  Adjudicator  properly  concluded  in  the
    circumstances that the Appellant had failed to bring himself  within  a
    Refugee Convention reason.

35.   Further, and in support of  her  adverse  credibility  findings,  the
    Adjudicator was entitled to take account of the Appellant's failure  to
    seek asylum immediately upon arrival in the  United  Kingdom  and  that
    such application was not made until eleven months later.

36.   The Adjudicator properly  noted  that  the  Appellant's  parents  and
    siblings appeared to have been able to  leave  Vietnam  and  settle  in
    Canada which suggested that  the  Appellant  was  an  economic  migrant
    rather than a genuine refugee.


37.   Mr Last referred us to a document produced by the  Respondent,  which
    is in effect a source document"6n", referred to in the CIPU Report.  He
    noted that the subject matter related to Vietnamese Exit  and  Re-entry
    laws and whether one could get a passport notwithstanding that  such  a
    person had "fallen out of favour" with the Government.

38.   Mr Last pointed out that as regards Vietnam's Passport  Policy  there
    were  two  categories  of  citizens  "Ord  inary"   and   "Politically-
    Problematic People (dissidents or dissent persons)".

39.   As regards the latter category, Mr Last referred us  to  the  extract
    which appeared at 2(b) as follows: -

         "It is completely difficult for a dissident or dissent  Vietnamese
         who are now living abroad to apply  for  a  visa  to  go  back  to
         Vietnam.  I know of some cases in which some Vietnamese  political
         activists are allowed to go back to Vietnam.  When inside Vietnam,
         they are closely watched everywhere  they  go  and  harassed  many
         times by the police."


40.   Mr Last was being somewhat selective with regard to this extract.  It
    has to be read in its proper context with the preceding paragraph  2(a)
    that states as follows:

         "The present Communist Government in Vietnam  is  eager  to  allow
         dissidents  to  go  overseas  and  resettle  there.   It  is  less
         politically problematic for them if the  dissidents  live  abroad.
         Therefore it depends more on the  Canadian  Government  to  accept
         these people live in Canada than on the Vietnamese  Government  to
         allow them to leave Vietnam.  However these people have  the  same
         problems with graft and corruption as  ordinary  citizens  in  the
         passport issuing process. "


41.   It was Mr Last's submission that here was evidence  that  there  were
    some people subject to punishment and that given the lower standard  of
    proof it was "not a quantum leap that  someone  who  is  defined,  even
    according to CIPU sources, as a problem person, might be subject to the
    same."

42.   We drew to Mr Last's attention that  the  category  of  "Politically-
    Problematic People" related to "dissidents or dissent persons"  and  to
    an earlier passage in the  source  document  at  1(a)  that  states  as
    follows:

         "In recent years, the Communist Government of Vietnam has  allowed
         Vietnamese  citizens  to  go  overseas  for  travel  or   personal
         purposes.  It is  quite  easy  to  get  a  passport  for  ordinary
         citizens, or  as  popularly-termed  Vietnamese,  for  'no-problem'
         citizens (e.g. being not on the political security  list)."   (The
         typed emphasis is ours.)


43.   It was noteworthy that Mr Last accepted that the Appellant was not  a
    person on a "political security list" but he continued to maintain that
    the Appellant was "monitored following release".

44.   We drew to Mr Last's attention that his understanding of the evidence
    in this regard was with all  due  respect  to  him,  misconceived.   We
    reminded him that the Appellant was released from his  first  detention
    in 1984 namely twenty years ago.  The significant passage of  time  was
    not a factor that could be ignored.  Further,  we  were  not  persuaded
    (whether it was the Appellant or the camp to which  he  had  been  sent
    following his release in September 1983 that was monitored) that by any
    stretch of the imagination could it  now  be  said,  almost  twenty-one
    years later, that the  Vietnamese  authorities  would  now  regard  the
    Appellant as a "problem person".

45.   We agree with Ms Holmes submission, that the Appellant  could  hardly
    be described as  a  political  activist  and  that  "on  the  scale  of
    dissidents could but only be described as 'very small beer'".   It  was
    many years ago that the Appellant was  a  source  of  distress  to  the
    Vietnamese authorities.

46.   Mr Last in response placed further reliance on the Human Rights Watch
    Report and continued to maintain that dissidents were  put  in  prison.
    In this regard he referred us to a  further  passage  from  the  Report
    namely its subheading which is in the form of  a  quotation  from  Brad
    Adams the Executive Director of the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch
    as follows: -

         "Vietnam's already dismal human rights  record  has  sunk  to  new
         depths this year.  The Vietnamese Government has  spent  the  year
         arresting  and  imprisoning   dozens   of   Buddhists,   political
         dissidents, cyber-dissidents and ethnic minority Christians."


47.   Significantly, when we asked Mr Last if he  could  confirm  that  the
    Appellant fell into any of the above referred categories, he was unable
    to do so save to point out he would fit into such category "if  he  was
    someone who wanted to leave the country and was not allowed to".

48.   We asked Mr Last if he could draw our attention to any evidence  that
    people  generally  who  wanted  to  leave  the  country  were   refused
    permission.  Mr Last's response that "the only evidence in that  regard
    is about the Montagnardes ", was noteworthy.

49.   For the above reasons we find that the objective  material  to  which
    our  attention  has  been  drawn  demonstrates  that  the  grounds  are
    misconceived.

50.   We remind ourselves  that  the  Adjudicator  for  wholly  sustainable
    reasons properly concluded that the core elements  of  the  Appellant's
    account were simply not credible.  As she rightly noted at paragraph 49
    of her Determination, the Appellant's profile  was  not  such  that  he
    would be of interest to the authorities upon his return to Vietnam.  He
    had not been  involved  in  any  unauthorised  political  or  religious
    activities.  He would be of no interest to the  Vietnamese  authorities
    upon return.

51.   There is no proper basis upon which the Tribunal  should  reverse  or
    set aside those findings.  In the  view  of  the  Tribunal,  they  were
    findings and conclusions  properly  open  to  the  Adjudicator  on  the
    evidence.

52.   It follows that the appeal is dismissed.




                                                               N H GOLDSTEIN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


