


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                       AW (Purpose_Family Visit) Ghana
                             [2004] UKIAT 00005

                                             Date heard:  14  October   2003
                                              Date notified: 22 January 2004

                                   Before:-

                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MR L WAUMSLEY

                                                       Between



                                              Appellant



                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This case is reported in  order  to  clarify  how  family  visit  appeals
should be approached where the only purpose shown for the visit  is  family-
related.


2. The appellant, a national of  Ghana,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator,  Mr  Michael  J  H  Wilson,
dismissing  the   appeal  against  the  decision  of   the  Entry  Clearance
Officer, Accra refused entry clearance as a family visitor.   There  was  no
appearance from the sponsor or  anyone  representing  the  appellant.  Mr  C
Buckley  appeared for the respondent.

3. In the absence of any explanation from the sponsor as to  why  there  was
no representation at the hearing, we decided to exercise our  discretion  to
proceed with the hearing under Rule 44 (1) of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.

4. The Entry Clearance Officer had refused to grant  entry  clearance  as  a
family visitor for 6 weeks for the following reasons:

      "I acknowledge the importance of family visits in  maintaining  family
      ties, therefore I have given your application  careful  consideration.
      You wish to visit a relative in the UK. However:


      You are a young single man who has yet to establish himself  in  terms
      of property, assets, career, or family commitments.

      You are unable to credibly account for how you will spend your time in
      the UK. Given the expense involved this lack of research in advance of
      your trip casts doubts on your bona fides a visitor.


      I am not therefore satisfied that you are genuinely seeking entry  for
      the purpose and for the period as stated by you".

5. This refusal notice came after two short  interviews,  the  first  simply
confirming   answers  in  the  IM2A  form.  The  second  and  only  recorded
interview consisted in the following:

           "1. Why go? See uncle
           2. How long there? 22 years
           3. How related? Mother`s brother
           4. She visit? No
           5. Why note? D/know
           6. What do? Visit historical places
           7. Where? Beckingham Palace [(sic)]
           8. Where else? Madame Tissaw`s (sic)."


6. In the grounds of appeal the  appellant  said  that  he  had  given  some
account of how he would spend his time but in any event he had  trusted  his
uncle to ensure his trip was educational and interesting.   The  appellant`s
sponsor stated that he had not disclosed to the appellant the exact  details
of his visit as it was meant to be a surprise for  his  nephew  designed  to
make it an interesting and educative visit.

7. The appeal came before the adjudicator under provisions then in force  as
a paper appeal. He considered that the  ECO  had  a  reasonable  ground  for
refusal in all the circumstances of the appellant`s case. He said:

      "The appellant had still not advanced anything to say how he  proposes
      to spend his time in the United Kingdom. I find that the appellant has
      failed  to  meet  the  respondent's  point  and  that  it  remains  an
      outstanding issue. This combined with the fact that the appellant is a
      young single man  who  has  yet  to  establish  himself  in  terms  of
      property, assets, career, or  family  commitments,  leads  me  to  the
      finding that I cannot be satisfied on a balance of probabilities  that
      the appellant is genuinely seeking entry for the purpose and  for  the
      period stated by him, and I cannot be satisfied  that  he  intends  to
      leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period of his visit."

8. We can only  allow  this  appeal  if  satisfied  that  the  adjudicator's
conclusions were unsustainable. Before stating our conclusions  about  this,
it is salient to set out the framework in which family visit appeals  arise.


9. This appeal is one of the first crop of "paper" family visit  appeals  to
come before the Tribunal for a (non-paper) hearing following  the  abolition
of the fees for family visitor appeals.

10.  Largely because of the fee system, there have been a limited number  of
cases in which  we  have  had  to  consider  relevant  issues.  However,  in
deciding this appeal we have had regard to several  family  visit  cases  in
particular Mohammad Ashrif (01/TH/3465), Ramsew  (01/TH/2505),  Rattan  Kaur
[2002] UKIAT 05692 and Ogunkola [2002] UKIAT 02238.

11. The relevant provisions of para 41 read:

12. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  leave  to  enter  the
United Kingdom as a visitor are that he:

      (i) is genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a  limited  period  as
      stated by him, not exceeding 6 months; and
      (ii) intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the  period  of
      the visit as stated by him; and
      (iii) does not intend to take employment in the United Kingdom; and
      (iv) does not intend to produce good or provide  services  within  the
      United Kingdom, including the selling of goods or services  direct  to
      members of the public; and
      (v) does not intend to study at a maintained school; and
      (vi)  will  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  and  any   dependants
      adequately out of resources  available  to  him  without  recourse  to
      public funds or taking employment; or will, with  any  dependants,  be
      maintained and accommodated adequately by relatives or friends; and
      (vii) can meet the cost of the return or onward journey".


13. In the context of a family visit, these have to be read  in  conjunction
with s. 60 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and with  the  Immigration
Appeals (Family Visitor)(No  2)  Regulations  2000  which  at  regulation  2
state:

      "For the purposes of section 60(10) of the Act a "family visitor" is a
      person who applies for entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom  as
      a visitor, in order to visit -


           (a) his spouse,  father,  mother,  son,  daughter,  grandfather,
           grandmother, grandson, granddaughter,  brother,  sister,  uncle,
           aunt, nephew, niece or first cousin;
           (b) the father, mother, brother or sister of his spouse;
           c) the spouse of his son or daughter;
           (d)   his   stepfather,   stepmother,   stepson,   stepdaughter,
           stepbrother or stepsister; or
           (e) a person with whom he lived as  a  member  of  an  unmarried
           couple for at least two of the three years before  the  date  on
           which his application for entry clearance  was  made"  (emphasis
           added) "

14. We shall come back to the relevance of the words in regulation  2  which
we have italicised. What is plain otherwise from these  provisions  is  that
paragraph 41(i) and 41(ii) of HC 395 are two  separate  requirements.   They
are not interchangeable. That accords with common sense. One can think of  a
person who intends to leave at the end of his visit  but  does  not  have  a
genuine purpose for his visit. Equally,  however,  it  accords  with  common
sense to accept that there is  some  degree  of  overlapping:  if  a  person
genuinely intends a visit for a limited period, that entails  that  he  will
have an intention to leave at the end of that period. For that reason it  is
not in every case an error of  law  for  an   adjudicator  to  automatically
equate failure to meet one requirement with failure to meet the other.

15. How do these observations impact on the adjudicator's  determination  in
this case. We have two difficulties with it.

16. One is that he purported for no apparent reason to  dismiss  the  appeal
on an additional ground to that relied upon by the Entry Clearance  Officer.
He dismissed it under paragraphs 41(i) and 41(ii). The latter, however,  had
refused it under paragraph 41(i) only.

17. Although it is generally undesirable for an adjudicator to find  against
an appellant on grounds not raised by an ECO, it may sometimes be  a  proper
step if the facts as found simply do not support  an  essential  requirement
under the Immigration Rules.  In  this  case  too  little  is  said  by  the
adjudicator to establish whether she did err in refusing  the  appeal  under
paragraph 41(ii) notwithstanding that the ECO only refused  under  paragraph
41(i). However, it is clear that in this  case  his  reliance  on  paragraph
41(ii) was not based on any reasons over and above those he relied  upon  in
dismissing the appeal on paragraph 41(i) grounds. That  means  that  if  his
reliance on  paragraph  41(i)  was  sound,  then  the  appeal  was  properly
dismissed. If, however,  such  reliance  was  unsound,  then  there  are  no
separate reasons identifiable in this case for sustaining  a  refusal  under
paragraph 41(ii) either.

18. The other difficulty, however is more serious. Plainly the  adjudicator,
like the ECO, placed considerable reliance on the failure of  the  appellant
to account for how he would  spend  his  time  in  the  UK.  As  Mr  Buckley
conceded, it cannot easily be understood why a person applying as  a  family
visitor should have to establish anything more than that he has the  purpose
of visiting a family member. In this regard  the  family  visitor  is  in  a
slightly different position from  persons whose visit  intentions  are  less
specific. In regard to the latter,  what  account  they  give  of  how  they
intend to spend their time is directly  relevant  to  consideration  of  the
underlying purpose of the proposed visit. For the family  visitor,  however,
all that is strictly required is to have the purpose of a family visit.

19. To similar effect was the view taken by the  Tribunal  in  the  case  of
Ahsrif chaired by Mr Barnes:

      "14. As to the point taken that there is no specific reason for making
      the trip at that particular time, although it is a reason for  refusal
      frequently given by Entry Clearance Officers, it seems to me  to  have
      little weight provided that the claimed family relationship  is  shown
      to exist. The whole point of family visits is that  the  existence  of
      the family ties will normally furnish the reason for the visit,  since
      it is hardly surprising that members of the family separated  by  many
      thousands of miles may from time to time wish to see each other".

 20. Even if a family visitor were to spend every minute  of  his  visit  in
the company of a family member, the visit would not necessarily be  any  the
less valid. However, we are not saying that there is anything wrong with  an
ECO, as part of his inquiry into whether a person intends  a  family  visit,
asking  questions  about  how  a  person  will  spend  his  time,  including
questions about what tourist attractions he plans to visit. It  may  be  for
example that in some cases - as a result of such inquiry  -  that  a  person
appears so concerned about the non-family aspects of the visit  that  it  is
not credible there what is intended is a family  visit.   Such  inquiry  may
yield evidence going to the overall picture. However, what is valid  in  the
context of an inquiry in order to establish  a  person's  intention  is  not
necessarily valid as a reason  for  refusing  a  family  visit  application,
certainly not when it concerns matters which are extraneous  to  the  family
visit purpose.

21.  The  ECO`s  reasons  asked  a  mere  eight  questions,  all  relatively
straightforward. Only two were related to  family  reasons  and  three  were
concerned with what historical places the appellant  planned  to  visit  (we
must assume with some trepidation that by Beckingham  Palace  the  appellant
had in mind Buckingham palace  rather  than  a  certain  celebrity  couple`s
recent abode). Given that his questions did not disclose any concern on  his
part about the genuine nature  of  the  appellant`s  relationship  with  his
uncle or about the financial arrangements,  we do not consider that  he  was
entitled to give lack of advance planning as  a  reason  for  refusal  of  a
family visit application. It was not a factor relevant  to  the  genuineness
of that type of application. The adjudicator's reliance  on the same  reason
was also erroneous.

22. What about the only other reason given by the adjudicator  for  refusing
the appeal? That reason was that the appellant was a   single  man  who  had
yet to establish himself in terms of property,  assets,  career,  or  family
commitments. The Vice President in granting  leave  expressed  concern  that
this appeared, wrongly, to treat  the  mere  fact  of  youth,  i.e.  an  age
factor, as a negative consideration. If that is what the ECO or  adjudicator
had done, we would share this concern. Plainly the family  visit  rules  are
not confined by rules or regulations to persons of a certain age:  they  are
not age-discriminatory. However, it is sufficiently clear in our  view  that
the ECO and the adjudicator were concerned, not about the mere fact  of  the
appellant`s age/youth, but about the fact that he was single, lacked  family
commitments and had yet to establish himself in terms  of  property,  assets
or career. We see nothing wrong on its  own  with  the  adjudicator  viewing
this composite set of factors as counting against the appellant.

23. We have to bear in mind, however, that the adjudicator  saw  refusal  of
the appeal as justified by  (1) factors indicative of lack of  incentive  to
return taken together with (2) the lack of  advance  planning.  Keeping  the
latter out of the equation (for reasons already given), it  remains  for  us
to consider whether on the evidence relating  to  incentive  to  return  the
appellant had shown on the balance of  probabilities  that  only  a  genuine
visit for the period as stated by him was intended. In  this  connection  we
think the Vice President granting permission to appeal was right to  observe
that no doubts were  raised  by  the  ECO  or  adjudicator  as  to  the  the
appellant`s evidence that he came from a settled family  background  in  his
own country. We note that the appellant had provided evidence of  continuing
education there. The Ghana Institute of Journalism  had  written  confirming
that he was a student at this  Institute  who  had  planned  a  short  visit
during the Institute's long vacation. Against this  background  and  bearing
in mind what we have already said in relation to the appellant`s youtha  and
single status, we do not  think  that  the  evidence  relating  to  (1)  was
sufficient to justify dismissal of the appeal.

24. Considering the evidence in the round, we think that the  appellant  had
provided sufficient evidence to show that only a genuine  visit  for  family
purposes was intended. Given the lack of challenge by the ECO  to  important
aspects of his background in Ghana, taken together with the  ECO`s  lack  of
concerns about the financial arrangements for the trip,  we  have  concluded
that this adjudicator should have allowed the appeal. Accordingly  we  allow
the appellant`s appeal to us.

25. We would note that we did consider whether we should  treat  failure  of
the sponsor to appear at the hearing as  a  factor  significantly  weakening
the appellant`s  case.  However,  bearing  in  mind  that  as  a  result  of
legislative  changes  this  appeal  has  "changed  its  spots"  as  it   has
progressed - from being a paper appeal to being one before the  Tribunal  at
a hearing,  we  concluded  that  we  had  to  make  allowance  for  possible
confusion on the part of the sponsor.

26. Whilst accordingly his absence did not lead us to  dismiss  the  appeal,
we do think that before any entry clearance was granted to the appellant  in
consequence of our decision, the sponsor should be expected to reconfirm  to
the ECO his commitment to hosting the  trip  in  full  accordance  with  the
Immigration Rules.

27. For the above reasons this appeal is allowed.






DR H H  STOREY
VICE-PRESIDENT






