
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |GS (Article                 |
|                           |        |3-Persecution-Military      |
|                           |        |Service) Turkey CG [2004]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00041                 |
|On 19 February 2004        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|8 March 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr N H Goldstein                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr P Collins, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Spence & Horne, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DETERMINATION OF APPEAL

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, has been  granted  permission  to
      appeal to the Tribunal against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr P M S Mitchell) who dismissed his  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.

2.    The grounds of appeal challenge the Adjudicator's findings that there
      was no Refugee Convention reason in the case  in  relation  to  which
      reliance is placed on the decision of the Tribunal in Aydogdu  [2002]
      UKIAT 06709.  It was submitted that this was  a  case  that  did  not
      appear to have been drawn  to  the  Adjudicator's  attention  at  the
      hearing or relied on before him.

3.    The Vice President, Miss B Mensah,  in  granting  permission  rightly
      recognised that the Adjudicator  could  not  be  criticised  in  this
      regard not least in light of paragraph 14 of his  determination  that
      the appellant's claim on the basis of conscientious objection was not
      pursued at the hearing and at paragraph 23 of the determination where
      the Adjudicator further noted that Counsel had conceded there was  no
      Refugee Convention reason for the appellant's  wish  not  to  perform
      military service.

4.    Mr Collins was candid in explaining to us that it "was very difficult
      to see whether I was right to give that concession, but that  is  the
      decision I came to at the time of the hearing, that was view I took".



5.    We have decided to dismiss this appeal.

6.    It is apparent that Counsel's concession before the  Adjudicator  was
      advisedly and properly made.

7.    It was further apparent upon a reading of the determination that  for
      reasons amply supported by the evidence the Adjudicator concluded  at
      paragraph 22:

      "...The appellant is not suspected as a separatist by the authorities
      and  that  his  claim  of  being  detained  is  below  the  level  of
      credibility for I cannot understand how he could escape so easily and
      than remain at large for so long in the Country after his 'escape'".

8.     Significantly  the  Adjudicator  noted  at  paragraph  23   of   his
      determination as follows:

      ". It has been conceded that in the light of the House of  Lords  and
      Court of Appeal case of Sepet  [2003)  UKHL  15  that  there  was  no
      Convention reason for the appellant's concession.  The  appellant  is
      not a conscientious objector.   He has not said he  is  unwilling  to
      kill others only that he does not wish to kill Kurds."

9.    The Adjudicator therefore found that the appellant was  nothing  more
      than a military draft evader and continued at  paragraph  24  of  his
      determination in the following way:

      "...The appellant's claim now is purely what would happen to  him  if
      he was returned to Turkey.    The answer seems  to  be  he  would  be
      charged with evasion of military service.   He would be found  guilty
      and  receive  a  penalty  of  between  four  months  and  two   years
      imprisonment.   If the sentence was for more than six months, part of
      the sentence may be  served  in  a  civilian  prison.   It  has  been
      suggested that the civilian  prisons  are  harsh  and  that  when  he
      started his military service, the regime there, would also be  harsh.
      He may  also  be  subjected  to  harsher  treatment  because  of  his
      ethnicity and his failure to serve his country".

10.   The Adjudicator went on to take account of  the  background  material
      and concluded that there was no evidence that the appellant would  be
      subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment if he served a period  of
      imprisonment and that such treatment would not amount to  persecution
      because   of   his   ethnicity.     The   sentence   would   not   be
      disproportionate and not in breach  of  the  appellant's  his  rights
      under the ECHR.

11.   At paragraph 26 of his determination the Adjudicator  re-stated  that
      the appellant was not at real risk  of  persecution,  arrest  or  ill
      treatment upon his return because it was not  credible  even  to  the
      lower standard that he  was  thought  to  have  any  connection  with
      separatist groups.  Indeed there was no evidence  that  he  was  even
      known to the authorities.    The appellant's family history  did  not
      support his claim.   The Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  appellant
      would be "dealt with as a straightforward draft evader".

12.   In the  light  of  Counsel's  concession  and  the  findings  of  the
      Adjudicator, Counsel was constrained to  argue  before  us  that  all
      draft evaders were at risk for a Refugee Convention  reason  and  for
      this purpose he essentially relied  on  a  decision  of  the  learned
      former President Mr Justice  Collins  in  Faith  Akcan  [2002]  UKIAT
      01111.   Counsel informed us that upon  his  interpretation  of  that
      decision the Tribunal found that military drafter  evaders  would  be
      subjected to treatment  which  crossed  the  threshold  necessary  to
      engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

13.   With respect to Counsel  he  would  appear  to  have  overlooked  the
      learned former President's conclusions at paragraph 12  in  which  he
      stated inter alia as follows:

      "...This appellant has no particular reason to stir up concern in the
      authorities  so  as  attract  interrogation.   Once  his  account  is
      rejected, his credibility is not accepted, he is not someone in  whom
      the authorities are likely to have any particular interest".

14.   Mr Justice Collins in Akcan continued:

      "In those circumstances we do not accept that there is  a  real  risk
      that he would be the subject of treatment which contravenes either of
      the Conventions were he to return as a failed asylum  seeker".   (The
      typed emphasis is ours).

15.   Mr Justice Collins  further  noted  at  paragraph  11,  that  Counsel
      further relied upon the concern that after return the appellant might
      well be  interrogated  and  that  because  the  Turkish  police  were
      accustomed to torture, he might  well  suffer  torture.   Mr  Justice
      Collins continued:

      "The problem with that is that, quite apart from his  draft  evasion,
      there is no reason why he should be interrogated.   If he were to be,
      so would any other returning Turkish  Kurd  although  there  is  some
      evidence to what has happened to some who had returned, the  fact  is
      that the only statistics available show, out of  some  thousands  who
      are returned, some seventy at most have complained  about  particular
      ill-treatment".

16.   Counsel further sought to rely  upon  paragraph  6.108  of  the  CIPU
      Country Assessment dated October 2003  which  in  fact  refers  to  a
      report sourced from the Netherlands Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  of
      July 2001 which states  that  if  it  is  established  that  where  a
      returnee has evaded registration/examination or failed to  report  as
      having deserted, he is subjected to questioning  and  transferred  to
      the military authorities within 48 hours at the latest.

17.   We however  find  it  noteworthy  that  the  paragraph  continues  as
      follows:

      "...Persons who have evaded  registration/examination  or  failed  to
      report are regularly released after  questioning  and  instructed  to
      report to the military registration office within a few days.     The
      direct superiors of the conscript concerned are not always aware that
      he has evaded military service.   However, such acts are known to the
      most senior officers within the unit.    In many cases, deserters are
      not returned to the unit from which they escape  but  are  posted  to
      another unit in the same army".

18.   It is relevant that a military deserter would  normally  be  released
      and instructed to  report  to  their  military  registration  office.
      This appellant is of course not  a  deserter  but  as  found  by  the
      Adjudicator a simple draft evader.    Interestingly, Paragraph  6.109
      of the same report echoes the  findings  of  Mr  Justice  Collins  at
      paragraph 11 of his decision in Akcan.

19.   Counsel further referred us to paragraphs 5.97 and 5.98 of  the  CIPU
      report that sets out the penalties for evasion of Military service in
      peacetime for which there is a sliding  scale  of  imprisonment.   He
      submitted that the appellant fell into the category of a  person  who
      reported voluntarily after three months and would be sentenced  to  a
      period of four months to two  years  imprisonment.   Counsel  further
      submitted that the appellant  might  fall  into  the  final  category
      namely that of a person arrested after  three  months  who  would  be
      sentenced to six month to three years heavy imprisonment.

20.   Paragraph 5.98 however goes on to note the Dutch Ministry of  Foreign
      Affairs  Report  that  military  judges  in  general  impose  minimum
      sentences.   The sentences for desertion are higher  than  those  for
      evasion and registration/examination or enlistment.    As  a  general
      rule, normal prison sentences of less than one year can  be  commuted
      into a fine.  In an individual  case  the  Judge  determines  in  his
      judgment whether or not the prison sentence will be commuted  into  a
      fine.   It is noteworthy that the report goes on to state:

      ". Prison  sentences  for  evasion  and  registration/examination  or
      enlistment or for desertion are generally commuted into  fines  which
      must be paid after the end of military service".

21.   It is appropriate to note that the report continues:

      "...Heavy prison sentences handed down  for  evasion  lasting  longer
      than three months without giving oneself up may not be commuted  into
      fines."

22.   Significantly the qualifying word is "may" and of course it would  be
      open to this appellant to voluntarily report upon return.

23.   We further note that paragraph 5.92 of the CIPU records  that  on  17
      July 2003 as part of reforms to increase the professionalism  of  the
      Armed Forces, the standard length of  military  service  was  reduced
      from 18 months to 15 months, a change which led to a reduction in the
      number of conscripts in the Turkish Armed Forces.

24.   Mr Collins submissions further overlook paragraph 5.99 which  records
      that the enforcement of final judgments in cases relating to  evasion
      and military service (including desertion) takes  place  in  military
      prisons if the sentence is six months or less and in  normal  prisons
      if the sentence is, more than six months.  The report continues:

      "...As a rule the sentence is first enforced and then  the  conscript
      completes (the remainder of) his military service".

25.   CIPU further notes at paragraph 5.100 the 1999 report by  the  German
      Federal Agency for the Recognition of Foreign Refugees in which it is
      stated:

      ". In practice, in Turkish military jurisdiction it is apparent  that
      the Courts  readily  aim  for  minimum  penalties  and  impose  fines
      (commuted low custodial sentences).    The  military  courts  despite
      the situation in the South East of Turkey obviously see no reason for
      punishing non-entry to military service more severely than before".

26.   Apart from that which  is  self  evident  from  this  report,  it  is
      important  to  appreciate  that  the  situation  on  the  ground  has
      significantly changed since 1997.

27.   We find that Counsel's submissions that military  draft  evaders  per
      se, such as indeed this appellant, are at risk of persecution  for  a
      Refugee Convention reason in Turkey,  is  neither  supported  by  the
      background material that we have examined nor indeed by the case  law
      upon which Counsel has relied.

28.   Accordingly, in our view the decision of the Adjudicator was  correct
      and this appeal must be dismissed.



                                                   N H Goldstein
                                                   Vice President

