
ar     GA (Visa Facilities _ Unreported Determination) Pakistan [2004]
UKIAT00034


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                            Date of HearingDetermination  : 20 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            27 February 2004


                                   Before:

                            Mr G Warr (Chairman)
                               Mrs E Hurst, JP
                               Mr A E Armitage



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Miss S.K. Kayler) who allowed the appeal of a citizen  of
      Pakistan (hereinafter to convenience referred to as the appellant)  on
      Article 8 grounds only but dismissed his asylum appeal.
   2. Mr D.N. Saville appeared for the Secretary of State.  Mr  R.  Hussein,
      of counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co., solicitors,  appeared  for  the
      appellant.

   3. The case deals with the issues of (a) UK visa facilities  in  Pakistan
      and (b) reliance on unreported determinations.

   4. The appellant applied for asylum on  his arrival in this country on 16
      January 2002.  He met his future wife at a party in February 2002  and
      married her on 31 May 2002.  It was the appellant's case that his wife
      knew nothing about his precarious immigration  history  prior  to  the
      marriage. His wife had two sons from a previous marriage who stayed at
      weekends and during holidays with whom the appellant had  built  up  a
      close relationship. He asserted he had not married to extend his  stay
      in the United Kingdom or to boost his asylum  application.   His  wife
      was expecting a child of the marriage on    7  November  2003  -  that
      child was duly born after the  Adjudicator  hearing  which  had  taken
      place on 19 June 2003.

4.    In paragraph  22  of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  stated  as
follows:

             'The actions of the appellant in marrying soon  after  he  met
             his wife suggest the actions of a man desperate to stay in the
             UK. He says his wife knew nothing of his status, and  she  has
             confirmed this. I view this with some suspicion in view of the
             hasty marriage. I am of the view that  the  couple  agreed  to
             marry quickly, both  being  fully  aware  of  the  appellant's
             immigration status.  Having said that, I accept that this is a
             genuine marriage with the intention of the  parties  being  to
             live together.  The wife  is  pregnant  with  the  appellant's
             child, and I do not doubt that they intend to live together. '

5.    The Adjudicator was not satisfied that  the  appellant  left  Pakistan
      because of any persecution or intimidation nor that there were charges
      outstanding against him as he had claimed.  Accordingly  he  dismissed
      the asylum appeal and there has been no appeal from that aspect of his
      determination.

6.    Turning to human rights matters, the  Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied
      that returning the appellant would breach his Article 3 rights  -  see
      paragraph 27 of  the  determination.   Dealing  with  Article  8,  the
      Adjudicator concludes her determination  as follows:

             '30.      The appellant has established family life in the  UK
                with his wife. They expect their first child. The answer to
                the first question must be that the  appellant  has  family
                life here.


             31. The interference with that family life  is  in  accordance
                with the law and the  legitimate aim is to  have  a  proper
                policy of immigration control. The only  relevant  question
                therefore is whether the interference with  that  right  is
                legitimate.


             32. As I have already stated, I find that  both  parties  were
                aware of the appellant's precarious status on entering  the
                marriage.  The  respondent  says   they   must   face   the
                consequences  thereof,  and  Mrs  A.  has  the  option   of
                accompanying her husband to Pakistan  and  enjoying  family
                life there. I find that there are insurmountable objections
                to this since she has two other children (aged  8  and  14)
                from a previous marriage who have staying access  with  her
                on weekends and during holidays.  She  enjoys  family  life
                with her sons in the UK. It would be impossible to maintain
                that level of contact from Pakistan.  For  this  reason,  I
                accept that it would be  difficult  for  Mrs  A.  to  enjoy
                family  life with her sons from abroad, and she  cannot  be
                expected to live there.   I do not find that  the  cultural
                and other differences would make it impossible for  her  to
                live in Pakistan.


             33. The second option is for Mr A. to make his application  to
                join the appellant as a spouse from  abroad.  There  is  no
                reason why he should not do so, and  join  the  queue  with
                others who have  to  wait  for  their  applications  to  be
                processed.  Would his  right  to  apply  from  Pakistan  be
                nullified in light of the position at the High Commissions,
                as expounded by the appellant  and Mr Ghaffar?  I have  not
                been presented with any evidence to support this  assertion
                and do not accept this to be the case.


             34. My conclusions are that there would not be  insurmountable
                obstacles to  Mr  A.  returning  to  Pakistan  to  make  an
                application  for  entry  clearance   from   there.   Having
                considered Article 8, it  is  clear  that  there  would  be
                interference with the family rights  of  Mrs  A.  to  enjoy
                family life with her two sons should she have to  accompany
                her husband there. Thus there are insurmountable  obstacles
                to family life being enjoyed in Pakistan, since clearly the
                boys cannot be expected to join their mother in Pakistan as
                they reside with their father. To return Mr A. to  Pakistan
                to make an application there would appear to  be  a  futile
                exercise since, in view of  my  findings  and  conclusions,
                family life cannot be carried out in Pakistan. The decision
                under Article 8 is therefore not proportionate.'

7.    In the grounds of appeal reference is made  to  Mahmood  [2001]  ImmAR
      229.  The point is made that the Adjudicator had concluded that  there
      would be no insurmountable obstacle  to  the  appellant  returning  to
      Pakistan to make an application for  entry  clearance  but  that  this
      would be a futile exercise. Reference was made to the  case  of  Singh
      [2002]  UKIAT  00660.   There  were   no   exceptional   circumstances
      preventing return and the requirement to make the application overseas
      was necessary to maintain fair and effective immigration control.

8.    In submissions Mr Saville  relied  on  the  case  of  Mahmood  and  he
      submitted that the Adjudicator's determination flew in the face of it.
       He referred to a document in the appellant's  bundle  concerning  the
      visa service provided by the British  High  Commission  in  Islamabad.
      That made it clear that settlement applications could be received.  In
      any event the Adjudicator had made a clear finding that there would be
      no obstacles preventing the  appellant  making  his  application  from
      Pakistan. There had been no respondent's notice  in  respect  of  that
      aspect of the Adjudicator's decision.  In the bundle  there  were  two
      authorities which were not reported and objection was taken  to  their
      being paraded before the Tribunal, contrary to the Practice  Direction
      of 16 May 2003 (Practice Direction No. 10).

9.    Mr Hussein  submitted  that  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  were
      properly open to him in the light of the unreported  authorities.   It
      was acknowledged that there  had  been  no  respondent's  notice.  The
      appellant would  face  problems  as  those  with  complex  immigration
      histories would need an interview  and  there  would  be  a  delay  in
      processing his application.

10.   In reply, Mr Saville reiterated  his  objection  to  the  citation  of
      unreported decisions. There had been no attempt to argue that the last
      paragraph  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  had  been  correctly
      analysed. It was not clear why a claimant who had arrived on  a  false
      passport and had used documentary deception  should  be  in  a  better
      position than someone who had applied in  the  proper  manner  for  an
      entry clearance. The British High Commission document indicated on its
      face that there were facilities for interviews.

11.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We  have  carefully  considered  all  the  material  before  us.   The
      Adjudicator carefully considered the position of the appellant  making
      an application from Pakistan and made a clear finding that there  were
      no obstacles to his making such an  application.  The  point  was  not
      challenged by the appellant and we see no good reason to  disturb  the
      finding made by the Adjudicator on this issue.

12.   We have, however, looked at the document setting  out  the  facilities
      available in Pakistan for the processing of visas.  The  visa  section
      Islamabad  is  not  able  to  accept  visa  applications  direct  from
      customers but offers  a  limited  service  and  a  dedicated  UK  visa
      telephone enquiry call centre operates from Karachi. A visa service is
      provided through Gerry's/FedEx offices. Among those who  are  able  to
      avail themselves of the service are those who  are  making  settlement
      applications providing, in the case of spouses, that the spouse in the
      United Kingdom is settled and aged eighteen  and  over.   There  is  a
      proviso to which Mr Hussein  referred.   If  the  applicant  has  been
      refused a visa for the UK or for any other country,  or  been  refused
      entry to the UK  or  any  other  country  or  failed  to  comply  with
      conditions of entry to the UK or sought an extension of stay in the UK
      'then we may not be able to resolve your application  and  it  may  be
      returned to you'.   It is suggested that in complex cases an interview
      may be necessary and that will cause the appellant  difficulties.  The
      British High Commission document appears to  suggest  that  facilities
      are available  for  interview  -  see  page  5  'If  an  interview  is
      necessary, you will be contacted  and  given  details.'   There  is  a
      further reference later on in the document about  an  aim  to  make  a
      decision without calling applicants for interview  whenever  possible.
      Processing times for settlement applications is given as three months.



13.    As  we  pointed  out  to  counsel  in  argument,  there  is   nothing
      particularly complex  about  this  case.  Indeed,  the  appellant  has
      certain advantages over other applicants in the queue in that he has a
      determination in his favour on the merits of his case.    He  will  be
      equipped with all the necessary documentation evidencing  the  genuine
      nature of his marriage, including a birth certificate  in  respect  of
      the child of the marriage. We were not told  of  any  reason  why  the
      application would not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

14.   We find firstly that there is a nothing unfair  about  requiring  this
      appellant to make his application from overseas  like  everyone  else.
      Even if he is able to demonstrate quite clearly that he complies  with
      the rules - see paragraph 26 of Mahmood in the judgment of Laws LJ 'It
      is simply unfair that he should not have to wait  in  the  queue  like
      everyone else. At least it is unfair unless he  can  demonstrate  some
      exceptional circumstance which reasonably justifies  his  jumping  the
      queue.'

15.   In paragraph 65 of the judgment of the Master of the  Rolls  reference
      is made to potential difficulties with an application.  The Master  of
      the Rolls did not consider that the possibility that  the  application
      may not succeed 'is any reason for excusing him from  the  requirement
      to  make  an  application  from  outside  the  country  if  he  wishes
      permission to settle here with his wife and family.'   Although  there
      may be a lengthy separation, the court  did  not  consider  'that  the
      Secretary of State's insistence that the appellant should comply  with
      the same formal requirements as all other applicants seeking an  entry
      visa to join spouses in this country is in conflict with Article 8.'

16.   In relation to the unreported decisions,  no  permission  was  applied
      for or granted to cite them and objection was  taken  to  their  being
      referred to us.  There  are  clear  reasons  for  complying  with  the
      formalities when putting forward unreported  decisions.   Furthermore,
      it is not clear what documents were available to the Tribunal in those
      decisions. The material before us does not indicate that the appellant
      will not have his application processed.  As  we  have  observed,  the
      appellant is in certain ways in a favourable position since he has all
      the  material  he  needs  together  with  a   favourable   Adjudicator
      determination.  As the Court of Appeal made clear in Mahmood, the fact
      that an application may not succeed is no excuse for failing  to  make
      an  applicant  go  through  the  normal  procedures.   The  time   for
      processing a settlement application is indicated as three months.   In
      the appellant's case it may be shorter because he has all the material
      necessary or it may be longer because of other factors.  It is  to  be
      observed that the Adjudicator rejected the claim of the appellant  and
      his wife that his wife did not  know  of  his  precarious  immigration
      status when she married him. They married both being  fully  aware  of
      the circumstances.  In such circumstances it does appear, to  use  the
      words of Laws LJ 'simply unfair that he should not have to wait in the
      queue like everyone else.'

17.   The Adjudicator's  approach  as  indicated  in  paragraph  34  of  the
      determination is plainly wrong  on  the  authority  of  Mahmood.   The
      Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to  insist  that  the  appellant's
      application  is  made  from  overseas  and  we  see   no   exceptional
      circumstances that would indicate that he should not  join  the  queue
      like everyone else.  Permission  was  not  granted  to  challenge  the
      Adjudicator's findings that the appellant could make  his  application
      from Pakistan and we would not, had it been necessary to do  so,  have
      concluded from the material available to  us  that  the  Adjudicator's
      decision was not properly open to him.  The  British  High  Commission
      document does not state  that  the  application  will  be  refused  or
      rejected out of hand.  It makes it clear that it may not be able to be
      resolved. It does not  indicate  that  interview  procedures  are  not
      available. In any event, the fact that the application  may  encounter
      difficulties along the way is not, on  the  authority  of  Mahmood,  a
      reason to absolve am applicant from the usual requirements.

18.   The Adjudicator was wrong to allow this appeal on the  basis  that  to
      require the appellant to make his application  from  overseas  was  'a
      futile exercise'. There are no exceptional circumstances in this case.
       for the reasons we have given, the Adjudicator's determination of the
      Article 8 issue is reversed and the appeal of the Secretary  of  State
      is allowed.

19.   Appeal allowed.



                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


