
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |MF (Immigration - adoption -|
|                           |        |genuine transfer of parental|
|                           |        |responsibility ) Philippines|
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00094          |
|On:18 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|29 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                    |
|Ms S S Ramsumair JP                                               |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Entry Clearance Officer - Manila                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr  G  Phillips,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.
For the respondent:    Ms N Adesemowo, solicitor, Adesemowo solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, with  permission,  appeals  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mr D P  Herbert)  promulgated  on  24  June  2003.   The
      Adjudicator allowed the  respondent's  appeal  from  the  appellant's
      decision to refuse entry clearance.

2.    The respondent, making her third  application  for  entry  clearance,
      applied to the appellant on 20  August  2001  to  join  her  adoptive
      parents in the United Kingdom.  She was interviewed  on  27  February
      2002 and the application was refused.

3.    Her history is somewhat complicated.  The respondent was  born  on  7
      November 1983.  She is  the  fourth  of  six  children  born  to  her
      parents.  There is evidence in the papers that  adoption  proceedings
      were underway in the Philippines by 1994.  The intention, even before
      she was born, was that the  sponsor  and  her  husband  (she  is  the
      respondent's maternal  aunt)  were  to  adopt  the  respondent.   The
      sponsor was already living in the United Kingdom.  The documents from
      the Social Services in  Manila,  dated  about  1994,  show  that  the
      proposed adoption was for two reasons. First the respondent's parents
      agreed that they could adopt the respondent because the  sponsor  and
      his wife are unable to have  children.   Second,  the  birth  of  the
      respondent would put some financial strain on  her  natural  parents.
      It  is  said,  but  there  is  no  supporting  evidence,   that   the
      respondent's mother died in 1995 and at that stage her natural father
      abandoned all his children.  They were all taken  in  by  a  maternal
      uncle in the Philippines. The respondent thereafter continued to live
      in his house, together with six other children, of which  the  eldest
      two are her younger siblings.

4.    We were told that the two  previous  failed  applications  for  entry
      clearance were both with the intention that the respondent would come
      to the United Kingdom and then be adopted here. The reason  was  that
      the lawyer in Manila,  who  was  supposed  to  be  dealing  with  the
      adoption, did not make any progress with it.  It was decided that  it
      would be easier for the adoption to  be  dealt  with  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

5.    In the event, the adoption was completed on 21 February 2000 when the
      Regional Trial Court in San  Fernando  made  the  appropriate  order.
      That adoption order provided for a new birth certificate to be issued
      with the names of the adoptive parents in place of  the  respondent's
      actual parents.  The appellant has not challenged the validity of the
      order, or suggested it would not be recognised by the United  Kingdom
      courts.

6.    It is in the light of that history that the respondent's  application
      came to  be  considered  by  the  appellant.   At  the  time  of  the
      application she was nearly 18.  She is now 20.  The relevant date  is
      the date of refusal save that for the  purpose of  ascertaining  age,
      it is the date of application.

7.    The relevant immigration rule, is  paragraph  310  of  HC  395.   The
      relevant parts read as follows:-

           "310. The requirements to be met in a case of  a  child  seeking
                 indefinite leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
                 adopted child of a parent or parents present  and  settled
                 .... in the United Kingdom are that he:


                 i)    is seeking leave to enter to .... join  an  adoptive
                       parent  or  parents   in   one   of   the   following
                       circumstances:-


                       (a)   both parents are present  and  settled  in  the
                            United Kingdom.


                 ii)   Is under the age of 18; and


                 iii)  is not leading an independent  life,  is  unmarried,
                       and has not formed an independent family unit; and


                 iv)    can,  and  will,  be  accommodated  and  maintained
                       adequately  without  recourse  to  public  funds   in
                       accommodation which the adoptive  parent  or  parents
                       own or occupy exclusively; and


                 vi)   (a)   was adopted  in  accordance  with  a  decision
                            taken by the competent administrative authority
                            or court in his country of origin .... being  a
                            country whose adoption orders are recognised by
                            the United Kingdom; and


                 ix)   was adopted due to the  inability  of  the  original
                      parents or current carers to care for him  and  there
                      has   been   a   genuine   transfer    of    parental
                      responsibility to the adoptive parent; and


                 x)    has lost or broken  his  ties  with  his  family  of
                      origin; and


                 xi)    was  adopted,  but  the  adoption  is  not  one  of
                      convenience arranged to facilitate his  admission  or
                      remaining in the United Kingdom..."


8.    So far as this appeal is  concerned  it  is  not  disputed  that  the
    sponsor and her husband could accommodate and maintain the  respondent;
    that at the time of the application of decision she was under  the  age
    of eighteen; or that the sponsor and his  wife  are  both  present  and
    settled in the United  Kingdom.   In  addition,  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband have no other children and so the provisions  of  sub-paragraph
    viii (which we have not quoted) are not relevant.

9.    Although the appellant, challenging the Adjudicator's decision, cites
    several parts of the rule he does not assert that the adoption was  one
    of convenience.  We are not therefore concerned to deal with that  part
    of the rule.

10.   The appellant gave several reasons for the refusal.   The  respondent
    attended  the  interview  accompanied  by  her  natural  father.    The
    appellant asserts that is an indication that she has not lost or broken
    ties with her family of origin.  The respondent told the appellant that
    her adoptive parents, the sponsor and her husband, keep in contact with
    her by letters, telephone and text messages but produced no evidence of
    this from before the year 2000.  The appellant was  not  satisfied  the
    sponsor has been solely responsible for the respondent's upbringing  or
    that there has  been  a  genuine  transfer  of  responsibility  to  her
    adoptive parents.

11.   The Adjudicator found the respondent complied with rule  310  in  its
    entirety.  He found that the fact she was accompanied by her biological
    father to the interview, and that she sees him once  a  week  does  not
    mean her adoptive parents had not been responsible for  her  parenting.
    He accepted the explanation that it  would  have  been  unwise  for  an
    unaccompanied minor to go to a large city,  like  Manila,  alone.   The
    Adjudicator said that the appellant was  wrong  when  he  said  in  the
    explanatory statement that the sponsor must be solely  responsible  for
    the appellant's upbringing.  He said that was too high a test  and  was
    not in accordance with the requirement of the rule.  He  was  satisfied
    the appellant had "ignored clear evidence to suggest there had  been  a
    genuine transfer of responsibility to the adoptive parents".

12.    Following  submissions,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  adoption  is
    perfectly genuine and was carried out in accordance with the long  term
    plans of  both  the  respondent's  natural  parents  and  her  adoptive
    parents.  The appellant has not asserted the adoption is one that would
    not be recognised by the United Kingdom.   The  questions  we  have  to
    decide relate to other aspects of the rule.

13.   Ms Adesemowo, who had not prepared any bundles for the hearing before
    us, relied on the bundle that had been before the Adjudicator  both  in
    relation to the statement made by the sponsor and documents  which  had
    been produced in support.  The Tribunal and the Presenting Officer (who
    did not have a copy of the bundle on his file  presumably  because  the
    appellant was not represented before the Adjudicator)  shared  the  one
    copy that was in the IAA file.

14.   In support of the  assertion  that  there  has  been  a  transfer  of
    responsibility for the respondent, we were taken to a number of  school
    fee bills.  Those did not help us as there is no indication as  to  who
    paid them.    The sponsor's bank statements were produced in  order  to
    deal with accommodation and maintenance issues, but show no money being
    sent to the Philippines  during  the  period  which  they  cover.   The
    evidence, in the form of the sponsor's statement, is that she  assisted
    the respondent's natural parents financially, from the United  Kingdom.
    It says little more than that.  Although it  was  suggested  to  us  in
    submissions that that the sponsor and her husband have been responsible
    for the respondent financially that was not established in evidence  to
    the Adjudicator.

15.   The rule requires the adoption to have been due to the  inability  of
    the natural parents to care for the respondent.  There is  no  evidence
    that is the case, although, arguably, if the respondent's  mother  died
    and her father abandoned her, that could be the situation.

16.   However, the rule says more than that. It also requires there to have
    been a genuine transfer of  parental  responsibility  to  the  adoptive
    parents.  Save for sending money from the United Kingdom (the extent of
    which has not been established) the only other evidence was a series of
    telephone accounts showing numerous calls  to  the  Philippines  and  a
    series of badly photocopied envelopes addressed to  the  respondent  by
    the sponsor and her husband.

17.   Even if that could arguably be sufficient, it is vitiated by some  of
    the other evidence.  It is said that the respondent's father  took  her
    to the interview with the appellant because it would have been  foolish
    to expect a young woman  to  travel  alone  to  Manila  to  attend  the
    meeting.  That may well be true.  However, the very fact  that  it  was
    her natural father who accompanied  her,  immediately  casts  doubt  on
    whether there has been a genuine transfer of  parental  responsibility.
    Furthermore it calls into question the requirement in rule 310(x)  that
    the respondent should have lost or broken her ties with her  family  of
    origin.  This latter provision caused us considerable concern.   First,
    we note that within rule 310 the use of the  word  "family"  cannot  be
    restricted to parents.  The expression "parents" is used throughout the
    rule and there is clearly intended to be a distinction  when  the  rule
    refers to family.  The appellant was, at the time of  application,  and
    still is, living with her two younger siblings and her maternal  uncle,
    his wife and children. Those siblings, uncle, aunt and cousins are part
    of her family.  They are not distant relations and  clearly  must  come
    within the meaning of "family" in rule 310.   However,  there  is  more
    relevant evidence. In her interview she was asked how  often  she  sees
    her father. She answered, "once a week".  She said  that  she  did  not
    discuss problems with him, but if she had problems she wanted  to  talk
    about, she did so with her elder sister or friends.  She confirmed  she
    meant her biological sister. The explanation she gives for  her  seeing
    her father once a week is  that  he  has  access  to  the  respondent's
    younger siblings.  She says they are not hostile towards him  like  her
    older brothers and sisters.  They are hostile because he abandoned them
    and they remember it.  Whatever the reasons, she sees him weekly.

 18.  it is not sufficient for the purposes of the rule that  adoption  was
    made with a legitimate intent and in accordance with  the  law  of  the
    Philippines. In order to obtain entry clearance she has to do more than
    establish the genuineness of the adoption, she has to be able to comply
    with all aspects of the rule.  She simply cannot  do  so.   She  cannot
    establish on the evidence that she has lost or broken her ties with her
    family of origin.  It would be doing violence to the  language  of  the
    rule to suggest that the fact her  father  sees  her  weekly  (even  if
    primarily to see her younger  siblings)  and  accompanied  her  to  the
    interview can still mean she has broken her ties with him.  The ties to
    be considered are not just with her biological father because the  rule
    refers to her family.  She was living with her  family.   In  terms  of
    immediate family, she is with her two younger siblings.  Slightly  less
    immediate, but still family, are the uncle, aunt and  cousins  she  was
    living with.  She has lived with them since about 1995 and continues to
    do so.  It cannot possibly be said that she has broken  her  ties  with
    those parts of her family either.

19.   Whether there has been a genuine transfer of parental  responsibility
    is not determinative because the respondent cannot  comply  with  other
    parts of the rule.  However, we do set out our findings on that.  We do
    not regard sending back unspecified amounts of money, making  telephone
    calls and writing letters as  sufficient  evidence  of  a  transfer  of
    parental responsibility.  The sponsor and her husband have only visited
    the Philippines twice since 1994 (once was  to  initiate  the  adoption
    proceedings ). There is no evidence the respondent  has  not  met  them
    elsewhere.  There is no evidence to show that they have been making the
    sort of decisions that would point to the transfer  of  responsibility.
    Nor is there evidence that the respondent's current  carers  would  not
    care for her.

20.   The Adjudicator's findings are not backed up by adequate reasons.  It
    was not open to him to conclude as he did from the evidence before him.
       As Mr Phillips said, the rules are precise, there is  no  room  for
    ambiguity.  The Adjudicator's determination  is  plainly  wrong.   Such
    evidence as he had was available to  us.  No  more  was  produced.   Ms
    Adesemowo had the opportunity of drawing our attention to the  evidence
    which she felt important and making submissions upon it.

21.   For the reasons which we have set out above we are entirely satisfied
    that the respondent did not comply with the provisions of paragraph 310
    of HC 395 entitling her to leave to enter the United Kingdom to  settle
    as the adopted child of the sponsor and her husband.

22.   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.



                                                                  C P Mather
                                                              Vice President
