
ar
        DG (Extortion by Maoists - internal flight) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00116


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 20 April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 26 May 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                Mr M G Taylor
                               Mrs J E Nichols




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives: Mr D. Bunting for the appellant;   Mr  A.  Hutton  for  the
respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Nepal.  She  appeals  against  a
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M.  Neuberger,  dismissing  her
      appeal against a decision  giving  directions  for  removal  following
      refusal to grant asylum.

2.    The basis of the appellant's claim was that she and her  family  owned
      a farm.  In March 1999 they began receiving extortion demands from the
      Maoists who also asked the appellant to join them. In all  her  family
      had to pay the Maoists on seven occasions. The police were  unable  to
      help and in April 1999 she was arrested and detained when  the  police
      learnt her family had made payments. When  reluctantly  the  appellant
      distributed leaflets for the Maoists she  was  arrested  on  15  April
      2002, detained for two-and-a-half months and  released  on   condition
      that if she helped the Maoists again her life would be in danger.  She
      left Nepal in July 2002.

3.     The  Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant's  account  was  credible.
      However, in view of the fact that she had been released without charge
      on both occasions she had been arrested  and  detained,  he  concluded
      that the police had no further interest in her.  He further  concluded
      that whilst the appellant 'might fear returning her to her home area',
      she would be able to avail herself of  a  viable  internal  relocation
      alternative.

4.    Before proceeding further we should clarify that we are satisfied  the
      Adjudicator accepted the appellant would face  an  objective  fear  of
      persecution from the  Maoists in her home area. It  is  true,  as  was
      noted by the  Vice President when granting leave, that the Adjudicator
      used words which could be read as suggesting her fear  was  subjective
      only ('she might fear').  But he was satisfied the appellant's account
      was  credible  and  her  account  described  a  campaign  of   serious
      harassment and extortion.

5.    Equally, however, the Adjudicator  concluded  the  appellant  did  not
      face a real risk of serious harm  from  the  authorities  anywhere  in
      Nepal. The written grounds of appeal  did  not  effectively  challenge
      this conclusion and in any event we consider it entirely  sustainable.
      He correctly attached weight to the fact that the police had last gone
      to her home to enquire about her whereabouts  approximately  one  year
      ago and the fact that her parents and siblings had not been  subjected
      to any problems whatsoever. Accordingly the only issue in this  appeal
      was whether the Adjudicator was justified in concluding she would have
      a viable internal relocation alternative.

6.    Mr Bunting in amplifying the grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the
      Adjudicator failed to consider the difficulties that would  beset  the
      appellant wherever she sought to relocate, in particular the fact that
      she was a single woman aged twenty-eight  for  whom  travelling  alone
      would entail risk and hardship. As someone who had only ever worked on
      a farm she would also be unlikely  to  obtain  employment.  There  was
      also, he  submitted,  a  real  risk  arising  from  her   marginalised
      existence, that she would come to the attention of the Maoists.

7.     Dealing  first  with  the  last  contention,  we  consider  that  the
      Adjudicator was fully justified in concluding that there were areas of
      Nepal where the appellant would run no real  risk  of  coming  to  the
      attention of the Maoists. He very properly noted that there are  areas
      in Nepal where the Maoists were  not  in  control.  This  finding  was
      wholly consonant with the objective country materials which identified
      the Maoists as having no significant presence in a number of provinces
      in Nepal: see CIPU Report October 2003 paragraph  6.34.   Furthermore,
      the  Maoists' interest in the appellant was plainly a minor one:   all
      she had done in their eyes was object to paying  extortion  money   to
      Maoists in her area and refuse  to  continue  distributing  pamphlets.
      She was not likely to be on any list of persons of particular interest
      to the Maoists on a national level.

8.    As regards  whether  the  appellant  would  find  internal  relocation
      unduly  harsh  otherwise,  we  are  not  persuaded  that  the  grounds
      identified any factors of real significance.

9.     It  is  true  that  the  objective  country  materials  do  chronicle
      significant discriminations facing women  in  Nepal,  particularly  in
      the  context of domestic violence:  see the CIPU Report  October  2003
      paragraphs 6.59-6.63.   However, they fall well short of  establishing
      that women who are single and have to live without the  support  of  a
      family  face a real risk of serious harm.

10.   Whilst the appellant had only ever worked on a farm,  she  was  young,
      healthy and had finished a school education. Once again, the objective
      country materials did not demonstrate that  she  would  be  unable  to
      obtain employment either  in  the  agricultural  sector  (40%  of  the
      country's population work in this sector), a sector in which  she  has
      relevant experience, or in some other sector.

11.   For completeness we would observe that we found  no  substance  in  Mr
      Bunting's  contention  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  follow  the
      principles identified in the Court of Appeal judgment in the  case  of
      AE & FE [2003] EWCA  Civ  1032.  He  clearly  considered  whether,  by
      comparison with the appellant's home area, the appellant would be able
      to achieve safety in other parts of Nepal where the Maoists were not a
      force.

12.   For the above reasons, we  are  not  persuaded  that  the  Adjudicator
      erred in concluding that the appellant would  be  able  on  return  to
      achieve safety from the Maoists by means of internal relocation.

13.   This appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


