
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |KV (Country Information -   |
|                           |        |Jeyachandran - Risk on      |
|                           |        |Return) Sri Lanka [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00012                 |
|On 15 January 2004         |        |                            |
|Dictated 16 January 2004                                          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....10/February 2004...                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Professor B L Gomes Da Costa JP                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation
For the appellant:           Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms S O'Rourke, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                       Association (Romford Road)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil  ethnicity  born  on
      30 June 1979.  She claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  20
      February 2001 and on 23 February 2001 an application  for  asylum  was
      made on her behalf by her representatives.   Following  submission  of
      the self-evidence form and an interview the Secretary of State refused
      her asylum application for the reasons set out in a  letter  dated  22
      March 2001.  On 28 March 2001 he issued directions for her removal  to
      Sri Lanka as an  illegal  entrant  following  refusal  of  her  asylum
      application.  She appealed against that decision on  both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds and the Secretary of State forwarded  the  appeal
      papers to the Immigration Appellate Authority on 3 October 2002.   The
      appeal was heard on 19 May 2003 by an Adjudicator, Mr J  Brennan,  who
      found the appellant to be credible and allowed her appeal  both  under
      the Refugee Convention and under Article 3 of the European Convention.

2.    The Secretary of State now appeals with leave against that decision.

3.    There was  in  the  written  skeleton  argument  of  Ms  O'Rourke,  an
      indication that the appellant sought to raise issues in respect of her
      right to family life under Article 8 of the European Convention but we
      note that no such claim was raised in her original grounds  of  appeal
      to the Adjudicator and, although we accept that there was clearly some
      evidence of the appellant's marriage subsequent to her arrival in  the
      United Kingdom to a Sri Lankan citizen who has  exceptional  leave  to
      remain here, it did not appear from the record of proceedings that any
      Article 8 claim had been raised before the Adjudicator by Ms  O'Rourke
      who represented the appellant then also.  When pressed on  the  point,
      Ms O'Rourke finally conceded that she had not sought to raise  Article
      8 in any way before the  Adjudicator  although  there  had  been  some
      evidence which might  have  been  relevant  to  such  an  issue.   The
      Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal on  25  July  2003
      and that determination was promulgated to the  parties  on  15  August
      2003.  The respondent failed to make any application under Rule 19  of
      the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.  Rule 19(2)
      requires such an application to be  made  within  10  days  after  the
      respondent is served with notice that the appellant has  been  granted
      permission to appeal and there is no provision for extension  of  time
      for a respondent's  notice  within  the  Rules.   The  respondent  has
      accordingly had the opportunity by giving the  appropriate  notice  to
      seek to raise Article 8 issues before us but has failed to do so.   In
      those circumstances our consideration of this appeal is restricted  to
      the appellant's grounds of appeal before us.

4.    The accepted factual history of the appellant  is  that  between  1995
      and 1997 whilst  living  in  an  area  controlled  by  the  LTTE,  the
      appellant had assisted the LTTE by dressing the  injured  and  wounded
      but it does not appear that that past  assistance  was  known  to  the
      authorities.  In 1997 the appellant  and  her  family  moved  back  to
      Inuvil where they owned a farm.  In  mid-December  2000  there  was  a
      confrontation between The Sri Lankan army and the LTTE close to  their
      home and an injured LTTE member reached a neighbour's house  where  he
      died.  This resulted in the neighbours, together with  all  the  young
      people in the neighbourhood, being arrested by the  Sri  Lankan  army,
      including the appellant who was interrogated and seriously ill-treated
      during her detention although she did not  admit  to  any  involvement
      with the LTTE.  In the course of her detention she was raped on  three
      occasions but her mother was ultimately able to procure her release on
      21 January 2001 with the help of the Eelam People's  Democratic  Party
      to whom her mother  had  paid  a  substantial  bribe  to  procure  her
      release.  She was released on condition that she should report to  the
      army camp every Saturday but it was decided  by  her  mother  to  make
      arrangements for her to leave Sri Lanka.  She left her home area on 23
      January, two days after her release and left the country by  air  with
      the assistance of an agent on 17 February 2001.

5.    In paragraph 11.2 of the determination the Adjudicator refers  to  the
      Tribunal decision in Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869 that a real  risk
      occurs only in exceptional cases,  and to paragraph 11 of the judgment
      of Buxton LJ in Selvaratnam [2003] EWCA Civ 121 where he  quotes  what
      is recorded in paragraph 6.1 in the  Home  Office  Investigative  Team
      Report as follows:

           "The Director explained that if a returnee were not wanted  they
           would not be stopped at the airport.  However when the  CID  are
           certain that the individual has committed or been  convicted  of
           an offence then they would be  stopped.  A  computer  holds  the
           name, address and age of any wanted person."

6.    The Adjudicator allowed the appeal on the following basis.

           "On the objective  evidence  before  me  there  are  substantial
           grounds for believing that on arrival  at  Colombo  airport  the
           appellant would be detained.  She would not simply be a returned
           asylum seeker but  a  person  who  very  recently  has  been  in
           detention in that country for a specific reason, a  reason  that
           is identified by the authorities  as  a  ground  for  taking  an
           interest in its  citizens,  and  had  unlawfully  escaped.  (Our
           emphasis)


           The appellant is still of interest to  the  authorities  in  Sri
           Lanka and as such is likely to be detained on return.  There  is
           substantial  evidence  about  the  likelihood  of   torture   of
           detainees and therefore there is a real risk that the  appellant
           will be tortured on her return.  An added problem  is  that  the
           appellant is recently delivered of a child and even if  we  were
           to ignore the pre Sri Lanka  situation  she  is  of  a  delicate
           mental condition."

7.    That is the sum of the reasoning of the  Adjudicator  before  whom  Ms
      O'Rourke had submitted, as indeed she submitted to us, that it was the
      fact of failing to report in accordance with  the  conditions  of  her
      release which meant that the appellant had "unlawfully  escaped"  from
      Sri Lanka and  which  would  lead  to  the  reasonable  likelihood  of
      detention on arrival.

8.    The grounds of appeal, on which  Mr  Morris  relied  before  us,  were
      firstly that the Adjudicator had erred in law by allowing  the  appeal
      in that he had failed to give clear and valid reasons as  to  why  the
      appellant would be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka  at  the  date  of
      determining the appeal.  It was challenged that he had not taken  full
      account of the  current  objective  material  relating  to  the  peace
      process and the Tribunal decisions of Thiarajah [2002] UKIAT 04917 and
      Jeyachandran were relied on in this respect.  In particular there  was
      no evidence of an arrest warrant or further evidence to  suggest  that
      the respondent was wanted in Sri Lanka,  but  it  was  said  her  last
      arrest [there was in  fact  only  one  arrest]  was  long  before  the
      commencement of the ceasefire and that  she  did  not  fall  into  the
      exceptional case or category envisaged in Jeyachandran, a  proposition
      from which the Court of Appeal did not dissent in Selvaratnam although
      they distinguished the  case  of  that  particular  appellant  on  the
      particular facts.

9.    We should observe that in the latter case the  accepted  evidence  was
      that the army authorities had  information  which  confirmed  that  Mr
      Selvaratnam had previously worked for the LTTE, that he had signed two
      papers whilst in detention, one of which was in Singhalese  and  which
      he believed to be a confession of some kind and the other of which was
      a blank sheet of paper, and that he had actually escaped from  custody
      immediately prior to leaving the country.

10.   It was Mr Morris' oral submission to us  that  as  a  matter  of  fact
      there was no arguable basis on  which  it  could  be  said  that  this
      respondent was an exceptional case, her case depending on the fact  of
      failure to report in response to reporting conditions as  putting  her
      in the category of a "wanted" person in Sri Lanka.

11.   We had the benefit of  both  written  and  oral  submissions  from  Ms
      O'Rourke but it became clear  that  it  was  indeed  the  nub  of  her
      submissions that danger to the appellant resulted from the failure  to
      comply with reporting conditions.  We asked her whether there was  any
      objective evidence to which she could refer  us  which  supported  the
      contention that somebody in the situation of the  appellant  would  be
      wanted by the Sri Lankan authorities but she finally agreed that there
      was no such objective evidence to  which  she  could  refer  us.   She
      submitted  that  the   respondent's   treatment   in   detention   was
      illustrative of the fact that she was under suspicion at the  time  of
      her detention.  That may be so and the  treatment  to  which  she  was
      subjected is clearly wholly unacceptable.  Mr  Morris  did  not  demur
      from the proposition that if there were a real  risk  that  she  would
      again be detained, then she would be entitled to  succeed  before  us.
      Such objective evidence as there was, however,  did  not  support  the
      submission that failure  to  report  would  lead  to  further  adverse
      attention of somebody who had been voluntarily  released  by  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities in the changed circumstances which now apply in Sri
      Lanka.  It had, indeed, been the evidence given  to  the  Home  Office
      Fact-Finding Mission which had visited Sri Lanka in March  2002  after
      the ceasefire was in place, that the CID  stated  that  a  failure  to
      report in response to  reporting  conditions  would  not  lead  to  an
      adverse interest on the part of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   That
      evidence was accepted by the Tribunal in Brinston [2002]  UKIAT  01547
      which fully reviewed the situation in Sri Lanka in May 2002  following
      the ceasefire.  It is an  approach  which  has  been  applied  by  the
      Tribunal in the many Sri Lankan appeals  which  have  been  determined
      since Jeyachandran and Brinston and we see no arguable basis on  which
      the Adjudicator could, had  he properly considered the evidence before
      him, have reached the conclusion that Ms O'Rourke's submission  as  to
      the effect of non-reporting was that which she put  forward.   It  was
      plainly against the weight of the evidence and we are  satisfied  that
      the Adjudicator's findings as to the risk on return  at  the  time  he
      heard the appeal are unsustainable.

12.   The second line of submissions  made  by  Ms  O'Rourke  was  that  the
      situation in Sri Lanka had now changed for  the  worse  and  that  the
      views expressed in the CIPU Country Report of October 2003 as  to  the
      safety of return for the generality of Tamil asylum seekers  could  no
      longer be maintained.  We put it in that way because the  position  up
      to and including that report has been considered by  the  Tribunal  on
      many occasions and it is the settled view of the Tribunal that, having
      heard extensive argument on the issues, the CIPU  report  does  fairly
      reflect  the  diminution  in  risk  which  was   first   observed   in
      Jeyachandran and  Brinston.   The  additional  evidence  to  which  Ms
      O'Rourke directed our attention concerned  the  political  differences
      between the President and the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka in  November
      2003 which are reflected in a number of BBC News Items produced to  us
      dating between 4 November 2003 and 7  January  2004  as  well  as  the
      latest letter from the UNHCR on the position on returns to  Sri  Lanka
      which is dated 15 December 2003.  That letter  indeed  summarises  the
      matters which are dealt with  in  the  BBC  News  reports  and  it  is
      appropriate that we quote the relevant passages from the UNHCR  letter
      which are based on the latest  information  they  have  received  from
      their branch office in Colombo.  They are as follows:

           "There has been a noticeable improvement  in  the  human  rights
           situation in Sri Lanka since the signing of the MOU in  February
           2002 and the subsequent peace talks.  However, despite increased
           freedom of movement and other  improvements,  the  human  rights
           situation is  still  far  from  satisfactory.   The  checkpoints
           remain in  place  between  the  LTTE  and  government-controlled
           areas;  political killings continue (especially in the  east  of
           the country);  non-state actors continue to  harass  and  extort
           taxes  from  the  local  population;   and  there  seems  to  be
           widespread impunity for human rights violations.


           The President declared a state of emergency on 6 November  2003.
           As a consequence of the declared state of emergency there was  a
           noticeable increase of soldiers on patrol in many parts  of  the
           country, and ID checks were carried out in Colombo  -  and  most
           likely also in other areas.  Reports received by the  Consortium
           of Humanitarian Agencies in Sri Lanka imply  that  the  security
           forces at certain crossing points may be  involved  in  imposing
           arbitrary and random restrictions on the freedom of movement  of
           persons and goods, similar to  that  which  existed  before  the
           ceasefire agreement in February 2002.  The political  leadership
           of the country  has  publicly  stated  that  there  will  be  no
           reversal of the peace process;  however, these types of  reports
           are an indication that fear is creeping back into society making
           the situation more volatile.


           Although the declaration of a state of emergency  has  now  been
           reversed,  it  is  unclear  how  the  present  political   power
           struggles, related both to the peace  talks  and  other  issues,
           will impact on the human rights situation.   Given  the  present
           situation, we would strongly urge you to verge on  the  side  of
           maximum caution in any Refugee Status Determination decisions.


           In light  of  the  foregoing,  UNHCR  maintains  the  view  that
           although steps towards  peace  have  been  taken  in  Sri  Lanka
           recently, it is still premature to advocate that  the  situation
           has reached a satisfactory level of safety to warrant the return
           of all  unsuccessful  asylum  applicants  to  Sri  Lanka.   This
           caution is now also warranted by the uncertainty surrounding the
           effects of the recent  Presidential  decree  imposing  and  then
           reversing a state of emergency in Sri Lanka.


           The present political situation in Sri Lanka is  very  unstable.
           Although it is still too  early  to  say  what  impact  the  new
           situation will have on the human rights situation, recent events
           have  certainly  reminded  the  population  of  the   widespread
           impunity for human rights violations in the past - and  this  in
           itself makes the situation more prone to destabilisation."

  13. We have taken fully into account what is said in that  letter  and  we
      acknowledge the need for caution.  Nevertheless, it does not  seem  to
      us that there has been any change in the position  which  has  applied
      for some long time now, namely that all parties to the conflict  which
      ceased in December 2001 on a voluntary basis and was  then  reinforced
      by the formal agreement in February 2002, remain committed to avoiding
      any return to armed combat as existed in  the  past.   There  are  two
      significant matters which in our view follow from  the  UNHCR  letter.
      First, in the opening two paragraphs there is no suggestion of reports
      of arrest and detention on suspicion of LTTE connection, or indeed any
      reference to arrests of returnees at the airport. We  are  aware  that
      earlier in 2003 there was  public  concern  because  of  the  policing
      measures taken to deal with specific threats from a  small  number  of
      extremist militants who had or were feared to be conspiring to  commit
      serious criminal acts which began with the murder of a police  officer
      in a police station.  At that time senior members of  government  were
      at pains to make it clear that there would be no return to  operations
      under the Prevention of Terrorism Act or the revival of the  Emergency
      Regulations but that the police would operate only under  due  process
      in accordance with the requirements  of  the  ordinary  criminal  law,
      including compliance with the obligation to  produce  anyone  detained
      before the courts within 24 hours of detention. Given those events  it
      seems to us significant that there  is  no  suggestion  of  operations
      being carried out outside the normal provisions of  the  criminal  law
      save anecdotally to a limited extent which  is  not  said  to  involve
      arrest or detention. Secondly, the letter makes  clear  the  political
      will on the part of  the  government,  despite  political  differences
      between the Singhalese parties, to  avoid  a  return  to  a  state  of
      emergency by the swift reversal of one introduced for a  short  period
      only because of those internal differences. Negotiations in any  peace
      process are bound to be subject to fluctuations and to  stalling  from
      time to time.  There will inevitably be real  differences  based  upon
      the  past  experiences  of  both  sides  which  require  time  to   be
      accommodated.  Nevertheless, it has for some time now  been  the  case
      that there has been international acceptance of the appropriateness of
      return of failed asylum seekers unless there  are  clear  reasons  for
      considering that they may be particularly at risk.


  14. Ms O'Rourke urged upon us that the  absence  of  a  birth  certificate
      might  make  it  impossible  for  the  appellant  to  obtain   regular
      identification documents  on  her  return.   There  are  a  number  of
      difficulties with this submission.  To begin with, there is  no  clear
      evidence  that  the  respondent  is  not  in  possession  of  a  birth
      certificate or that she could not obtain it by requesting that  it  be
      forwarded to her by her family in Sri Lanka.  If returned, she will be
      issued with temporary travel documentation obtained by the Home Office
      in conjunction with the Sri Lankan High Commission in London  and  she
      will  not  re-enter  Sri  Lanka  undocumented.   The  issue  of   such
      documentation will entail an acceptance that she is who she  says  she
      is by the Sri Lankan authorities and the background information  makes
      clear that there are in  place  arrangements  in  Sri  Lanka  for  the
      provision of identity documents for those  returning  within  a  short
      timescale.  We do not consider there is any validity in this argument.

15.   Further, this respondent  has  never  admitted  being  either  a  past
      member or supporter of the LTTE but, even if she  had  done  so,  such
      support was at a low level in an LTTE controlled area in response to a
      situation of ongoing conflict which  no  longer  exists.   We  do  not
      accept that the severity of her treatment at a time when that conflict
      still continued has any relevance to a current risk.  From  the  point
      of view of the authorities, she is not someone who is  known  to  have
      assisted the LTTE in the past even in the minor way which she did. She
      was arrested in a  general  round-up  situation  arising  out  of  one
      specific incident where the  arrests  were  on  an  indiscriminate  as
      opposed to specifically  targeted  basis,  and  she  was  subsequently
      released without charge, albeit on payment of a bribe and with what we
      know to be fairly standard reporting conditions in such  circumstances
      from the many appeals with which we deal.  The statement  of  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities that failure to report is not a matter which  leads
      to any risk of further detention seems to us simply a matter of common
      sense.  Many Tamils were arrested and detained and  then  released  on
      such conditions.  The background evidence is that in the normal course
      after a short time such reporting conditions are dispensed  with.   It
      is simply a further  extension  to  the  accepted  view  that  release
      implies a  lack  of  any  continuing  interest  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities however it came about.

16.   Taking full account, as we say, of what is said in the  UNHCR  letter,
      there is no evidence before us capable of leading to  a  finding  that
      there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  or  real  possibility  that  the
      appellant  is  currently  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Sri   Lankan
      authorities or that she cannot safely be returned there.  Accordingly,
      she fails to discharge  the  comparatively  low  burden  upon  her  of
      demonstrating a current well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee
      Convention reason in her home area or of treatment in  breach  of  her
      protected human rights under Article 3 of the European Convention.

17.   We have not considered Article 8 issues as they  were  not  before  us
      for the reasons explained at the beginning of this determination.

18.   For the above reasons, on the grounds of  appeal  with  which  we  are
      seized challenging the allowing by the Adjudicator of  the  appeal  on
      asylum and Article 3 grounds, the appeal of the Secretary of State  is
      allowed.






                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
