
Heard at Field House
On 12 July 2004

         HB(Ethiopia EDP/UEDP members)Ethiopia CG [2004]UKIAT 00235

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                              25 August 2004


                                   Before:

                      Dr H. H. Storey (Vice President)
                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                              Mr C. H. Bennett


                                   Between


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Lewis, Counsel instructed by Otchere
                       Collisons, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Ethiopia  who  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Ms Linda Freestone, promulgated on  6
      January 2004, dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
      of the Secretary of State to refuse  both his asylum and human  rights
      claims.


   2. The Appellant was born on 27 July 1981 and is now 22  years  old.   He
      claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 16 July 2003 using false
      documents.  He claimed asylum on  17  July  2003.   The  Secretary  of
      State's decision to refuse his asylum claim and  to  issue  directions
      for his removal to Ethiopia was made on 15 September 2003.  This  gave
      rise to a right of appeal under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Appellant  appealed  on  25
      September 2003.

   3. In a statement prepared as part of his application dated 26 July 2003,
      the Appellant stated that he was born and bred  in  Gonder,  Ethiopia,
      some 700 km from Addis Ababa.  His father, a  supporter  of  the  Derg
      regime, had been killed by forces of the  EPRDF  in  1990.   In  1993,
      whilst at college studying  clinical  nursing,  the  Appellant  became
      involved with the Ethiopian Democratic Party (EDP),  although  he  did
      not become an "official member" until February 2001.   [See  E2]   The
      Appellant stated that he was  an  active  participant  of  the  party,
      contributing financially  to  it  and  taking  part  in  meetings  and
      demonstrations as well as  in  recruitment.   In  April  2001,  Gonder
      College boycotted classes in support  of  the  student  demonstrations
      taking place at the University in  Addis  Ababa.   As  a  result,  his
      college was closed for a week.  The Appellant said  that  he  was  the
      only member of the EDP at his college, although all  of  the  students
      participated in the boycott.

   4. The Appellant claimed that he was arrested on 28 April 2001 in  Gonder
      and accused of organising the demonstrations on behalf of the EDP.  He
      stated that he was released on 23 July 2001, some three months  later,
      on the basis that he signed a document promising not to  continue  his
      involvement with EDP.  He  claimed  that  he  was  released  on  bail.
      During the course of his detention, the Appellant said that he was ill
      treated.

   5. Almost two years passed.  On 11 May 2003, the Appellant  claimed  that
      the police were  looking  for  him.   He  was  not  at  home  and  the
      information is derived from what his mother told  him  to  the  effect
      that they wanted to arrest him because of their suspicions that he was
      still actively involved with the EDP.   The  Appellant  contacted  his
      uncle  who  made  arrangements  for  the  Appellant's  departure  from
      Ethiopia.

   6. When dealing  with  his  arrest  and  detention  in  April  2001,  the
      Appellant stated that he was one of 13 people arrested in  Gonder  and
      that he was unaware of whether his fellow detainees were  subsequently
      released.  See his answer to question 68 of  the  interview.   In  his
      answer to the following question, however, the Appellant  stated  that
      they were not released because, had they been, he  would  have  known.
      The Appellant was asked why the  authorities  waited  until  mid  2003
      before seeking to re-arrest him.  He answered:

           "I know  they  are  after  me  and  I  was  doing  my  political
           activities slowly and cautiously.  Maybe  they  were  trying  to
           collect enough evidence."

      The Adjudicator records in  paragraph  21  of  the  determination  the
      Appellant  explaining  in  evidence  that,  after  his  release,   his
      activities were carried out in a  clandestine  manner.   He  told  the
      Adjudicator that he attended meetings on a monthly basis but made sure
      no one was following him.  In paragraph 22 of a statement prepared  by
      the Appellant and dated 3 November 2003, the  Appellant's  account  of
      his involvement after his release in July 2001 was described in  these
      terse terms:


           "I continued to participate despite the governments threats.   I
           have got a commitment to my nation and my people and I was ready
           to expose the government about its political  incorrectness  and
           about its Administration."


      It is difficult for the Tribunal to deduce from this passage what  the
      Appellant was actually doing.


   7.  Since  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the   Appellant   has
      participated in the activities of the EDP, now  the  United  Ethiopian
      Democratic Party, (UEDP).  In the Country Report for  Ethiopia,  dated
      April 2004, prepared by CIPU, the UEDP is referred to on page 68.  The
      party was formed in July 2003, at about the same time as the Appellant
      left Ethiopia,  and  was  an  amalgamation  of  the  EDP  and  another
      Ethiopian party, the EDUP.   The  current  head  of  the  UEDP  is  Dr
      Gebeyehu.  It is one of a number of political parties in Ethiopia.   A
      full list is set out at Annex B of the CIPU report (page 65).  In  the
      May/August elections of 2000, prior to the formation of the UEDP,  the
      EDP managed to gain two  seats  in  Parliament.   The  Oromo  People's
      Democratic  Organisation  polled  178  seats.   The  Amhara   National
      Democratic Movement polled 134.  These two parties represent over  one
      half (312) of the 546 seats  in  Parliament.   The  EPRDF  managed  19
      seats.

   8. The state of the opposition parties is referred to in  paragraph  5.26
      of CIPU, derived from an IRIN news report of August 2003 to the effect
      that 15 Ethiopian opposition parties had  formed  what  was  called  a
      "rainbow coalition" to challenge the political  hold  of  the  current
      government.  The United Ethiopian Democratic Forces became the largest
      coalition opposition within the country.  Among the other main parties
      is the UEDP.  The UEDP is specifically referred to in paragraphs  5.40
      to 5.43.  It is said that the party has some 20,000 members.

   9. In paragraph 35 of the determination,  the  Adjudicator  accepted  the
      Appellant's account of his arrest during the student revolt  in  2001.
      She found it implausible, however, that, having been released in  July
      2001, the authorities would show any interest  in  the  Appellant  two
      years later in May 2003.  Yet it was this incident, according  to  the
      Appellant, that prompted his departure from Ethiopia.  The Adjudicator
      recorded that the Appellant did not provide any evidence  of  specific
      incidents of activity that would have brought him to the attention  of
      the  authorities,  as  he  claims,  in  mid-2003.   Accordingly,   the
      Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant's activities in Ethiopia were
      not such as to establish the reasonable likelihood of  persecution  on
      return  or  a  violation  of  his  human  rights.   In  addition,  the
      Adjudicator considered the Appellant's involvement in the UEDP in  the
      United Kingdom and concluded that this, too, would not  engage  either
      Convention.

  10. The Appellant appealed.  In  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  Appellant
      relies upon the positive findings of fact made by the  Adjudicator  as
      to the Appellant's involvement in the demonstrations  of  April  2001.
      In paragraph 1(vi) of the grounds, it is  said  that  the  Adjudicator
      accepted the Appellant's account that in May 2003 he was  informed  by
      his mother that the police were looking for  him  on  account  of  his
      political activities.  This is simply  incorrect.   The  Tribunal  has
      considered the Adjudicator's findings and  it  is  apparent  that  the
      Adjudicator rejected the totality of the Appellant's account that  the
      authorities showed any interest in the Appellant in May 2003, some two
      years after  his  arrest  in  2001.   In  our  judgment,  this  was  a
      substantial misstatement of the Adjudicator's findings and  one  which
      may have  influenced  the  grant  of  permission  given  by  the  Vice
      President.

  11. It was submitted by Mr Lewis on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
      Appellant  remained  and  remains  of  continuing  interest   to   the
      authorities.  Given that he had been detained, tortured and  told  not
      to participate further, he submitted the Appellant was not  simply  an
      ordinary member of the UEDP.  In support of his submissions he  relied
      upon a list of essential reading.  This may be summarised in the  sub-
      headings provided by him:

           Human Rights Violations.  According to the US  State  Department
           Report, 2003, the government  continued  to  arrest  and  detain
           persons   arbitrarily,   particularly   those    suspected    of
           sympathising with or  being  members  of  the  OLF.   There  are
           credible reports of widespread human rights abuses.
           Treatment of Political Opposition.  On 19 April  2001,  one  EDP
           member was shot and killed by security forces at  his  home  and
           "about 40 EDP members were arrested", including  the  Secretary-
           General and one executive member.  This was part of the  student
           protests.  Information on the EDP's website  indicated  that  in
           April 2002, 23 EDP members were arrested and "some were released
           after they were told they will be shot in their  heads  if  they
           organise any opposition."
           Restriction  on  Human   Rights   Reporting.    The   government
           restricted  freedom  of  the  press  and  continued  to  harass,
           threaten, arrest and detain journalists.
           Impunity of Security Forces.  Security forces  guilty  of  Human
           Rights violations were not held responsible by the government.
           Absence of Judicial Oversight.  Although nominally  independent,
           the judicial process is  subject  to  political  pressure.   The
           judicial process is flawed.

  12. Mr Lewis sought leave to adduce fresh evidence.  He told the  Tribunal
      that he had been informed by staff from the Tribunal on the  Wednesday
      before the hearing that the appeal was being considered as  a  country
      guidance case.  As a result, his Instructing Solicitors were  able  to
      seek funding for an expert report to assist the Tribunal.  The  report
      dated 9 July 2004 has been prepared by  Dr  JR  Campbell  of  SOAS,  a
      Senior Lecturer at the Department of Sociology and Anthropology.


  13. In paragraph 68 of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  E  and  R
      [2004] EWCA Civ 49, it  was  noted  that  an  appellate  court  has  a
      discretion to admit new evidence (CPR 52.11(2)), but  it  is  normally
      exercised subject to Ladd v Marshall principles, raising in particular
      the issue whether  the  material  could  and  should  have  been  made
      available before the decision. In paragraph 88,  the  Court  extracted
      three principles from its earlier decision  in  Khan  v  Secretary  of
      State [2003] EWCA Civ 530, the last of which was that:
                 "c    It  illustrates  the  intrinsic  difficulty  in  many
                 asylum cases of obtaining reliable evidence  of  the  facts
                 giving rise to the fear of persecution, and  the  need  for
                 some flexibility in the  application  of  Ladd  v  Marshall
                 principles. "
    The Court concluded:
          "92. In relation to the role of the IAT, we have concluded
              a. The Tribunal remained seized of the appeal,  and  therefore
                 able to take account of new evidence,  up  until  the  time
                 when the decision was formally notified to the parties;
              b.  Following  the  decision,  when  it  was  considering  the
                 applications for leave to appeal to this Court,  it  had  a
                 discretion to direct  a  re-hearing;  this  power  was  not
                 dependent on its finding an arguable error of  law  in  its
                 original decision.
              c. However, in exercising such discretion,  the  principle  of
                 finality would be important. To justify reopening the case,
                 the IAT would normally need to be satisfied that there  was
                 a risk of serious injustice, because of something which had
                 gone wrong at the hearing, or some important evidence which
                 had been overlooked; and in considering  whether  to  admit
                 new evidence, it  should  be  guided  by  Ladd  v  Marshall
                 principles, subject to any exceptional factors."
  14. Applying these principles, we were satisfied that the report should be
      admitted.   Its late production is explained by the  late  designation
      of the appeal as a potential guideline case.  It is at least  arguable
      that funding would not have  been  permitted  unless  and  until  that
      designation was made known.


  15. The principal  discussion  in  the  report  concerns  the  Appellant's
      involvement with the UEDP in London:


           "A further problem exists  for  the  Appellant.   As  an  active
           member of the London branch of the UEDP - an electoral  alliance
           which the EDP entered into several years ago -  his  activities,
           and those of the UEDP will have been monitored  by  a  Political
           Councillor  at  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  in   London.    Embassy
           officials actively cultivate links with resident  Ethiopians  in
           England and actively monitor their political activities.   Until
           recently this activity  was  co-ordinated  by  a  Major  in  the
           Federal Police who was appointed to the  Embassy  between  1998-
           2000.
           In the refusal letter, an assumption is made (paragraph 9)  that
           because the EDP is a registered political party, that membership
           in it is protected by the Constitution.  I would point out  that
           even a cursory examination of  human  rights  reports  makes  it
           clear that rank and file members and supporters  (really,  those
           suspected  of  supporting  a  party)  are  routinely   harassed,
           arrested and detained for varying periods of time without  being
           charged.   Furthermore,  a  routine  outcome  of  detention   is
           mistreatment/torture."


  16.  The  Adjudicator  found  the  Appellant's  account  to   be   broadly
      consistent.  See paragraph 34  of  the  determination.   However,  she
      expressed one significant reservation.  She did not find it  plausible
      that, two years after the Appellant's release, he would be  approached
      by the authorities.  In our view, the Adjudicator was fully  justified
      in concluding that there was no  credible  evidence  of  any  specific
      incident in the period 2001 to 2003.  The Appellant's  own  statement,
      also found at E4, is to the effect that he continued to participate in
      the EDP despite government threats  but  he  failed  to  identify  any
      activities likely to have  caused  renewed  interest.  In  any  event,
      according to his interview, his  activities  were  being  carried  out
      cautiously [question 71].  The Adjudicator recorded in paragraph 21 of
      the determination that everything he did after his release was done in
      a clandestine manner.  In which case it is unclear on  what  basis  he
      considered he was kept under surveillance.


  17. The only reason provided by the Appellant for his leaving Ethiopia  is
      contained in his statement:


           "My mother informed me that they wanted  to  arrest  me  because
           they suspect I was still actively involved with the EDP."

      However, no information is provided as to how the  Appellant's  mother
      came to know of the intention of the authorities or their  motivation.
      In our view, the Adjudicator was not obliged to attach weight to  such
      tenuous evidence.


  18. Such interest as the authorities may have shown in  the  Appellant  in
      May 2003 must be assessed in the light of the  events  of  2001.   His
      arrest arose in the context  of  student  demonstrations  involving  a
      boycott of the college by all the students.  He  was  one  of  several
      arrested.  We consider that it was open to the Adjudicator to conclude
      that the Appellant's evidence failed to provide any clear  reason  why
      the authorities would wish to approach him two years later.


  19. What are we to make of the Adjudicator's assessment of the EDP/UEDP in
      the light of the further materials now before us?  Such involvement as
      the Appellant had with  the  EDP/UEDP  should  be  considered  in  the
      knowledge that it is a  legal  party,  that  it  has  participated  in
      elections and, in May 2000, won two seats in Addis Ababa.   The  April
      2004 CIPU deals with the two parties in these terms:



           Ethiopian Democratic Party


           5.39 Political Parties of the World, updated January 2002 stated
           that, "The EDP was formed in 1998 following a split in  the  All
           Amhara People's Organization [AAPO]. It  fielded  15  candidates
           for the federal House of People's Representatives in  May  2000,
           winning two seats in Addis Ababa.  Its  policies  included  land
           reforms to benefit peasant farmers. EDP party members (including
           candidates in current local  government  elections)  were  among
           those targeted by the security forces in May 2001 in a  campaign
           against 'political activists' following the violent  suppression
           of student demonstrations in Addis Ababa".


           United Ethiopian Democratic Party


           5.40 IRIN news observed that the EDP  has  since  joined  forces
           with the Ethiopian Democratic Union Party  to  form  the  United
           Ethiopian Democratic Party (UEDP). Its leader Dr Admasu Gebeyehu
           said it had some 20,000 members and described it as 'one of  the
           largest' political parties in the country.
           5.41 The US State Department  Human  Rights  Report  2003  noted
           that,  "On  September  30  [2003],  six  policemen  removed  the
           national flag from the office of the United Ethiopia  Democratic
           Party (UEDP) in Masha Woreda, Sheka Zone, Southern  Region,  and
           detained UEDP  representative  Berhanu  Hailu  in  Masha  police
           prison for 3 weeks. He was released after  posting  $580  (5,000
           birr)".
           5.42 The US State Department  Human  Rights  Report  2003  noted
           that, "Some opposition political parties charged the  Government
           with deliberately obstructing  their  attempts  to  hold  public
           meetings. Local government officials granted the UEDP permission
           to conduct a conference in Mekelle on June 29  [2003];  however,
           on the day of the conference, UEDP officials were told that  the
           regional government needed the hall for an urgent  meeting,  and
           UEDP was denied its meeting venue".
           5.43 The US report further noted that, "Two  teachers  in  Masha
           Woreda were dismissed [from their jobs]  for  being  members  of
           UEDP".

  20. It is apparent  from  these  passages  that  EDP  party  members  were
      targeted by the security forces in May 2001 following the  suppression
      of  the  student  demonstrations  in  Addis  Ababa.   Thereafter,   as
      paragraphs 5.41 and 5.43  make  clear,  the  incidents  of  harassment
      against UEDP members were specific events: in one case, following  the
      removal of the national flag from the UEDP office in Mashe Woreda;  in
      the other (in the same location), the dismissal of  two  teachers  who
      were members of the party.  These two events do not reveal  widespread
      or routine harassment against the UEDP.

  21. We were also referred to the documents at page 203 of the bundle  from
      the Research Directorate, Immigration and Refugee Board, Ottawa, dated
      27 August 2002.  Amongst other things, this  records  the  arrest  and
      detention for 50 days of 4 EDP members, one of  whom  was  rearrested.
      The arrests  were  reportedly  because  opposition  parties  had  been
      implicated  in  trying  to  destabilise  the   government.    Further,
      according to Human Rights Watch, of 100 or  so  EDP  members  arrested
      during the course of 2001, 90 were released without  charge  and  four
      others were released on bail.  The seven others, however,  were  still
      in custody without charge in November 2001.

  22. The Adjudicator's overall assessment is set out in paragraph 36 of his
      determination:

           "I  do  not  find  that  the  objective  evidence  supports  the
           Appellant's claim that grass roots members of the UEDP  are  now
           being routinely harassed and targeted by the  authorities.   The
           only objective  evidence  in  this  respect  that  I  have  been
           referred to is at paragraph 5.20 of the CIPU report that  states
           that  there  had  been  credible  reports  of  violence  against
           opposition members.  This is a very general risk to all  members
           of opposition parties.  I do not find that this establishes that
           the Appellant with his  particular  profile,  attending  monthly
           meetings of the EDP clandestinely and giving financial  support,
           is a real risk of persecution."


  23. In our judgment, even in the  light  of  more  recent  materials,  the
      Adjudicator's conclusion remains sustainable insofar as conditions  in
      Ethiopia are concerned.


  24. Dr Campbell in his recent report of 9 July 2004 states on page 2:

           "The Appellant describes  a  pattern  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
           detention in which the focus  of  the  authorities  concern  his
           membership in the  EDP;  the  Appellant's  political  activities
           would have been known to security officials.  There are numerous
           cases of security officials repeatedly visiting the  home  of  a
           "suspect" at which time they harass and threaten (sometimes they
           also beat and arrest) the person and his/her family.   Thousands
           of supporters of registered  opposition  political  parties  had
           been  picked  up,  detained  without  charge,  and  released  on
           warning/ bail.  Frequently officials  return  to  harass  former
           detainees and their families, making  life  extremely  difficult
           for such persons (in addition to detention,  salaries  and  bank
           accounts are frozen,  and  individuals  may  be  dismissed  from
           government jobs, etc)."


  25.  We do not find that we can attach significant weight to Dr Campbell's
      report.   Principally,  that  is  because  the  description   of   the
      Appellant's history given to Dr Campbell  does  not  accord  with  the
      Appellant's own account.  The Appellant speaks of a single arrest  and
      detention following a student demonstration.  Thus it is  improper  to
      describe his case as evincing  "a  pattern  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
      detention  in  which  the  focus  of  the  authorities  concerns   his
      membership in the EDP."  Furthermore, the Appellant's claim  that  his
      activities were carried out in a clandestine manner is contrary to  Dr
      Campbell's note that the Appellant's political activities  would  have
      been known to security  officials.   Mr  Lewis  informed  us  that  he
      advised his Instructing Solicitors to  supply  Dr  Campbell  with  the
      Appellant's  statement,  the  refusal  letter  and  the  Adjudicator's
      determination.  None  of  these  documents  refers  to  a  pattern  of
      arbitrary arrest and detention of this Appellant.  Furthermore, whilst
      over  the  years,  a  headcount  of  those  supporters  of  registered
      opposition parties detained without charge may run into thousands, the
      specific incidents of harassment involving members of the EDP/UEDP  do
      not establish widespread abuses.


  26. We now turn to whether the risk faced by  the  Appellant  is  altered,
      substantially or at all, by reason of his involvement with the UEDP in
      London.  At page 10 of the Appellant's bundle, we find a letter  dated
      5 November 2003 from Mr Lemma, the Chairman of the  Support  Committee
      of the UEDP in London.  This confirms that the Appellant  has  been  a
      member of the Support Committee in the  United  Kingdom  since  August
      2003.  It continues:

           "During  this  time,  he  has  been  actively  involved  in  the
           activities  of  the  Support  Committee   by   discharging   his
           responsibilities by way of attending  meetings  and  paying  his
           membership contribution."


  27. The Chairman of the Support Committee, quite properly, does  not  seek
      to express an opinion on whether the  Appellant  is  at  risk  in  the
      United Kingdom or on return to Ethiopia.


  28. We have already set out Dr Campbell's assessment of the risk faced  by
      those involved with the UEDP in London in paragraph 15, above.  On the
      basis of his assessment, we are prepared to accept that the  Ethiopian
      Embassy in London  monitors  the  political  activities  of  Ethiopian
      citizens resident in England.  However, we are unable to  accept  that
      this means that the Embassy's officials are capable of monitoring  the
      activity of every Ethiopian citizen. Simple constraints  of  resources
      must inevitably mean that the Embassy will concentrate upon  the  more
      important or  the  most  active  opposition  figures.   It  cannot  be
      inferred that the Appellant, described by the organisation  itself  as
      "discharging his responsibilities by way  of  attending  meetings  and
      paying  his  membership  contribution"  is  an  obvious   target   for
      surveillance.  There are also, of course, significant difficulties  in
      an Embassy official identifying an individual, even if his  photograph
      is taken.  Short of having a database with which the photograph can be
      compared,  surveillance  by  the  Embassy  is  unlikely  to  lead   to
      identification without further information being supplied.  Bearing in
      mind the Appellant's relatively minor role in the UEDP in London,  the
      Tribunal is not satisfied that the fresh material establishes that the
      Appellant's activities in London will place him at risk on return.  We
      consider that it is speculative to say that he is monitored in the way
      suggested by Dr Campbell:


           "As an active member of the London branch  of  the  UEDP...  his
           activities... will have been monitored by a Political Councillor
           at the Ethiopian Embassy in London."




  29.  We have also considered the statement made by Dr  Campbell  on  pages
      2/3 of  his  report  to  the  effect  that  all  individuals  who  are
      repatriated to Ethiopia are detained and questioned  at  the  port  of
      entry.  He goes on to say that if the authorities determine the person
      left the country illegally i.e. without a valid exit visa and/or using
      an illegally  obtained  passport,  the  person  will  be  indefinitely
      detained.  At page 18 of the US State Department Report for  Ethiopia,
      2002, we find:


           "The law requires citizens and residents to obtain an exit  visa
           before departing the country."

      The Appellant stated at page 9 his statement of 3 November  2003  that
      he entered the United Kingdom using a false passport because he  could
      not obtain a legal passport from the Ethiopian authorities.   He  also
      said that he did not know the details of  that  passport  because  the
      agent held that passport at all times.  In the course of his Screening
      Interview, however, the Appellant gave a somewhat different account:

           "I did not see the name in the passport.  The agent told  me  in
           case I was stopped to give my name.  [Question: Was your picture
           in the passport?] Yes, because I have already given my  picture.
           The agent told me to give my name and date of birth  in  case  I
           was stopped.  If the passport control ask  your  name,  you  can
           give them your name and date of birth."

  30.  On this material we consider that the passport used by the  Appellant
      contained his correct biographical details and his photograph.   There
      is little to suggest that the passport did not also  contain  an  exit
      visa, as one would be required on departure.  In these  circumstances,
      it is difficult to understand what the Appellant meant by its being  a
      false  passport.   Be  that  as  it  may,  the  material  before   the
      Adjudicator and the Tribunal is insufficient  to  establish  that  the
      Appellant left the country illegally, that is  without  a  valid  exit
      visa or using an illegally obtained passport.


   Conclusions


  31. In our judgment, the Adjudicator reached a sustainable  conclusion  in
      rejecting the Appellant's account that  the  authorities  demonstrated
      any interest in the Appellant two years  after  his  arrest  in  April
      2001, following his involvement in a  student  demonstration.   Almost
      the sole basis for the Appellant's claim to be of continuing  interest
      is the Adjudicators reference in paragraph 21 of her determination  to
      his evidence that, after  his  release,  he  acted  in  a  clandestine
      manner,  even  though  he   was   being   kept   under   surveillance.
      Nevertheless, this did not prevent him attending meetings on a monthly
      basis as "he would make sure  no  one  was  following  him."   In  our
      judgment, the Adjudicator was entirely justified in placing little  or
      no weight on the Appellant's own assertion, without more, that he  was
      under surveillance.  This aspect of  his  claim  is  not  referred  to
      elsewhere.  Furthermore, the objective evidence  does  not  support  a
      claim that members of the UEDP are subjected to routine persecution.

  32. We are also satisfied, having considered the fresh material, that  the
      report of Dr Campbell does not establish to  a  reasonable  likelihood
      that the Appellant's activities with the UEDP in London place  him  at
      risk.  In particular, we consider the Appellant's limited  involvement
      as one  who  attends  meetings  and  pays  his  contributions  is  not
      reasonably likely to result in his being monitored or identified.  Nor
      do we consider that the circumstances  in  which  the  Appellant  left
      Ethiopia have been demonstrated as likely to result in  his  detention
      (whether or not indefinitely) on return.  For these  reasons,  we  are
      satisfied that the Adjudicator reached a sustainable conclusion.   The
      appeal is dismissed.

  Decision:  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.







Andrew Jordan
Vice President
13 August 2004
Approved for electronic distribution

