

           AB (Algeria - scope of remittals) Algeria [2004] UKIAT 00323
                                                    | |
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                      Date:  1 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            21 December 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr A Jordan (Vice President)

Between:




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, instructed by Irving and Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Adjudicator's determination

  1. The Claimant in this appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  a  male
     national of Algeria, who arrived in the United Kingdom in  June  2000,
     and three weeks later claimed asylum.  His asylum claim  was  rejected
     by the Secretary of State in January 2001.  He appealed on asylum  and
     human rights grounds to an Adjudicator, Dr A Thorndike, who  dismissed
     his appeals under both Conventions in a determination promulgated on 7
     December 2001.

  2. The Adjudicator found that the Claimant was credible in all  respects.
     The Claimant was then a 28 year old.  He had run  a  grocery  shop  in
     Blida, a large town 40 kms west of Algiers, in the so-called "triangle
     of death".  The shop was on the ground floor of the family house where
     his mother lived.  In 1993, armed  men  had  demanded  food;  in  1997
     terrorists had demanded �5,000, but he had refused to give it to  them
     and had reported the matter to the police.  The  police  took  details
     and when the terrorists returned to repeat their  demand,  he  refused
     again.  Four to five months later, a letter  arrived  saying  that  he
     would be killed because he had gone to the police.  He then spent time
     in another family house.  In 1998, his brother, an army conscript  was
     shot and badly injured by, it appears, a gunman.   The  Claimant  then
     closed the shop.  By this time, the Government had built a police post
     close to the shop but in January 2000,  after  the  Claimant  had  re-
     opened the shop, the police post  was  attacked  by  terrorists.   The
     Claimant decided that that was  enough  and  left  to  live  with  his
     grandmother some 60 kms away but as that arrangement could  not  last,
     he left for France.  Fearing that he would  be  deported  quickly,  he
     left for the United Kingdom.  His family was  not  under  any  threat.
     The police post remained manned but there had been some bomb incidents
     in the area.

  3. The asylum claim was dismissed because he had not been persecuted  for
     a  Convention  reason;   matters  had  improved  greatly   since   his
     departure; there was an adequate level of protection and the continued
     guard post evidenced that.  His family was not under threat and if  he
     had really had a well-founded fear of persecution he would have sought
     asylum in France.

  4. The ECHR claim was dismissed because he would face only  a  relatively
     mild interrogation at the airport.

  5. The Adjudicator said,  but  did  not  explain  why,  he  reached  that
     decision with genuine regret.  It is not obvious  why,  either.   This
     gratuitous comment should not have been made, at least in the  absence
     of some clear justification.  The  Claimant  had  no  sound  claim  to
     international protection.  He was a single male in  his  twenties,  in
     reasonable health, who had no family here and had  only  been  in  the
     country eighteen months at the time.

  6. The Claimant appealed on the ground that the evidence did not  support
     the conclusion that there had been a change  of  such  magnitude  that
     someone who had been of interest to a terrorist group could now return
     safely to Algeria.  The Tribunal, (Mr Batiste VP Chairman),  concluded
     that there was at  least  a  significant  doubt  about  the  level  of
     violence in Blida.  As the Claimant  did  not  know  which  group  had
     threatened him, it was not possible to conclude that  the  threat  was
     over.  The Tribunal took into account more recent  material  than  the
     Adjudicator had been able to do.  It concluded that the  Claimant  was
     justified in his fear of return to Blida now.

  7. The Tribunal then examined whether there were other areas  of  Algeria
     to which the Claimant could return and concluded that there were  many
     places to which he could safely return, of which  Algiers  itself  was
     the most obvious, but not the only one.  An assessment  needed  to  be
     made of whether internal relocation would be unduly  harsh.   However,
     the Adjudicator had made no findings about that and  as  evidence  was
     required before a conclusion could be reached on that  limited  issue,
     the case was remitted to Dr Thorndike.  It was remitted on 7 May  2002
     in these terms:

           "In the circumstances, we have decided to adopt the  suggestions
           of both Representatives.  We allow this appeal  to  the  limited
           extent that it is remitted to Dr Thorndike to take evidence  and
           decide whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh."

  8. The Tribunal also remarked, and we would endorse what is said:

           "We would suggest it is good practice for Adjudicators in  cases
           such as this where internal flight could be an  issue,  to  make
           appropriate findings, even if not strictly required in the light
           of their primary conclusions,  so  as  to  avoid  the  need  for
           remittal."

  9. Matters then got into something of a procedural tangle.

 10. When the appeal was remitted to the Adjudicator,  and  notwithstanding
     the apparent suggestion of both parties that the remittal be  for  the
     limited purpose of dealing with whether internal relocation  would  be
     unduly harsh, the Adjudicator records that it had been  referred  back
     for further consideration in the light of new objective evidence.   We
     can see no suggestion that that was the purpose of the remittal.

 11. The  Adjudicator  heard  further  evidence  from  the  Claimant.   His
     grandmother lived in a secure and prosperous suburb of Algiers, but it
     had not been practicable for him to  stay  there  permanently  because
     there was little room.  He had never registered with the police  there
     because he was terrified that they would pass on his details to  their
     allies  among  the  terrorists.   The  family  had  another  house  in
     Boudouaou, some 45 kms from  Blida,  where  his  wounded  brother  now
     lived.  The shop remained closed and the  rest  of  his  family  still
     lived above it.  He had never worked anywhere other than in the  shop,
     although he agreed that he had business skills.  Boudouaou  and  Blida
     were too dangerous to live in. Nowhere was safe because of the network
     of GIA terrorists and their informants which would find him  out.   If
     he lived and registered with  the  police  in  the  suburb  where  his
     grandmother lived, he would be unable to venture out of that  area  as
     his whereabouts would be known to the terrorists.

 12. The submissions are important.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
     relied on the same CIPU Report as had been before the Tribunal to urge
     that essentially all the larger towns were  safe  and  that,  as  many
     others had done voluntarily, he could relocate to one of them.  He was
     young, unattached, with relevant skills, and now fit.  The absence  of
     contacts or jobs in those cities could  not  be  a  factor  of  weight
     because he had come to the United Kingdom in precisely that situation.



 13. Mr Bazini, who appeared then as now for the Claimant,  submitted  that
     the Claimant had a well-founded fear nationally.   He  would  have  to
     register with the police, and informers would let the GIA  know.   The
     expert  evidence  of  Mr  Joffe  was  that  terrorists  groups  had  a
     nationwide network of information  partly  derived  from  the  police,
     including  in  Algiers.   This  was  supported  by  a  December   2001
     Supplementary Bulletin from CIPU, and other press reports.  He faced a
     specific threat of death.  He would experience  mental  torture  as  a
     result of his deep-seated fear which would  cause  him  on  return  to
     suffer inhuman treatment.

 14. The Adjudicator's conclusions are brief, and we set them out in full:

           "25.  In reaching my conclusions I have taken account of all the
                 evidence before me, including the  background  information.
                 I have carefully reviewed my earlier Determination  and  it
                 is clear that the conclusions  drawn  at  that  time  (late
                 2001) are not justified in the light of new evidence.


           26.    I  repeat  my  positive  findings  on   credibility.    I
                 acknowledge neither Blida nor Boudouaou are safe places for
                 this appellant.  I note the case of Demirkaya [1999]  where
                 it  was  held  that  past  persecution  means  that  future
                 persecution is more likely (and the fear of it more  likely
                 to be well-founded) unless there  has  been  a  fundamental
                 change in circumstances.  I note the recent press and other
                 reports in  the  appellant's  bundle  which  indicate  that
                 although  terrorist  activities  are  constrained  in   the
                 cities, attacks still take  place.   Above  all,  I  cannot
                 ignore the  death  threat  and  the  extensive  network  of
                 information operated by the terror groups.


           27.  [The claimant] is clearly in considerable fear and internal
                 flight is not in my considered opinion reasonable.   Return
                 followed by relocation would also involve  hardship  as  he
                 would be socially isolated, living in fear, not being  able
                 to live a 'normal'  life.   Return  would  certainly  cause
                 great anguish, breaching the Article 3 threshold, and could
                 result in injury or possibly  even  death,  for  daring  to
                 oppose  the  GIA,  namely  for  a  Convention  reason.    I
                 therefore allow the appeals."

 15.  The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  to  the  Tribunal  against  that
     determination, promulgated on 26 November 2002,  in  relation  to  its
     findings on the availability of internal relocation, which it was said
     was the only point remitted to the Adjudicator.  He had failed to give
     due weight to the evidence in the CIPU Report and had  been  wrong  to
     prefer the  evidence  of  Mr  Joffe.   He  failed  to  deal  with  the
     availability of protection, and a different decision of  the  Tribunal
     was noted.  No consideration had  been  given  to  the  potential  for
     residing with the grandmother.

 16. This appeal was  first  considered  by  the  Tribunal,  (Chairman,  Mr
     Mackey), in a determination  promulgated  on  31  October  2003.   The
     appeal was allowed.  It rejected a submission from Mr Bazini that  the
     determination  of  Mr  Batiste's  panel  had   wrongly   limited   the
     consideration of the  Adjudicator  on  remittal  to  the  question  of
     whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh,  and  that  safety,
     which encompasses the question of protection as well, was too  closely
     tied to the question of harshness for the two to be separated in  that
     way.  We comment that that submission would not appear to  tally  with
     the suggestions, recorded by Mr Batiste as coming from both parties in
     front of him, as to what course should be followed.  Mr Mackey's panel
     rejected the submission because although there was an overlap  between
     the issues, the question of whether there were places to which someone
     in the Claimant's position could safely relocate had  been  explicitly
     settled by the decision  of  Mr  Batiste's  panel,  leaving  only  the
     particular circumstances of the Claimant to be examined.

 17. The Adjudicator's specific reasons on relocation,  the  basis  of  his
     conclusions on Article 3, and the risk to the Claimant  were  rejected
     in short order  as  unsustainable  and  unreasonable.   Permission  to
     appeal was refused.

 18. The issues raised on the application for leave to appeal were  (1)  as
     to whether the effect of the terms of the remittal by Mr  Batiste  was
     to limit the scope of the Adjudicator's determination when the matters
     were again before him, (2) that the Tribunal had failed to address the
     new evidence which the Adjudicator  had  before  him  on  that  second
     occasion and (3), having ignored the significance  of  the  Claimant's
     evidence  about  registering  with  the  police,  ought  not  to  have
     interfered with the Adjudicator's decision.  The matter was to come on
     for an oral hearing of the permission application  when  the  Tribunal
     determination  was  quashed  by  the  consent  of  the  parties.   The
     statement of reasons says that it is "arguable" that Mr Mackey's panel
     erred in its conclusion that the Adjudicator was unreasonable  because
     it  had  failed  to  deal  with  the  Joffe  evidence   about   police
     registration.   The  Secretary  of  State  also  now   "considers   it
     appropriate" that the separation  of  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of
     protection and internal relocation  should  cease  and  that  the  two
     should be considered together.

 19. Accordingly the  matter  now  comes  before  us.   A  few  preliminary
     observations are necessary.   First,  it  would  obviously  have  been
     better if the representatives of both parties  who  suggested,  as  Mr
     Batiste records, that the matter be remitted on a  limited  basis  had
     not made that suggestion.  Neither  kept  to  it.   Mr  Bazini  argued
     before both the Adjudicator and Mr Mackey that there was no  effective
     limit and appears at those stages  to  have  met  some  understandable
     resistance from the Secretary of State.  The latter does not appear to
     have thought through what his position was, until conceding the  point
     without resistance before the Court of Appeal.  If the  views  of  the
     parties as expressed to Mr Batiste's panel  had  been  what  they  now
     appear to be, namely that there was no effective exercise of the power
     to limit the remittal in the way they suggested, other  courses  might
     have been followed:  the taking of evidence by  the  Tribunal  or  the
     exercise of a specific remittal power for the purpose only  of  taking
     evidence on a particular point.

 20. Second, we repeat our endorsement of what Mr Batiste said at paragraph
     12 of his determination.  We  add  that  wherever  possible  remittals
     should be avoided  and  the  Claimant  should  have  realised  that  a
     possible conclusion of the Adjudicator was that he could safely return
     or return to a different place.  He should have given  evidence  about
     it to the Adjudicator first time round.  It is for  an  applicant  for
     international protection to go further than to show that he has a well-
     founded fear in his home area;  it is inherent in the  claim  that  he
     has such a well-founded fear in any place in  that  country  where  it
     would not be "unduly harsh" for him to relocate.  The burden of  proof
     does not switch to the host country, on account of persecution in  the
     home area, to show where within the country  of  origin  he  would  be
     safe.  A remittal to deal with that issue is therefore unnecessary  if
     evidence that he cannot relocate to another part has not been adduced.
      It simply fails.  If, however, such evidence has  been  adduced,  the
     Tribunal should be  able  in  most  instances  to  assess  it  without
     remittal.  Of course, much will depend on the reason for  the  alleged
     persecution;  but where persecution or want of protection is or may be
     localised to the home area, the applicant must  show  that  his  well-
     founded fear is so extensive as to cover all areas to which  he  might
     reasonably relocate.  We emphasise that because it  has  become  clear
     that, in fact, even with the Adjudicator's second determination, there
     is very little which has been drawn from the Claimant at any stage  on
     whether relocation would be unduly harsh, and  none  which  could  not
     have been given shortly to the Tribunal.  Yet the problem  created  by
     the remittal for that limited  purpose  has  effectively  delayed  the
     resolution of this case for some long time.

 21. Third, there was a specific power in the 2000  Procedure  Rules,  Rule
     22(7) (a), available to Mr Batiste, had he been aware  that  what  was
     suggested to him would prove contentious, to  remit  a  case  for  the
     purpose of this evidence being taken.  It  is  not  a  power  commonly
     exercised, and has no direct counterpart in the  2003  Rules,  but  Mr
     Batiste might have used it.  We also mention it because, although  the
     terms of the remittal purport to limit the nature of the issues before
     the Adjudicator, the 2000 Rules contained no power for a limit  to  be
     imposed, apart from Rule 22(7), and  we  do  not  consider  that  that
     Tribunal was in fact exercising any such power.

 22. Fourth, although the parties have agreed that the two issues should be
     joined, the reasons for the quashing are silent, rightly, as  to  what
     the nature of the Adjudicator's  powers  are  upon  such  a  remittal.
     There is no judgment of the Court of Appeal and  it  is  not  for  the
     parties to reach such a decision. It calls for judicial determination.
      It is an issue which needs to be addressed.  To us, it is clear that,
     apart from any specific Rule, there is no power to  limit  the  issues
     which are considered upon  a  remittal.   The  appeal  is  before  the
     Adjudicator who may or may not be the same Adjudicator  as  heard  the
     first appeal.  The appeal remains to be determined.  It is open to the
     parties to raise fresh issues, to adduce fresh evidence,  to  seek  to
     contradict what has previously been concluded and to change the stance
     which has previously been adopted towards any evidence.   Accordingly,
     the intentions of Mr Batiste's  panel  could  not  be  effected,  Rule
     22(7)(a) apart.  Mr Mackey's panel erred in  holding  that  there  was
     such a limit; and the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  re-examine  his
     earlier conclusions.

 23. Fifth, it does not follow at all from that that upon  a  remittal  the
     Tribunal should not express what issue has  caused  the  remittal  and
     what the Adjudicator needs to focus on.  Quite  the  contrary.   There
     may be no fresh evidence or argument  on  other  issues.   Even  where
     there is, it should assist the conclusions of the Adjudicator to avoid
     error or at least its repetition.

 24. Sixth, when an Adjudicator is dealing with a remittal on such a basis,
     it is an error of law for him to ignore what  the  Tribunal  has  said
     about the issues which have not occasioned the remittal and upon which
     it has expressed its clear conclusion.  He is expected to follow those
     conclusions rather than to reopen them, unless there are good  reasons
     for doing so.  The mere fact that more evidence has been heard is  not
     by itself sufficient; it is necessary to explain why that new evidence
     justifies differing from the Tribunal's conclusion  on  those  issues.
     It will also  be  necessary  to  look  with  considerable  care,  even
     scepticism, at evidence which could and should have  been  before  the
     first Adjudicator or before the Tribunal.

The appeal before this Tribunal

 25. We now turn to the grounds of the Secretary of State's  appeal  before
     us.  It became apparent during the course of Mr  Bazini's  submissions
     that his first contention was that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  no
     effective appeal.  This was, he said, because the grounds only went to
     the conclusions on internal relocation.  The Adjudicator  however  had
     reached  the  conclusion  that  nowhere  was  safe  and  so   internal
     relocation did not arise.  This meant, he accepted,  that  the  Mackey
     decision should not  have  dealt  with  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
     quashing of that decision  so  that  the  appeal  could  continue  was
     irrelevant and that all the subsequent parties'  time  and  costs  had
     been simply wasted.

 26. If there were any technical correctness in  this  contention,  it  was
     merely technical.  The parties had known for  a  long  time  what  the
     essential contention was and that that was that  the  Adjudicator  had
     erred in finding that there was nowhere safe in Algeria to  which  the
     Claimant could safely and reasonably relocate without undue harshness.
      The focus in the grounds of appeal on the latter aspect derives  from
     the basis of the remittal and represented an endeavour to keep  within
     its  limits.   The  ground  of  complaint  in  relation  to   internal
     relocation obviously includes an implicit assertion that  the  greater
     risk has also been assessed wrongly.  The overlap is  plain  from  the
     Adjudicator's determination.  He did not draw  any  clear  distinction
     between the two, running them together in paragraph 27.  The Secretary
     of State's recognition that the two issues should now  be  joined  had
     not led to any revised grounds.

 27. In order to cut through this arid point, we invited Ms Holmes to  seek
     to amend her grounds of appeal to allege that the findings that  there
     was nowhere safe in Algeria were wrong in law  for  the  same  reasons
     that she relied on in relation to internal relocation.   She  did  not
     seek to argue, without conceding the point, that the  specific  places
     where the Adjudicator found that the Claimant would be  at  risk  fell
     within the safe area;  these were Blida and Boudouaou.  She had raised
     no challenge to that  part  of  the  determination.   We  allowed  the
     amendment.  It altered nothing of substance  and  could  not  possibly
     have taken Mr Bazini by surprise. It enabled the issues  to  be  dealt
     with and we were surprised that he took such a point.

 28. Mr Bazini also questioned whether there had been a finding as  to  the
     group which had threatened the Claimant.  This affected  the  relevant
     background evidence and the significance of the expert  evidence.   It
     is not clear from the first determination of the  Adjudicator  whether
     any particular group was identified by the  Claimant.   It  was  clear
     however from the second that the group in question was  the  GIA.   We
     drew Mr Bazini's  attention  to  what  his  client  had  said  to  the
     Adjudicator  at  the  second  hearing,  paragraph  19,  and   to   his
     submissions, paragraph 22, and to the conclusion in paragraph 27.   We
     shall consider this appeal on the basis that the group in question  is
     the GIA.

 29. Turning to the arguments on the appeal, Ms Holmes submitted  that  the
     Adjudicator had failed to give  due  weight  to  the  CIPU  Report  of
     October 2002, preferring wrongly  the  report  of  Mr  Joffe  for  the
     Claimant.  He  had  given  no  reasons  for  his  preference  and  for
     discounting the  CIPU  material.   Mr  Joffe's  report  was  based  on
     undisclosed private sources, and was couched in  very  general  terms.
     He had ignored the potential for the Claimant to relocate to El  Biar,
     or elsewhere in Algeria.  If the current position were  examined,  the
     latest CIPU Report of April 2004 supported  the  contention  that  the
     Claimant could relocate in Algeria and in particular to Algiers.  Many
     had done so.

 30. Mr Bazini contended that the Adjudicator  had  not  ignored  the  CIPU
     Report; he had  set  out  the  contentions  briefly,  and  had  simply
     preferred the Joffe Report  as  he  was  entitled  to.   No  elaborate
     reasoning was required.  There were newspaper reports which  supported
     what  Mr  Joffe  was  saying  about  the  influence  of  networks   of
     informants, including those within  the  police.   This  would  enable
     someone like  the  Claimant  to  be  identified  to  the  GIA  if  his
     whereabouts were to become known to any group.  The  extent  of  their
     infiltration of the police meant that registration  with  the  police,
     which was necessary for lawful residence in an area,  would  risk  his
     details being passed on to the GIA, who would  then  carry  out  their
     threat to kill him.

 31. This meant that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  be  returned
     because  of  the  risks  which  he  would  face  in   consequence   of
     registration, and the problems which he would face of prosecution  for
     the criminal act of not registering were  he  not  to  register.   The
     latter was his likeliest course.  The Adjudicator had  recognised  the
     great anguish which return would cause.  It would not  be  practicable
     for him to live with his grandmother, as he had  already  found.   The
     fact that others might be able  to  return  did  not  mean  that  this
     Claimant could.

 32. Mr Bazini also relied on two further reports from Mr  Joffe,  of  July
     2003 and June 2004, and other background material which had  not  been
     before the Adjudicator.

 33. We summarise first the material before the Adjudicator in order to see
     whether he made an error of fact or law.  The  Report  from  Mr  Joffe
     which was before the Adjudicator at the second hearing,  made  as  its
     first point, the treatment which Mr Joffe said would  be  received  by
     the Claimant upon return at the  airport.   He  risked  detention  and
     interrogation, and if returned on documents  issued  by  the  Algerian
     Embassy certainly would face detention and  interrogation.   He  would
     face a real risk of ill-treatment  and  torture  during  this  process
     because such treatment was standard police behaviour and it  would  be
     assumed that he was an Islamist because he had been  abroad  for  some
     time.

 34. Mr Joffe's second  point  was  that  terrorism  had  not  declined  as
     contended by the Home Office.  The Blida area had seen  a  resurgence,
     as the original focus of the GIA, and there had been repeated bombings
     in Algiers itself.  This violence was the work of local  groups  which
     the authorities could not control.  They were extremely vindictive and
     "tend always" to carry out their threats despite a considerable  lapse
     of time.  "They have clearly penetrated the local  police  service  as
     they were able to establish that he had informed the police  of  their
     original demands and this was the reason for the threats made  against
     him."

 35. His third point was that permanent relocation was not a viable  option
     because  of  the  shortage  of  housing   in   Algiers,   and   severe
     overcrowding; the usual pattern for temporary displacement was to move
     in with family members.  This could not be a permanent solution.   "In
     any case, there is no guarantee that this will provide [the  claimant]
     with the kind of personal safety which  he  quite  reasonably  seeks."
     The urban terrorist groups, although autonomous and  localised,  often
     had good informal contacts with groups elsewhere  who  would  pass  on
     information.  The police had been penetrated by  many  of  them.   The
     need to register with the police upon arriving to live in a  new  area
     would mean that his whereabouts would  be  immediately  known  to  the
     terrorists groups, with access to  police  dossiers.   Safety  through
     relocation would prove illusory.

 36. He did not at that stage provide any source  for  his  views,  general
     though they were.  He only did so in  response  to  the  Secretary  of
     State's grounds of appeal.  We shall deal with those later.

 37. The Adjudicator also had some newspaper reports  from  Algeria,  which
     referred to a number of terrorist attacks.  One said  that,  according
     to a reliable source, these attacks indicated that  there  was  a  co-
     ordination between  the  groups.   Security  sources  noted  that  the
     attacks recently on Algiers were carried  out  by  many  groups.   The
     mayor of one town which had been attacked called on the inhabitants to
     help the security forces with information.

 38. The October 2002 CIPU Report before the Adjudicator undoubtedly paints
     a rather different  picture.   It  referred  to  human  rights  abuses
     alleged  against  all  sides  in  the  killings;   but  paragraph  6.5
     continued:

           "There has been a shift in the past few years in the pattern and
           intensity of the violence.  The overall security  situation  has
           improved  as  the  security  forces  have  largely  brought  the
           security situation under control and forced the  insurgents  out
           of  the  main  cities  into  the  countryside.    The   Algerian
           authorities are  in  control  of  the  vast  majority  of  their
           territory.   As  most  people  live  in   towns,   many   having
           voluntarily  relocated  for  personal  security   reasons,   the
           terrorist attacks are not a major feature of most  people's  day
           to day lives."

     (The sources have been omitted from the quotation, but were set out.)

 39. Section 4 referred to the level of killings in 2001:  1980  civilians,
     terrorists, and members of the security forces were  killed,  although
     the main cities were generally secure.  The most prominent  leader  of
     the GIA was killed in  2002.   There  had  also  been  elections.   It
     contains no reference to a network between the various groups  through
     which information would be  shared  about  individuals  or  any  other
     matter.  Nor does it suggest that the police or security  forces  have
     been infiltrated by the terrorist groups;  rather  it  refers  to  the
     allegations that the security services had infiltrated the  terrorists
     and, worse, were carrying out attacks themselves.

 40. There is no comment to suggest that those who told  the  police  about
     demands from terrorists, which they had resisted and which had led  to
     death threats, were commonly attacked years after the event.  There is
     a risk to those who were servicemen  or  who  had  recently  completed
     their service.   Paragraph  5.86  said  that  government  actions  had
     diminished attacks on individual servicemen and  that  the  terrorists
     "mainly launch general attacks against the civilian population in  the
     regions rather than targeting specific individuals."

 41. However, dealing with the armed groups, paragraphs 6.24 and 6.25 said:

           "6.24 Armed groups may threaten individuals (such as shopkeepers
                 and  entrepreneurs)  in  dangerous   regions.    Government
                 officials and security forces and their families  are  also
                 targeted.  The GIA kidnap women  for  servitude  and  rape.
                 The GSPC armed group targets security force  infrastructure
                 and personnel, rather  than  civilians,  but  there  is  no
                 widespread  threat  to  conscripts  who  have  done   their
                 national service.


           6.25  The violence takes place primarily in the countryside  and
                 smaller towns as the security forces  have  largely  forced
                 the insurgents out of the cities, except in the strongholds
                 of the armed groups.  ... There are also some  networks  in
                 Annaba and sporadic attacks in Blida."

     (Again we have omitted the source references.)

 42. It identified the areas where the GIA was  strong  and  where  it  had
     residual pockets.  Identity cards had to be carried.

 43. It identified, 6.121, those who were at risk on return;  the  Claimant
     did not fall into any of  those  categories.   Failed  asylum  seekers
     could generally return safely; 6.123 to 6.126.  They might  face  some
     irritations on return; it would be different for  those  in  the  risk
     categories.

 44. We now deal with our conclusions on the alleged  errors  made  by  the
     Adjudicator.  The crucial issue before the Adjudicator on  the  second
     occasion was whether there was  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
     throughout Algeria, or whether there were areas to which the  Claimant
     could safely relocate and where it would not be unduly harsh  for  him
     to do so.  The evidence was divided, with two different pictures being
     painted.  The first determination had reached the conclusion that  the
     Claimant could return safely.  Mr Batiste's  Tribunal  had  heard  the
     appeal  some  eight  months  before  the  second   hearing   and   its
     determination was six months before.  It set  out  material  from  the
     December 2001 CIPU Report.  It considered that material and  concluded
     that "there are many parts of Algeria to which the Appellant could now
     viably and safely return and we so find.  The city of Algiers  is  the
     most obvious but by no means the only option available to him."  Hence
     the requirement for an assessment of whether such internal  relocation
     would be unduly harsh.

The Adjudicator's error

 45. It was open to the Adjudicator to conclude that he found the  evidence
     of Mr Joffe preferable to the current CIPU Report.  It is  clear  that
     he has done so.  But on this issue,  the  crucial  issue,  he  had  to
     explain what his reasoning was.  There are no reasons at all.  Had  he
     reasoned his conclusion as he should have  done,  he  might  not  have
     sustained them.  All that he says is that his earlier  conclusions  of
     late 2001 are not justified in the light of new evidence.  There are a
     number of issues which he should have dealt with,  not  the  least  of
     which was the absence of sources for the very general comments made by
     Mr Joffe.  He has  failed  to  deal  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
     arguments on the issue or to provide any reasons for  any  conclusions
     upon them which he may have reached.

 46. He also has ignored the first  determination  of  the  Tribunal  which
     dealt with the general risk position and the position in  Algiers  and
     other unnamed cities.  The only reason he could be regarded as  giving
     is that he has had new evidence, principally the Joffe Report.  Yet he
     makes no mention of the significance of the Tribunal's conclusions  at
     all, nor does he explain why he rejects them in the light of that  new
     evidence.  He had to provide some reason as to why that  new  evidence
     caused his previous determination, and the Tribunal  determination  to
     be no  longer  even  relevant.   Although  the  determination  of  the
     Tribunal chaired by Mr Batiste was not a  decision  intended  to  give
     authoritative guidance for a  whole  range  of  other  cases,  it  was
     intended to give authoritative guidance for this particular case,  and
     should not have been departed from  without  good  reason,  explicitly
     stated.  Mr Joffe's assessment of  the  situation  refers  to  attacks
     continuing to take place; but that was the  position  in  the  earlier
     Tribunal determination and the question was where and upon whom.

 47. In a reasoned determination, he would also have had to deal  with  the
     part of the Joffe Report which says that the return  itself  would  be
     likely to lead to detention and ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  the
     government.  The Adjudicator's comment about a breach of Article 3  on
     return relates not to what the government might do  at  the  point  of
     return, but to what the GIA might thereafter do to the Claimant.   The
     allegation that the government would ill-treat him on return is simply
     not dealt with, yet, if accepted, it would have been a  very  relevant
     consideration.  There is no reason for him to have forgotten about it.
      He appears to have picked and chosen the parts of  the  Joffe  Report
     which he accepted, without reasons.  If he  rejected  part,  it  would
     have required him to explain why or why it was irrelevant.  That could
     impinge on the weight which he could logically give to the rest of the
     Report.  Perhaps he did not think that risk on return at  the  airport
     mattered, though it was equally new and controversial evidence.

 48. We are satisfied that this determination cannot be regarded as  sound.
     Its reasoning is legally inadequate;  it has ignored a decision of the
     Tribunal which was directly in point  and  failed  to  deal  with  the
     issues before it, with the result that we are  driven  to  reject  the
     findings as unsustainable on the reasoning provided.  As the Court  of
     Appeal pointed out in Subesh v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 56, paragraphs 41,
     it is pragmatically easier  to  reach  such  a  conclusion  where  the
     material is documentary.  We add that that is especially so where  the
     documentary material  is  background  material  rather  than  personal
     material relating to specific oral evidence heard by the  Adjudicator,
     so that the Tribunal is every bit as well placed to assess it  as  the
     Adjudicator.  We cannot say that the  actual  result  reached  by  the
     Adjudicator is  necessarily  wrong  at  his  stage,  merely  that  his
     conclusion cannot be sustained on his reasoning.  We also  regard  the
     failings and the omission of material  considerations  as  showing  an
     error of law.

 49. We do not regard it as appropriate  to  remit  the  case  for  hearing
     before another Adjudicator.  It has been too long in the appeal system
     already, and we are  as  well  placed  as  anyone  to  deal  with  the
     background material upon which this case now turns.  We have  examined
     therefore the background material which the parties placed  before  us
     including material more recent than that before the  Adjudicator.   We
     now turn to it.
The new material

 50. The Secretary of State relied upon the April  2004  CIPU  Report.   Ms
     Holmes referred us to a number of passages.  Paragraph 6.3 said:

           "There has been a change in the past few years  in  the  pattern
           and intensity of violence as the overall security situation  has
           improved and  the  security  forces  have  largely  brought  the
           security situation under control and forced the  insurgents  out
           of the main cities in the countryside."

 51. The US State Department Report for 2003,  it  said,  recorded  reports
     that there had been a 61 percent decrease in the deaths of  civilians,
     terrorists, and members of the security forces in 2002, down to  1162;
     the Algerian Government put forward a larger  decrease.   Nonetheless,
     the killings continue at that sort of rate; 6.40.  There  had  been  a
     major relocation of people to the northern urban  areas  for  personal
     security reasons.  There were references to violations of human rights
     by the security forces but that is not the basis of the claim.

 52. Paragraphs 6.41 to 6.42 said:

           "6.41 The violence occurred primarily in the countryside, as the
                 security forces largely forced the terrorists  out  of  the
                 cities.  The authorities continued to mount anti-insurgency
                 operation.  Since the 1990s many people have moved to urban
                 areas to escape the attentions of armed groups.


           6.42  A report by the Swedish immigration authorities  of  March
                 2003 reported 'it should  normally  be  possible  to  avoid
                 threats from armed groups by the person concerned going  to
                 any of the largest cities which are  to  be  considered  as
                 safe'.  The Swedish report also stated '[However,]  in  the
                 present situation, terrorism is not a great problem in  the
                 major cities.  Cities such as Algiers, Oran and Constantine
                 are surrounded by police forces.   Terrorist  violence  has
                 decreased enormously and attacks occur more and more rarely
                 in comparison with the difficult years in the 1990s.'"


     (We have again omitted the source references).


 53. It referred to most recent  reports  estimating  that  the  number  of
     insurgents now numbered several hundred up to one thousand rather than
     the several thousands operational in the 1990s.

 54. The GIA and the GSPC were loose groupings of  militia  rather  than  a
     coherent command structure.  The GIA  was  involved  in  bombings  and
     massacres aimed  at  officials  and  ordinary  citizens  who  did  not
     positively share its particular extremist  viewpoint.   It  threatened
     individuals such as shopkeepers in  dangerous  regions.   The  GIA  is
     dealt with in more detail in Annex C:

           "14.  The GIA is no longer a nation-wide force.  In  1996  there
                 were splits in the GIA that led  to  a  number  of  smaller
                 groups being formed.  It  is  composed  of  semi-autonomous
                 groups each controlled by local emirs.  Allegedly,  Algeria
                 was divided into nine zones, each with an active  group  of
                 between 20 and 300 members.  Another report estimated  that
                 the groups each  contained  six  to  seven  fighters  whose
                 actions were uncoordinated.


           16.   The current strength of the GIA is  estimated  by  various
                 sources as ranging between sixty, fewer than a hundred, two
                 hundred, and several hundred.  Nevertheless, they are still
                 not a negligible force, bearing in mind that they  are  not
                 afraid of the consequences of  their  actions.   The  major
                 weakness of this group is that its members  have  lost  the
                 trust of  the  local  population,  following  the  horrible
                 massacres that are attributed to them.


           18.   Many of their attacks are killings of ordinary  people  in
                 rural areas, which include atrocities  such  as  beheadings
                 and massacres.  Some attacks on communities are said to  be
                 because they had not provided support to the armed  groups,
                 and to steal food and goods.  Others are  false  roadblocks
                 set up by the GIA posing as soldiers  for  the  purpose  of
                 extortion, robbery and murder.


           19.   The group members stay in an area for a few days only.  If
                 one of them comes down from the mountains and does not come
                 back within one day, the group immediately leaves its hide-
                 out and moves to another area.  This is in case the  person
                 in question might have been arrested or might have  decided
                 to inform the police about his comrades and their hide-out.


           20.   The GIA is reportedly active  in  large  sections  of  the
                 northern part of the country notably  in  the  central  and
                 western parts of the country, and  in  the  Algiers  region
                 especially Mitdja, Medea, and Blida.  They are scattered in
                 various regions inside the chain of  mountains  in  western
                 Algeria such as the wilayas of Ain Delfa, Chlef and  Medea.
                 They compete for influence with other splinter groups  that
                 are mainly active in the centre-east and eastern provinces.


           21.   The GIA was also said to be very aggressive in  the  areas
                 of Tipaza and Bouira where many cases of  racketeering  and
                 extorting money from villagers were ascribed to them.


           22.   The GIA rejected  the  amnesty  law.   However,  some  GIA
                 members surrendered to the Algerian authorities within  the
                 framework of the measures provided by the law on  restoring
                 civil accord."

 55. There is nothing about a network of information or infiltration of the
     police by the GIA or other groups.  Rather  the  security  forces  are
     targets.

 56. The position  of  returned  asylum  seekers  is  not  described  in  a
     significantly different way from that before the Adjudicator.

 57. Mr Joffe produced two further reports.  That of July  2003  said  that
     his sources for his earlier report were three French language Algerian
     daily newspapers, which he monitored and which were  reputed  to  have
     excellent relevant contacts.  He also had private sources which he was
     not  prepared  to  disclose.   Growing  networks  had  recently   been
     uncovered, with new threats of penetration into Algiers itself.  There
     had been shootings of police and racketeering.  Police corruption  and
     collusion with the armed groups was said to be widespread and analysed
     in a book covering the period 1992-7.  He recognised that by the  very
     nature of clandestine groups, there would not be much detail,  but  he
     said that the general picture was clear enough.  He  exemplified  what
     he thought the position  was  in  and  around  Algiers  and  Oran,  by
     reference to one of the newspaper reports for July 2003.   This  spoke
     of terrorist domination of certain areas as a result of  passivity  on
     the part of the municipal guards.  It appeared that the terrorists and
     guards had agreed not to attack each other;  they were informed  daily
     about terrorist movements and walked openly in uniform in areas  where
     they should have been in danger doing that.  It was  possible  to  say
     that there was complicity.  Terrorists were able to operate openly  in
     some areas.

 58. From his personal sources, Mr Joffe could say  that  the  police  were
     often intimidated by local terrorists groups and were unable to  offer
     protection.  Blida and Boumerdes were centres of  terrorist  activity.
     El Biar was not as safe as the Secretary of State suggested and  there
     were no details so consideration of it was  pointless.   The  hardship
     aspects of his report were  derived  from  an  article  which  he  had
     published in 2002.  He had  also  studied  the  Algerian  economy  for
     twenty years and knew the country.

 59. Mr Joffe's second new report of June  2004  dealt  with  registration.
     Permanent residence, more than a few weeks, had to be registered  with
     the authorities, and required an identity card.  Failure  to  register
     was a misdemeanour usually punishable by a fine unless repeated.  Non-
     registration could also be  construed  as  evidencing  involvement  in
     illegal acts.  The whole regulatory system was in  some  disarray  and
     not enforced strictly because of the number  of  displaced  people  in
     Algeria.

 60. Mr Bazini sought assistance from a letter dated  September  2004  from
     UNHCR dealing with this case.  It said that internal  flight  was  not
     available for the majority;  those who have fled  have  faced  serious
     social and  economic  difficulties  in  their  area  of  refuge,  with
     critical  shortages  of  water,  housing  and  basic  utilities.   The
     government does not fully control any habitable territory.  Those  who
     returned might now face  greater  difficulties  because  of  increased
     fears that they might have been involved in international terrorism.

 61. An Amnesty International Report for 2001  identified  many  abuses  of
     human rights, including that by the various security forces but it did
     not suggest that a problem was that they passed on information to  the
     terrorists about those who registered with  them;   rather  they  were
     overly abusive and aggressive in their pursuit of the  terrorists.   A
     Human Rights Watch Report was to  the  like  effect,  as  was  a  2004
     Amnesty International Report.

 62. Mr Bazini said that there was an illustration  of  the  way  in  which
     various different groups worked together in  a  newspaper  article  of
     July 2002 which said that there  had  been  an  upsurge  of  terrorist
     activity after an Al-Qa'eda envoy had been to Algeria.  These  attacks
     indicated that there was co-ordination between various  groups.   Many
     groups had recently targeted the capital.  Another complained  of  the
     inactivity pf the security forces.  None of these  articles  which  he
     produced instanced someone bring targeted as an informer as  a  result
     of complaining  to  the  police  about  terrorist  activity  or  other
     threats.

 63. The Tribunal has considered the situation in Algeria on  a  number  of
     occasions recently.  In  MM  (Djebari  Decision-Evidence)  Algeria  CG
     [2003] UKIAT 00089, it was concluded that there was no risk on  return
     merely as a failed asylum seeker.  In  AD  (Ex-policeman)  Algeria  CG
     [2004] UKIAT00137, in June  2004,  it  was  concluded  that  a  former
     policeman might be at some continuing risk from the  GIA  were  he  to
     fall into the hands of those who knew him, but that  that  was  now  a
     remote possibility in view of the now limited scope and range  of  the
     GIA, provided that Claimant lived in the larger cities.  The  GIA  was
     not active in Algiers as opposed  to  parts  of  the  Algiers  region.
     There were also other relocation possibilities.   "There  is  no  real
     risk that the GIA have now in place an intelligence network that would
     be able to identify him on return, even if  they  were  interested  in
     pursuing him."  (It is correct that that Tribunal  did  not  have  the
     Joffe report before it.)

Conclusion

 64. We regard the evidence as showing that there is no real risk  to  this
     Claimant upon return.  It has not been contended that the mere fact of
     the return of a failed asylum seeker to Algeria would cause him to run
     such a risk notwithstanding the much overstated views of Mr Joffe upon
     which the Claimant  and  the  second  Adjudicator  rightly  placed  no
     weight.

 65. The source of the risk to him is said to be that first the police  are
     infiltrated so generally that his whereabouts risk becoming  known  to
     the terrorists.  It does not matter which group have  infiltrated  the
     police where the Claimant becomes known;  they  co-operate  with  each
     other and would pass on his name.  He would be  at  risk  were  he  to
     register with the police and he would be at risk  of  prosecution  and
     not having an  identity  card  were  he  not  to  register.   This  is
     unrealistic on the material which we have seen.

 66. The Claimant gave evidence at the second hearing that  the  terrorists
     had informers and co-operating networks everywhere in Algeria.  It  is
     not clear what basis he had for giving that evidence;  he had not been
     in Algeria for some time and his evidence at the first hearing did not
     make such claims.  His knowledge of how they operated  appears  to  be
     limited to his experience of their local attacks.

 67. He also gave evidence at the second but  not  the  first  hearing,  at
     least so far as his  statement  and  the  evidence  as  noted  by  the
     Adjudicator go, about the existence of terrorist infiltration  in  the
     police force.  However, he does not say what the basis of that is  and
     what if anything he has learned since his first hearing.  This matters
     because Mr Joffe uses what happened to him  as  the  example  of  what
     happens generally, and it is not clear to what extent  he  is  feeding
     off the Appellant rather than adding  independent  support.   But  the
     Claimant's own evidence suggests that he did not regard the police  as
     infiltrated to any significant extent.  His statement  for  the  first
     hearing, which he adopted, says that  after  he  received  the  letter
     containing the death threat, he actually took it  to  the  police  who
     said that he need not worry.  He clearly did not then think that  they
     were infiltrated even locally.   This  was  in  early  1998.   He  had
     continued to open the very shop where the terrorists  had  made  their
     demands and where they had left the threatening letter.   Although  he
     had again closed it after the shooting of his brother in Spring  1998,
     he had re-opened it in late 1999 and what caused him to close  it  was
     the attack on the police post and the fear  which  that  attack  on  a
     source of protection caused.

 68. In  so  far  as  Mr  Joffe's  point  about  infiltration  and  extreme
     vindictiveness was based on the experience of the Claimant, as in part
     at  least  it  is,  it  is  plain  that  that  would  call  for   some
     qualification in the light of the above.  There is one obvious way  in
     which the group could have found out about the Claimant going  to  the
     police and that is because the police investigated the matter and that
     came to the notice of the group.  They  did  not  demonstrate  extreme
     vindictiveness, going to any lengths to fulfil  their  threat  as  the
     subsequent actions of the Claimant show.

 69. Mr Joffe did not produce any significant material to  support  any  of
     his very vague and generalised comments.  We  accept  that  he  has  a
     general knowledge of Algeria, as he does of  many  North  African  and
     Middle East countries.  He gives newspapers here as  his  main  public
     source and a book.  The book deals with historic  material  and  there
     are no extracts from  it  to  support  either  of  the  limbs  of  his
     contentions:  infiltration and  an  information  network  between  the
     groups covering this type of  information.   There  are  no  newspaper
     articles which support his contention either at the general  level  or
     by way of a number of specific examples.  The one which he did produce
     was more about private deals  between  the  security  forces  and  the
     terrorists to leave each other alone rather than infiltration  of  the
     police, with the effect that the information  which  the  police  have
     becomes available on any general level to  the  terrorists.   And,  we
     add, the article produced by Mr Bazini about the  possibility  of  co-
     ordinated attacks does not really support the contention  that  groups
     pass on information about someone who had merely reported an  incident
     to the police.

 70. The use of private sources is problematic wherever it  occurs.   There
     is no description here of their position or means of  knowledge,  even
     if their names are not to be stated.  We  know  that  this  is  a  not
     uncommon problem, but we would expect that more would be  provided  to
     enable the means of knowledge and the reliability of the source to  be
     assessed.  The next problem with such general information is  that  it
     provides no sound information about how frequent or rare an event  is.
     It is not that we are sure that there is no infiltration of the police
     or that there are no occasions when information may be passed on, even
     about someone such as a shopkeeper who has refused to  co-operate  and
     has complained to the police,  or  that  groups  may  not  share  some
     information of that sort;  it is that we do not have a sound basis for
     concluding that there is a real risk that  it  would  happen  to  this
     individual, either because of who he is  or  because  of  the  general
     level of frequency at which it happens.

 71. There is nothing in the material from Human Rights  Watch  or  Amnesty
     International which suggest that the problems to which Mr Joffe refers
     exist at all.  We would have expected  them  to  have  said  something
     about the infiltration of the police by terrorists  if  it  were  more
     than occasional.  Instead, the criticism of the police is as to  their
     ruthlessness in going after the terrorists and anyone they suspect  of
     terrorist connections and the role which they may have in infiltrating
     the terrorists and carrying out killings themselves.  There is nothing
     to suggest a network of  terrorist  groups  who  exchange  information
     about the likes of the Claimant or informants;  there is  merely  some
     very general suggestion that there may be co-ordinated attacks because
     they occur at the same time, often to mark  some  past  wrong  by  the
     government or a particular event.   Again,  if  there  were  such  co-
     ordination, we would have expected at least one other report  to  have
     picked it up from the same public sources as Mr Joffe, from their  own
     private  sources  or  from  various  incidents  involving   individual
     killings.  The position of the reluctant shopkeeper is well known, and
     is referred to but not that they have  been  killed  as  a  result  of
     complaining to the police or of  the  police  passing  on  information
     about them to terrorists, let alone in a different area and some years
     later.

 72. We would also have expected the CIPU Reports to have made some mention
     of infiltration, or co-ordination in the respect alleged here, and  of
     the length of time which the GIA was prepared to wait for its revenge,
     if there were anything in it as a point.  But there is nothing.

 73. We note that what Mr Joffe has to  say  about  the  return  of  failed
     asylum seekers is not put forward by the Claimant and that it  is  not
     in line  with  the  Tribunal's  appraisal.   We  do  think  that  that
     diminishes the weight which can be given  to  the  whole  report.   Mr
     Bazini said that part could be reliable even if other parts were  not.
     That may be so but we have seen nothing to enable us to  differentiate
     in that way between the various parts of the Reports.

 74. We also found it difficult to accept the chain of events  which  would
     have to occur for the Claimant to be in any danger.  The police  where
     he registered would have to be infiltrated, so the infiltration  would
     have to be reasonably common for there to be  a  real  risk.   Yet  if
     there were such infiltration, it is difficult to see how  the  Reports
     can describe the attenuation of violence in the way they do,  even  if
     there has been some recrudescence in Mr Joffe's view.  The infiltrator
     has to know or suspect that the newly registered person  has  been  of
     some interest to the groups, unless any  new  registration  reasonably
     often attracts some form of police record search to see if he has made
     a complaint to the police in the past.  This search would have  to  be
     on a wide scale geographically.  This would have to be done with  some
     frequency in view of the numbers of dispplaced people and the problems
     experienced according to Mr Joffe in operating the registration system
     for them all.  The right group  would  have  to  identified,  yet  the
     Claimant says that he did not know who they were when he reported  the
     matter.  There is absolutely no evidence that one group is prepared to
     carry out revenge attacks for another  group,  especially  where  that
     other is the GIA.  The group has to maintain the desire and ability to
     carry out the attack.  Yet the GIA did not do anything when they could
     have done when the Claimant was still operating the shop;  nor is here
     any evidence that his family was threatened by them.   The  attack  on
     his brother was because of his military service.

 75. We do not consider that we can give very much  weight  to  Mr  Joffe's
     Reports in the light of their generality, the  inadequate  description
     of the sources, and the lack of examples from the  published  sources,
     including his own, which support  his  contentions.   We  can  see  no
     reason why the detail or exemplification of his points could not  have
     been provided were they sound.  They  are  also  at  odds  so  far  as
     matters here with other  reports  which  we  would  have  expected  to
     contain something similar if it were sound.  They do not fit with  the
     Claimant's own behaviour and are in part rejected on all sides.

 76. Mr Joffe is well known as an expert witness in the Tribunal;  some  of
     his reports have been the subject of considerable criticism.  This has
     been expressed in the context of Algeria in Slimani*.   The  Court  of
     Appeal drew attention to this in Ddjebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  804,
     paragraphs 24 and 45.  It is clear that if a report of Mr Joffe is  to
     be preferred to contrary evidence, the  reasons  for  that  preference
     have to be expressed;  the reservations about the lack of sources  and
     the possible fixity of views about a country need to be examined.

 77. Mr Joffe does not differentiate between the various  terrorist  groups
     and does not  deal  with  the  position  of  the  GIA.   It  is  quite
     unjustified to treat them as all of a piece, with  no  differentiation
     in tactics, strength or location.   The  CIPU  Reports  do  give  some
     information which does not appear to be  contested  and  it  is  clear
     anyway that that group is very much weakened from what it was in 1997.
      It is hugely unlikely, from that more recent material with the detail
     which it  provides,   that  it  has  the  capacity  to  find  out  the
     whereabouts of the Claimant or that it has any desire to exact revenge
     on him for what is trifling  by  comparison  with  what  the  security
     forces have been  doing,  and  cannot  be  different  from  what  many
     Algerians have done.  Its capacity is now markedly less than  it  was.
     We accept the way in which it is  described  in  the  CIPU;   that  is
     consistent with what the Tribunal has held in AD, above.  There is  no
     sound evidence that it would seek to carry out a threat made  in  1998
     should it discover the whereabouts of  the  Claimant  upon  return  in
     2004/5.

 78. We can see nothing in  the  fact  that  the  Claimant  would  have  to
     register with the police to cause concern therefore.   If  he  chooses
     not to do so, the consequences are unlikely to be very  serious.   But
     as that failure would be a means of drawing himself to  the  attention
     of  the  authorities  anyway,  and  then  the  asserted   and   feared
     consequences would follow, there is no reason for the Claimant not  to
     register especially outside his home area.

 79. We find it very hard to accept that this Claimant would be  unable  to
     relocate within Algeria or that he  would  face  undue  hardship  upon
     return, relocating to one of the larger towns or cities.   It  is  not
     necessary for him to  be  spared  all  prospect  of  random  terrorist
     attack.  The government clearly does provide  a  sufficient  and  real
     degree of protection in many areas, and in any event  there  are  many
     areas in which the GIA simply does not operate beyond  infrequent  and
     random attacks.  From the point of  view  of  the  Geneva  Convention,
     there is nothing  in  the  UNHCR  evidence  which  suggests  that  the
     considerations relevant to its application, as held in  AE  and  FE  v
     SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1032, paragraph 38, would meant that return would
     involve a breach of  its  provisions.   They  represent  the  sort  of
     considerations which the UNHCR,  seeks  to  put  forward  in  a  wider
     humanitarian interest than the Geneva Convention requires.   There  is
     nothing about the return which would breach  Article  3  in  locations
     such as the larger towns including Algiers or Oran.  The evidence does
     not show that the mental anguish would alone breach Article 3 and that
     overstated conclusion of the Adjudicator is based on  fears  that  are
     not soundly based.  It is unclear whether  he  included  the  risk  of
     physical injury in his assessment of  Article  3;   grammatically,  it
     would appear not from paragraph 27, but  that  may  be  too  strict  a
     reading.  Either way this case does not approach the threshold of risk
     for it to be a breach of the ECHR for the Claimant to be returned.

 80. We had to press Mr Bazini for what it was  which  made  return  unduly
     harsh for this Claimant.  In reality his case was very much  bound  up
     with his case as  to  safety  overall  rather  than  there  being  any
     separate case based on particular locations to which he might have  to
     go where relocation would be unduly harsh, even though  this  was  the
     very point which led to his  suggesting  the  remittal  in  the  first
     place.  We have dealt with the  alleged  problems  which  registration
     with the police would cause.  There are of course general humanitarian
     concerns in Algeria to which Mr Bazini referred us  but  they  do  not
     come close to precluding  a  return  for  this  Claimant.   There  are
     difficulties as the UNHCR material reports but they have to be seen in
     the light of this Claimant's position.  He is a reasonably healthy man
     in his late twenties.  He has  some  skills  and  business  experience
     which can be used.  He has no dependants and has family in Algeria who
     can offer some assistance,  even  at  a  distance.   He  may  be  able
     temporarily or permanently to live with his grandmother in El Biar, if
     he is returned.  There may be impracticalities which prevent that on a
     permanent basis, but the fact that he has not lived  in  some  of  the
     larger towns  to  which  he  could  go  safely,  does  not  mean  that
     relocation  there  would  be  unduly  harsh.   The  Claimant  has  not
     demonstrated that there would be any breach of either Convention  were
     he returned.

 81. For those reasons, this appeal is allowed the decision is reported for
     what we say about the way in which  remittals  cannot  be  limited  in
     their scope and the remitting decision must be considered.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
