

|                                                                      |
|WT (Adjournment;  fresh evidence) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00176         |






                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                        Date: 14th June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                29 June 2004

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Miss B Mensah (Vice President)
                       Mr C P Mather (Vice President)

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr L A Jackson of Thakrar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R  J
     Manuell, promulgated on 5th November 2003.  By that determination,  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  him
     asylum and to issue removal directions  to  Ethiopia  dated  14th  May
     2003.  The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia, born in February  1970,
     who claimed asylum upon arrival in the United Kingdom  on  15th  March
     2003.

  2. The Appellant's case in summary was that he was a television cameraman
     who became a reporter working for Ethiopian  Television,  but  because
     his work had been censored, he had been suspended for five months from
     Ethiopian Television in 2001 and had given news reports to the private
     press.  In December 2002, security forces arrested him and took him to
     a political prison where he was detained without charge for 1� months,
     beaten and  harassed.   In  mid-January  2003,  he  was  charged  with
     supplying information to the private press and  with  working  against
     the government;  he was later released on bail.

  3. At the end of February 2003, he had attended a meeting  to  discuss  a
     new press law at which he had spoken his mind, but found that  he  was
     warned in consequence of what he said.   Fearing  the  effect  of  the
     court summons which he received at the beginning of March and  fearing
     that he would not receive a fair trial, he decided to leave  Ethiopia.
     He took with him his six-year-old son at his  wife's  insistence.   He
     said that if he returned to Ethiopia, the  authorities  would  try  to
     kill him and that he would be  taken  to  prison  where  he  would  be
     tortured.

  4. The Appellant produced a number of documents in support  of  his  case
     including a  medical  report  dated  8th  July  2003  prepared  by  Dr
     Olunfunwa, a GP who examined the Appellant on a  number  of  occasions
     after 9th April 2003.  Counselling with  the  Medical  Foundation  had
     also begun in August 2003.

  5. The Adjudicator did not accept that the Appellant  was  credible.   He
     set the Appellant's claim, that he faced persecution by the government
     because of an imputed or actual political opinion, in the  context  of
     the variety of background material  which  the  Adjudicator  concluded
     showed that although some journalists at times  experienced  problems,
     there was a surprisingly high degree of  freedom  of  expression,  but
     that it co-existed with open manipulation of the media and  resort  to
     threats in some cases.  He continued, in paragraph 40:

           "The examples of penalties imposed which are  given  by  the  US
           Department of State Report show that the court process  is  used
           and that cases and decisions are reported.   It  is  significant
           that many of the individual journalists are cited by name.   The
           penalties imposed tend to have been far less  than  those  which
           the Appellant suggests he  would  face.   I  consider  that  the
           Respondent's account of conditions in  Ethiopia  is  excessively
           rose-hued, but that the Appellant's views  are  exaggerated  and
           excessively bleak."


  6. The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  written  evidence
     provided no cogent detail about the most  material  events,  which  he
     found difficult to understand in view of the length of the  statements
     provided.  Much of the evidence was sketchy and he could see no reason
     why the work produced by the  Appellant  would  have  been  considered
     objectionable by the government "given its toleration of the outspoken
     private press and of foreign correspondents".  He also  said  that  it
     was difficult to see why the  authorities  had  waited  some  eighteen
     months before bringing any  charges  and  had  pursued  the  Appellant
     rather than the publishers.

  7. The Adjudicator concluded the Appellant was trying to make up the gaps
     in his written evidence during the course of his  oral  evidence.   He
     gave a number of instances as  to  why  he  reached  that  conclusion.
     These related to his contact with lawyers about the summons  which  he
     received and to his lack of knowledge of the fate of  his  brother-in-
     law who had stood bail for him, which the Appellant had breached.

  8. The Adjudicator also concluded that the summons  which  the  Appellant
     produced was not merely second-rate but was of no  real  value,  given
     the absence of particulars and the unusual  mode  of  service  at  the
     Appellant's place of work.  The  Adjudicator  also  found  a  document
     produced in support of the claim to have  received  a  warning  letter
     from Ethiopian Television after his participation in the conference on
     the new press law to be rather curious, both in format and in content.

  9. The Adjudicator then turned to the claim made by the Appellant that he
     had been tortured in prison some five months before he was examined by
     the GP in London.  He commented as follows, in paragraph 49:

           "Dr Olunfunwa, however, found no signs of physical injury  which
           began to correspond with the Appellant's account of imprisonment
           in Ethiopia.  The CIPU Assessment describes prison conditions as
           poor, with inadequate food:   see  paragraphs  5.72ff.   The  US
           Department  of   State   Report   describes   the   prisons   as
           'unsanitary'.  6 weeks in an  Ethiopian  prison,  especially  if
           accompanied by torture, would  be  expected  to  be  harmful  to
           health.  Dr Olunfunwa said the Appellant was in good health.  He
           did not state  that  he  considered  the  extent  to  which  the
           Appellant's depression might have been caused or contributed  to
           by  the  Appellant's  absence  from  his  wife  and  home,   but
           uncritically accepted  the  Appellant's  explanation.   It  thus
           seemed to me that little weight could be placed on  the  medical
           report as corroboration for any of the Appellant's claims.   His
           lack of any signs of physical  injury  indicated  that  any  ill
           treatment he had suffered in prison was far less severe than  he
           claimed, indeed, cast doubt on his claim to have been imprisoned
           recently at all."


 10. In paragraph 50, the Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant's claims
     in this respect sat uncomfortably  with  his  ability  to  instruct  a
     lawyer, to obtain bail, and to return to  his  work  as  a  journalist
     after his release.  He concluded that no explanation had been  offered
     for the  Appellant's  treatment,  apart  from  generalised  government
     repression and the Adjudicator concluded that it was unlikely that the
     Appellant would have been tortured at  all  in  the  circumstances  he
     described.  The Adjudicator said:

           "Torture (punishment or sadism apart, neither of which apply  on
           the Appellant's account of events) is  administered  to  extract
           information which is not  otherwise  forthcoming.   The  alleged
           evidence against the Appellant was already available in the form
           of his newspaper articles.  His place of employment at  ETV  was
           known.  His personal history can have  been  no  secret.   There
           was, in short, no reason to torture the Appellant."

 11. The Adjudicator continued, pointing out that, taking the  evidence  in
     the round, it seemed that the Appellant could  not  be  treated  as  a
     reliable witness and that his evidence  was  seriously  unreliable  in
     almost all material respects.  He continued to reject the claims  that
     the Appellant had been pursued by  the  Ethiopian  government  or  its
     agents or that he had been arrested, tortured, detained or imprisoned,
     or subject to any court process.  He rejected the claim that he was of
     any prominence as a journalist and rejected the medical  evidence  for
     the reasons he gave in paragraph 49 and  for  its  dependence  on  the
     Appellant's  unreliable  testimony,  rather  than  observed   physical
     evidence.  He went through other matters in some  detail  adhering  to
     his conclusions.

 12. However, at the outset  of  the  hearing  on  10th  October  2003  the
     Appellant, then, as now, represented by Mr Lee  Jackson,  had  made  a
     further application to adjourn the hearing.  This time the application
     was made on the grounds that the Appellant had had an  examination  by
     the Medical Foundation  on  8th  October  2003  with  a  view  to  the
     provision of a medical  report  by  3rd  December  2003,  although  no
     commitment could be given to that date.  The Adjudicator  refused  the
     application "because of the further and uncontained delay,  which  any
     further evidence would have entailed.  I  considered  that  there  was
     sufficient  evidence  already  available  on  which  the   Appellant's
     reliability could be fairly assessed".  This was, in fact, the  second
     application for an adjournment, because on 26th  August  2003  another
     Adjudicator had granted the  Appellant  an  adjournment  in  order  to
     enable video evidence to be filed and served.  It had not been made on
     the basis that an appointment with the  Medical  Foundation  had  been
     made because, as we were told, the appointment  was  not  itself  made
     until 12th September 2003  and  no  adjournment  was  sought,  perhaps
     understandably, on the mere grounds that the Appellant was seeking  an
     appointment with the Medical Foundation.  He had commenced counselling
     with the Medical Foundation at some time in August 2003,  having  been
     referred to the Medical Foundation on 15th March 2003 upon arrival  in
     the United Kingdom.

 13. Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was  sought  on  the  basis  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in law in failing to adjourn the appeal  because  it
     could not be justly determined without the Medical Foundation  report.
     The Appellant had already seen the Medical Foundation, a date for  the
     production of the report was known, although not guaranteed,  and  the
     Adjudicator ought to have exercised his discretion so  as  to  adjourn
     the hearing beyond the closure  date  in  the  2003  Procedure  Rules.
     There were other  criticisms  of  the  findings  made  in  respect  of
     detention and torture and various other findings which  were  made  by
     the Adjudicator were also criticised.

 14. Leave to appeal was refused.  The Vice President pointed out that  the
     Appellant had had ample time to obtain  medical  evidence  before  the
     hearing (which  need  not  necessarily  have  been  from  the  Medical
     Foundation) and the Adjudicator was correct in refusing to adjourn the
     hearing.  She continued:

           "The Adjudicator discounted the appellant's account  of  torture
           for the reasons set out at paragraph  51-54.   Those  paragraphs
           are soundly and cogently reasoned, and the  appellant's  Grounds
           of Appeal do not disclose an arguable error in  that  reasoning.
           He repeats his argument that as a person in breach of  his  bail
           conditions, the appellant risks return to detention and  similar
           ill-treatment.  However, given that the appellant left  Ethiopia
           openly on his own documents, that is not a sustainable  argument
           (paragraph 53 and 56 of his determination).


           The appellant further  contends  that  the  Adjudicator's  other
           negative findings are unsustainable.  Essentially  he  disagrees
           with the Adjudicator's assessment of the  factual  matrix.   The
           Adjudicator's  factual   reasoning   is   careful,   sound   and
           sustainable.  Permission to appeal to the Tribunal now lies on a
           point of law only,  including  a  factual  error  sufficient  to
           amount  to  an  error   of   law   (perversity   or   Wednesbury
           unreasonableness).  These Grounds of Appeal do not disclose  any
           error of law which would have made a material difference to  the
           outcome of the appeal.  There is no other compelling reason  for
           the appeal to be heard."


 15. Statutory Review  of  that  refusal  was,  however,  granted  and  the
     decision of the Tribunal  reversed  because  the  Vice  President  had
     assumed, in refusing leave, that the Medical Foundation  evidence  had
     not been provided to the Tribunal.  It may very  well  not  have  been
     with her, but was somewhere within the purlieu  of  the  Tribunal  and
     ought to have been associated with the  case  file.   The  report  was
     considered potentially relevant and  significant  which  "could"  have
     some bearing on the Appellant's credibility.  The justice of the  case
     required it to be considered by the IAT.

 16. The first issue is whether it was wrong in law for the Adjudicator  to
     refuse an adjournment on 10th October 2003 in  order  to  receive  the
     eventual Medical Foundation report.  Rule 40(2) of the 2003  Procedure
     Rules states that an Adjudicator "must not adjourn a  hearing  on  the
     application of a party, unless satisfied that the  appeal  ...  cannot
     otherwise be justly determined".  Also  relevant  to  the  application
     made on 10th October 2003 was Rule  13(6),  which  provides  that  the
     Adjudicator could fix a closure date more than  six  weeks  after  the
     date of the adjourned hearing "in exceptional  circumstances"  if  the
     Adjudicator was satisfied by evidence that the  appeal  could  not  be
     justly determined within six weeks.  The object of the closure date is
     to provide a time limit within which a case must normally be heard and
     to prevent a sequence of adjournments.  As we have said, this case was
     adjourned from 26th August 2003  to  10th  October  2003  without  any
     mention being made  of  the  Appellant's  desire  to  call  additional
     medical evidence.

 17. The Adjudicator would also have  known  from  the  file,  because  the
     hearing had come on on 26th August 2003 if only to be adjourned,  that
     the notice of the dates of the first hearing for 10th  July  2003  and
     for the full hearing  on  26th  August  2003  had  been  sent  to  the
     Appellant and  his  representative,  Thakrar  &  Co,  who  were  still
     representing him, on 20th June 2003.  The file also showed  that  they
     replied on the standard form saying that they requested a  hearing  of
     the appeal and certified that they were  "in  all  respects  ready  to
     proceed".  They did not tick the box to say that they  were  currently
     not ready to proceed.  The documentary evidence which they intended to
     produce was simply described as a court bundle.

 18. The Adjudicator had before him a medical report from the GP dated  8th
     July 2003 which gave a  brief  history  and  a  brief  account  of  an
     examination.  So far as  physical  signs  are  concerned  relative  to
     torture or physical ill-treatment, there was simply a reference  to  a
     complaint of pain in the left knee  on  walking  long  distances,  but
     otherwise the Appellant was physically sound, although complaining  of
     symptoms of depression and sleeplessness.  It said that he was  having
     counselling with the Medical Foundation and was  to  remain  on  anti-
     depressants.  In very  short  form,  it  said  that  he  had  suffered
     physical and mental torture, having currently some  treatment  with  a
     good long-term prognosis (it appears that the date of the commencement
     of counselling is wrong).

 19. Mr Jackson recognised the difficulties he faced in  arguing  that  the
     Adjudicator had erred in law in his refusal of the adjournment, but he
     pointed to the fact that the case came on  only  two  days  after  the
     Appellant had been examined by the Medical  Foundation  and  that  the
     Medical Foundation had  a  high,  but  not  unique,  standing  in  the
     assessment of torture claims.  They did not take on just  anybody  and
     so an examination by them indicated of itself that there was something
     in the case, because the Appellant had passed through  what  might  be
     termed a screening process conducted by the Medical Foundation.

 20. The decision as to whether  or  not  to  grant  an  adjournment  is  a
     judicial decision made in the exercise of a discretion,  curtailed  to
     the extent it is by the 2003 Rules.  In order for such a  decision  to
     be held wrong in law by  this  Tribunal,  it  would  be  necessary  to
     conclude that the decision  was  not  one  to  which  the  Adjudicator
     reasonably could have come or that  the  Adjudicator  had  misdirected
     himself as to the approach to  be  adopted  or  had  ignored  relevant
     considerations.  Both the Rules to which we have referred are designed
     to restrict the grant of adjournments.

 21. The case had been adjourned once  already,  notwithstanding  that  the
     solicitors had previously said that they were ready to proceed.  There
     had been no  prior  identification  of  the  desire  to  call  medical
     evidence or indeed medical evidence beyond that which was given by the
     GP.  That GP's report covered the physical condition of the Appellant,
     as well as his mental state.  If there were additional physical signs,
     such as scarring, upon which the Appellant wished to  rely,  it  would
     have been open to him to refer to those in his statement or, as is not
     uncommon, to show them or some of them to an Adjudicator.   There  was
     nothing in the GP's report which would have suggested that it would be
     of particular advantage  to  wait  for  a  Medical  Foundation  report
     because of any particular expertise which they would be able to  bring
     to bear. Nor was there anything in the Appellant's description of  his
     injuries or of what had happened to him which would have indicated  to
     an Adjudicator that a report from the Medical Foundation was  of  real
     importance to his case.

 22. There is no reason for an adjournment to be granted simply because  an
     appointment has been obtained or has been actually attended  with  the
     Medical Foundation.  They have a particular expertise, but it  is  not
     unique.  It cannot be  that  the  existence  of  a  potential  Medical
     Foundation  report  becomes  the  basis  for  successful   adjournment
     applications without very much more to justify  the  adjournment.   An
     Adjudicator would know that much  of  what  they  say  consists  of  a
     description of physical symptoms which can be provided by  others  and
     an assessment that the signs or symptoms are consistent with what  the
     Appellant describes.   Consistency  is  not  the  same  as  proof  and
     necessarily leaves open the point that what is seen is also consistent
     with some other cause of the injury.

 23.  The  Adjudicator  was  right  to  point  out  that  even  though  the
     appointment had been kept just two days before  the  hearing  (and  he
     would have known that the Medical Foundation has a long  waiting  list
     for appointments), it would  still  be  many  weeks  and  without  any
     guarantee before the report was received.

 24. There was no error of law in the refusal of an adjournment.  The  fact
     that the evidence which underlay the application for  the  adjournment
     is now available and would have been relevant before the  Adjudicator,
     does not mean that the adjournment was wrongly refused.   It  will  be
     rare that an adjournment which has been properly refused can in effect
     be set aside by the subsequent production  of  the  evidence  for  the
     production of which an adjournment was sought.

 25. We now turn  to  the  fresh  evidence  in  the  form  of  the  Medical
     Foundation report.  Whilst the grant of Statutory  Review  amounts  to
     the grant of leave to appeal to the Tribunal, it does  not  amount  to
     the grant of leave to adduce evidence which was not submitted  to  the
     Adjudicator.  That is  a  matter  exclusively  for  the  Tribunal  and
     nothing in the decision here on Statutory Review  suggests  otherwise.
     This is so, even where the fresh evidence has been persuasive  to  the
     judge in granting leave to appeal.  The party wishing to rely on  such
     evidence must comply with the requirements of Rule 21(2) of  the  2003
     Procedure Rules.  The Tribunal has power only,  in  relation  to  this
     appeal, to consider errors of law.  It is in  that  context  that  the
     application to adduce further evidence must be judged.

 26. For reasons which we have set out in a number  of  determinations,  we
     consider that the approach of the Court of Appeal in E v  SSHD  [2004]
     EWCA Civ 49 is applicable to appeals  under  the  2002  Act  and  2003
     Rules.  The essence of that is that we should  be  guided  by  Ladd  v
     Marshall principles in considering  whether  to  admit  new  evidence,
     subject to any exceptional factors.  See paragraphs 92 and 23.

 27. We accept that this particular Medical  Foundation  report  could  not
     have been obtained  with  reasonable  diligence  for  use  before  the
     Adjudicator.  The Appellant did what he could to obtain an appointment
     as soon as possible.  The Medical Foundation has a long waiting  list,
     with a far greater demand on its resources than it  is  able  to  meet
     quickly and there was nothing  more  which  the  Appellant  reasonably
     could have done to obtain the report earlier.  It is,  so  far  as  it
     goes, obviously  apparently  credible  in  relation  to  the  opinions
     expressed by the doctor, although not  incontrovertible.   It  is  not
     necessary for these purposes to examine the degree to which  a  report
     might be regarded as not apparently credible, either  because  of  the
     quality of the report or because of the reliance of the doctor on  the
     story provided by an Appellant who has been disbelieved.

 28. Here, the particular aspects of the  Medical  Foundation  report  upon
     which the Appellant relied, related to its conclusions in relation  to
     scarring.  We also consider that it satisfies the  second  requirement
     that it would probably have had an important influence on the  result,
     though would not necessarily have been decisive.  We say that  because
     although the Adjudicator  set  out  a  large  number  of  reasons  for
     concluding that the Appellant's case was  not  credible,  reading  the
     determination as a whole leads us to conclude that had the Adjudicator
     accepted that the Appellant had been ill-treated or  tortured  in  the
     way described, he would have accepted the fact of detention,  and  his
     approach to everything else which the Appellant told  him  about  what
     had happened in Ethiopia would have been markedly different.  It  does
     not follow, however,  that  the  outcome  would  have  been  different
     because it would still have been open to the Adjudicator to reject the
     claim of torture and detention, but he would have had to deal with the
     evidence of the Medical Foundation report.

 29. This identifies two pigmented scars on the anterior  left  knee  which
     the Appellant attributed to being beaten with a stick  and  pushed  to
     the floor and which the doctor concluded  were  consistent  with  that
     account.  A further circular scar on the left shin was  attributed  to
     being beaten with a stick which was also said to be consistent.  There
     was another scar on the rear of the  left  heel  attributed  to  being
     jabbed with a gun barrel and two scars on the side of the left  ankle,
     also attributed to being jabbed with a gun barrel,  which  were  again
     said to be consistent with what the Appellant said.  A similar scar on
     the left sole was given the same cause, and likewise was  said  to  be
     consistent.  A further circular scar on the left foot was said  to  be
     consistent with being beaten with a stick.  Slight pain on movement of
     the left knee and slight crepitus was attributed to being beaten there
     and the symptoms were  said  to  be  consistent  with  it.   There  is
     roughened pigmented skin on the right and left  back  consistent  with
     the Appellant's claim that they were caused by his being beaten with a
     leather whip.  There were other signs consistent with being beaten  on
     the back and being beaten on the head with a rifle butt.  This is  not
     a case  where  the  very  nature  of  the  Appellant's  occupation  or
     lifestyle would have generated such  scars  readily.  The  Adjudicator
     does, however, point out that there was no evidence of  poor  physical
     conditions which is  what  would  reasonably  have  been  expected  of
     someone recently detained in an Ethiopian prison for some weeks.

 30. However, that does not  mean  that  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  tests  are
     satisfied.  There is no reason why a GP could not refer to  the  scars
     which are  visible  on  a  physical  examination  and  identify  their
     location, size and nature and refer to the cause which  the  Appellant
     attributes to them.  Indeed, there is no reason why the  Appellant  in
     his witness statement could not have referred to each of  those  scars
     with the cause identified, together with the production of photographs
     of them.  The GP's report refers only to tenderness in the  left  knee
     and to no scars.  The Appellant's statement refers only  to  scars  on
     his back arising from being beaten there with the butt of a gun.   The
     Medical Foundation report really  adds  very  little  in  relation  to
     psychiatric symptoms to what the GP provides and the Adjudicator  knew
     that  the  Appellant  was  receiving  counselling  from  the   Medical
     Foundation.

 31. The physical evidence contained in the Medical Foundation report could
     and should have been supplied by a GP or by the Appellant himself.  It
     is for the Appellant to put his best case forward at the time when his
     factual material is for consideration on appeal  to  the  Adjudicator,
     the Tribunal of fact.  The only material  in  the  Medical  Foundation
     report which involves any degree of expertise is the comment that each
     of the scars  was  consistent  with  the  cause  put  forward  by  the
     Appellant.  As we have said, the Medical Foundation is well placed but
     not uniquely well placed to offer that sort of comment and it is not a
     comment which takes matters very far because it  is  inherent  in  the
     concept of consistency, but no more, that  there  are  other  possible
     causes.  It is only the reference to consistency with the  Appellant's
     later, more detailed descriptions to  the  Medical  Foundation,  which
     might satisfy the Ladd v Marshall tests.

 32. If the Appellant had given evidence about the scarring and its causes,
     it  is  that  which,  as  much  as  anything,  would  have  given  the
     Adjudicator at least pause for thought as to the  credibility  of  the
     other aspects of the Appellant's claims  but  the  Appellant,  legally
     represented as he was, did not provide that information.

 33. However, even where new evidence satisfies the Ladd v Marshall  tests,
     it does not follow at all that the case then should be remitted to  an
     Adjudicator for the credibility of the Appellant to be assessed in the
     light of that new evidence.  As the appeal is only on a point of  law,
     it is necessary for an Appellant to identify the point of law which is
     advanced by the reference to this new evidence.  The evidence  has  to
     show, or assist in showing, that there was an  error  of  law  by  the
     Adjudicator.  Evidence which would  be  relevant  to  the  credibility
     findings made by the Adjudicator does not  show  of  itself  that  the
     Adjudicator made an error  of  law.   It  therefore  does  not  become
     relevant to any arguable ground of appeal.

 34. We recognise that in E, paragraph 66, the Court of  Appeal  identified
     circumstances in which an error of fact could amount to  an  error  of
     law.  We do not consider that the Medical Foundation report identifies
     an error of fact in the way necessary for that to constitute an  error
     of law.  The scars may be uncontentious, but that they were caused  by
     beating in the way put forward cannot be regarded as an  uncontentious
     or objectively verifiable fact which has been established.

 35. It cannot be said that the Adjudicator failed to take into  account  a
     material consideration because no material consideration of this  sort
     was placed before him and he made no error of law in  not  considering
     it.  His reasoning on the material before him is perfectly sound.

 36. It will therefore be for the Appellant to  see  if  the  Secretary  of
     State will entertain a fresh claim based upon this evidence.  We  make
     two observations.  The restriction of the grounds of appeal to a point
     of law may have been intended  and  indeed  may  have  the  effect  of
     shortening proceedings in the IAT or before Adjudicators on  remittal,
     but they may entail an overall greater  length  of  time  being  taken
     whilst the Secretary  of  State  considers  fresh  claims  that  would
     otherwise have been dealt with within the Appellate process.  It  will
     be necessary for him to be particularly careful about the way in which
     he approaches fresh claims, bearing in mind the limitations which  the
     grounds of appeal impose on what the IAT itself can consider.

 37. Second, ever-shortening timeframes for decision-making  ought  not  to
     mean  that  specialist  medical  evidence  where  it  is  required  is
     inevitably unavailable because of the overload which specialists  find
     in torture or ill-treatment cases.

 38. This appeal is, however, dismissed.  It is reported for what we say in
     relation to fresh evidence on a point of law.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
