
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |AG (Persecution -           |
|                           |        |Discrimination - Risk -     |
|                           |        |Family member) Israel UKIAT |
|                           |        |00215                       |
|On 8July 2004              |        |                            |
|Oral determination         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|27 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A Jordan (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr K Craig                                                        |
|Mr J H Eames                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr N S Stanage, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Browell Smith & Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs L Prince, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr  D  G  B  Trotter,  promulgated  on  22  October  2003
      following a hearing at the North Shields Hearing Centre on  1  October
      2003 in which he allowed  the  appeal  of  the  claimant  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to refuse both the claimant's human
      rights and asylum claims.

2.    The claimant is a citizen  of  Israel  although  he  is  a  non-Jewish
      citizen of Israel.  He was born on 1 April 1982 and is  now  22  years
      old.    He entered the United Kingdom on 16 August 2001 when he was 19
      years old.    On 27 June 2003 a decision was made to refuse  to  grant
      him asylum and to refuse him a variation of leave to enter the  United
      Kingdom.  Accordingly this gave  rise  to  a  right  of  appeal  under
      section 82(1) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which
      the claimant duly exercised on 15 July 2003.

3.    The basis  of  his  claim  as  set  out  by  the  Adjudicator  in  the
      determination was that the appellant had suffered from  discrimination
      as a Palestinian.  He was brought up in a village  called  Abu  Ghosh.
      This is a small Palestinian village  separated  from  the  surrounding
      Jewish areas by a fence.   In the early part of the  appellant's  life
      the family was driven from Abu Ghosh to  Ramallah  in  the  West  Bank
      where they stayed as refugees for some years and the claimant  alleged
      that from time to time even the  children  were  harassed  by  Israeli
      security forces but the claimant does not suggest that  the  treatment
      was any different from that meted out  to  Palestinians  as  a  whole.
      The family left Ramallah when the claimant was about 14 or 15 years of
      age and then eventually returned to Abu Ghosh when the  appellant  was
      19 years of age.

4.    The account that the claimant gave was  that  there  was  an  incident
      when he was 5 years old when there was an attack on the family home by
      Israeli security forces as result  of  which  he  was  injured.    His
      brother was shot at one point during the Intifada.  There was also  an
      incident in 1992, when the claimant was aged about 10, when  his  home
      was  surrounded  by  Israeli  soldiers.   It  was  an  extraordinarily
      frightening experience for him.   That is the nature of the claim that
      he put forward.  In1995 the  claimant's  family  were  bombed  out  by
      Palestinians believing that they were collaborators but that does  not
      feature as part  of  the  claim  that  the  claimant  is  in  fear  of
      persecution from the Israeli authorities.

5.    The claimant has a brother, although we do not know his age.  It  said
      in paragraph 14 of the determination that Mohammed, his  brother,  had
      been arrested on a number of occasions on suspicion  of  working  with
      the Palestinians.  He has never been charged.  He appears not to  have
      been badly treated in prison but was in prison for  no  reason  except
      his ethnicity and, as the Adjudicator put it, "an inchoate suspicion".

6.    The evidence that the claimant gave about his brother is  found  in  a
      statement that he prepared and which was before the Adjudicator.    In
      paragraph 23 of the statement, dated 9 September  2003,  the  claimant
      stated:

           "My brother Mohammed  was  arrested  by  the  Israelis  on  many
           occasions  because  they  suspected  he  was  working  for   the
           Palestinians.  He would be in and out of detention.    The  fact
           that he had an Israeli passport  did  not  help  him.    He  was
           arrested in about 1998 and detained for about 6 months  and  the
           second time was in 2000.   He was detained for 6  months  again.
           He was never charged with anything.  We went to visit him a  few
           times.    The coaches were arranged by the Red Cross.     He was
           not badly treated when he was in prison but he was held  for  no
           reason.   I do not want to make difficulties for him now."

7.    The fact that his brother has been arrested as set out  above  is  put
      forward as a significant feature of the appellant's own claim.

8.    The Adjudicator considered the background material.  In  paragraph  17
      to19 of the determination, he summarised the  position  of  non-Jewish
      citizens in Israel.   The Adjudicator stated:

      "17.  The US Department Report shows considerable distinction  between
           the treatment of Jewish and non-Jewish citizens by  the  Israeli
           state  so  that,  for  example,  we  read  at  page  20  of  the
           appellant's bundle that "there  continue  to  be  problems  with
           respect to its treatment of Arab citizens"  and  "some  security
           prisoners were sentenced on the basis of coerced confessions  by
           both  themselves  and  others  according  to  the  Human  Rights
           Organisations.  The  legal  system  often  imposed  more  severe
           punishment  on  Arab  citizens  than  Jewish  citizens..."   and
           reference is made to the effect that "the government did  little
           to  reduce  institutional  legal  and  societal   discrimination
           against   the   country's   Arab   citizens   who    constituted
           approximately 20% of the population but did not share fully  the
           rights and benefits provided to and obligations imposed  on  the
           country's Jewish citizens".

9.    In paragraph  18  of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  refers  to
      malpractices conducted on the part of the police reported  in  the  US
      State Department Report and, in paragraph 19, the  Adjudicator  refers
      to the societal discrimination against Palestinian Arabs  set  out  in
      the US State Department Report such as to result  in  difficulties  in
      relation to employment, access to education and health  services,  the
      exercise of the peaceful right  to  enjoy  land  and  possessions  and
      severe discrimination even in  circumstances  where  members  of  that
      minority are Israeli citizens.

10.   That was the basis upon which the Adjudicator determined the  material
      before him.   It was  the  same  basis  upon  which  Mr  Stanage,  who
      appeared on behalf of the claimant, conducted his  appeal  before  the
      Tribunal.     The  Adjudicator  considered  that  there   were   three
      questions that he was required to ask (and answer).    First,  whether
      being a Palestinian citizen of Israel would leave the claimant open to
      persecution (rather than harassment and discrimination alone),  if  he
      returned  to  Israel.   Second  whether  the   claimant's   individual
      circumstances by reference to his family were such that  he  would  be
      targeted for persecution and thirdly whether, as a returnee to  Israel
      of Palestinian origin, he would be targeted  and  suffer  persecution.



11.   The Adjudicator decided in paragraph 23 of the  determination,  having
      considered the US State Department  report  concerning  discrimination
      and sporadic harassment suffered by  Israel  citizens  of  Palestinian
      extraction,  that  this  amounted  to  persecution.   Accordingly   he
      decided, as a non-Jewish Israeli citizen, the appellant was liable  to
      persecution on return.  It also followed that  if  that  were  so,  he
      would also suffer a violation of his human rights under Article  3  of
      the ECHR.

12.   Mr Stanage, appearing before the Tribunal this  morning,  agreed  that
      the claim that he wished to advance  (and  on  which  the  Adjudicator
      found in his favour) was that all non-Jewish citizens of  the  Israeli
      state are liable to persecution because the discrimination  that  they
      suffer  is  so  widespread  and  so  complete  that  it   amounts   to
      persecution.

13.   He was not deterred by the fact that this would mean that  the  entire
      20% of the population who  are  Israeli  citizens,  although  of  Arab
      dissent, would be entitled to claim asylum.  As a result of  that,  he
      referred us to there being credible objective evidence upon  which  it
      was open to the Adjudicator to decide that this was the case.

14.   During the course of his submissions we were not in fact  referred  to
      any of the other passages in the US State Department report save those
      that are referred to in paragraph 17, 18 and 19 in  the  Adjudicator's
      determination and which we have set  out  above.   We  have  therefore
      simply confined our consideration to  the  resume  of  the  background
      information  set  out  by  the  Adjudicator   in   those   paragraphs.
      Paragraph 17 of the determination talks of a distinction  between  the
      treatment of Jewish and non-Jewish citizens by the Israeli state.   It
      also refers to there being problems with respect to its  treatment  of
      Arab citizens.   The paragraph also refers to some security  prisoners
      sentenced on the basis of  coerced  confessions  and  that  the  legal
      system imposed more severe punishment on  Arab  citizens  than  Jewish
      citizens.  Since the claimant himself is not likely to be required  to
      stand trial (because he is not suspected of any criminal  offences  by
      the Israeli authorities) the fact that the  risk  of  imprisonment  is
      greater for Arab citizens than  it  is  for  Jewish  citizens  is  not
      directly  in  point,  even  though   it   points   to   the   societal
      discrimination which is spoken of in the US State  Department  report.
       Similarly, it is accepted that, as a result of the content of the  US
      State Department report by the Tribunal, the claimant establishes that
      there is discriminatory conduct by the Israeli authorities in relation
      to employment, access to education and health services.

15.   In our judgment, however, the passages which are referred  to  by  the
      Adjudicator do not  amount  to  persecution.     There  is  no  strict
      definition of persecution and we would not wish to impose one here but
      we  can  see  from  those  passages  the  conduct  complained  of   is
      discriminatory but no more.  The  discrimination  arises  because  the
      Arab  Israelis  are  both  an  ethnic  and   a   religious   minority.
      Nevertheless, the discrimination does not in our  judgment  amount  to
      persecution.     It was submitted by Mr Stanage that the Adjudicator's
      view was the quantity of discrimination (if  sufficiently  widespread)
      takes on the quality  of  persecution.   We  hope  we  have  correctly
      paraphrased this submission.  In our judgment, in the absence  of  any
      other background material to which we have might have been referred in
      relation to the conduct of  the  Israeli  authorities  upon  the  Arab
      minority, it cannot be said that the claimant has made  out  his  case
      that all Arab Israeli citizens are liable to persecution.

16.   The second area upon which  the  claimant  concentrates  is  that  the
      claimant's brother has been arrested on a number of occasions and that
      this would inevitably put the claimant at risk himself.   It first has
      to be said that the claimant reached his majority  whilst  he  was  in
      Israel, although he remained there for only a  few  months  after  his
      18th birthday.  There was no evidence to suggest that he had ever been
      targeted as an adult citizen by the security authorities.   We do  not
      have a sufficient indication  as  to  what  information  the  security
      services had in relation to Mohammed to be  satisfied  there  was  any
      evidence about his involvement in Palestinian  activities.    Assuming
      that there was none,  however,  it  does  not  seem  to  us  that  the
      Adjudicator should simply assume that,  because  a  brother  has  been
      arrested on a number of occasions and then  released  without  charge,
      this places members of his family at  risk  or  in  a  more  difficult
      position.    It is correct  that  in  the  background  information  in
      relation to other countries, there is sometimes credible evidence that
      the security services target other family members as a result of their
      suspicions in relation to one of them.  There is no evidence that  was
      put before us by the claimant, however, to suggest  that  the  Israeli
      authorities do this.  We do not think that it is for us to  draw  that
      inference.  Even if that  were  the  case,  we  do  not  consider  the
      claimant has established it is reasonably likely  it  will  happen  to
      him.

17.   The Adjudicator concluded in paragraph 23 of the determination:

      "Almost inevitably this man would be identified as the brother  of  an
      administrative detainee on his  return  to  Israel  and  he  would  be
      treated with even greater suspicion than he would ordinarily."

      We considered whether  there  is  any  evidence  in  support  of  that
      submission.

18.   Before the Adjudicator the claimant put forward a report  prepared  by
      Dr Gerd  Monneman  dated  26  August  2003.     Dr  Monneman  is  from
      Lancaster  University  Department  of   Politics   and   International
      Relations.    He prepared a report which at page 5 makes a  number  of
      points.  One passage reads:

       "If  his  brother  has  indeed  been  linked  to  and  arrested   for
      Palestinian militant activity then not only is he  likely  to  receive
      inadequate protection from Israel law enforcement and legal systems he
      may indeed be vulnerable to the type of human rights abuses (including
      arbitrary  arrest,  beatings  etc)  attested  by  the  reports  quoted
      earlier."

19.   That is the sum total of the evidence put forward in  support  of  the
      proposition.  It is submitted that the fact that the brother has  been
      arrested will inevitably  lead  to  the  appellant's  own  arrest  and
      persecution.     We are not satisfied that the background material  is
      sufficient to lead us to a conclusion that it is the routine habit  of
      the Israeli security services to detain other family  members  because
      one brother has been arrested.  In addition we are  unsatisfied  about
      the evidence in relation to the brother's involvement with Palestinian
      militant activity.   It was not said by the claimant in  his  evidence
      that his brother (or indeed any other family members) were  militants.
      It appears to have been the case that the brother was  arrested  as  a
      result of random security checks.

20.   The third and  final  point  made  by  the  claimant  (and  which  was
      accepted  by  the  Adjudicator)  is  that  returnees  to   Israel   of
      Palestinian origin are selected for and targeted with ill-treatment of
      a severity capable of amounting to persecution.  No evidence  was  put
      forward to us that returnees, as returnees, are routinely  ill-treated
      by the security forces,  because  they  have  spent  time  in  another
      country.   Indeed, we were not referred to  any  background  material,
      save by reference  to  the  material  set  out  in  the  Adjudicator's
      determination.  In our judgment, where it is said that  failed  asylum
      seekers or similar  returnees  fall  into  a  separate  category,  the
      claimant has to adduce some specific evidence that there is systematic
      ill- treatment carried out by the authorities at the airport  directed
      towards such people.  In our  judgment  we  were  shown  no  objective
      evidence that records are kept of  those  who  leave  the  country  in
      circumstances where they may be treated as terrorists or involved with
      Palestinian militant activity.  It is not suggested that the fact that
      the brother has been arrested will be recorded  on  records  available
      for inspection at the airport.   It does not therefore seem to us that
      there is any credible evidence that returnees  fall  into  a  separate
      category of risk or that this claimant, who  has  been  absent  for  2
      years, would be  treated  as  being  of  particular  interest  to  the
      authorities.

21.   For these reasons, we are not satisfied that the  Adjudicator  reached
      a sustainable conclusion.  We have considered the basis upon which  we
      are entitled to overturn the findings of fact made by an  Adjudicator.
      In Oleed [2002] EWCA Civ 1906, Schiemann LJ stated in paragraph 29:

           "Before us it was accepted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
           that the Tribunal should act even-handedly and should  only  set
           aside a decision of an Adjudicator who has heard the evidence if
           it is plainly wrong or  unsustainable.   I  do  not  regard  the
           Adjudicator's conclusion as perverse or plainly wrong nor  do  I
           think that the Tribunal  was  entitled,  at  any  event  by  the
           process  of  reasoning  that  it  employed,  to  come  to   that
           conclusion."


      The threshold is a high one:  plainly wrong, unsustainable,  perverse,
      so inherently illogical as to render  the  decision  flawed.   In  our
      judgment this determination is plainly wrong and unsustainable because
      the Adjudicator identified no evidence in his determination to support
      the three bases upon which he found that the appellant was  liable  to
      persecution or a violation of his human rights on return.  Mr  Stanage
      was unable to  refer  us  to  material  capable  of  making  good  the
      Adjudicator's failure.

22.   Accordingly, the Tribunal is permitted to intervene.  In our  judgment
      the evidence before the Adjudicator and to which we have been referred
      does not establish the claimant is liable  to  suffer  persecution  or
      breach of his human rights on return.

Decision: The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.





                                                   Andrew Jordan
                                                   Vice President
Approved for electronic distribution
