
 | |BB (Right of Appeal - Decision as Determination) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT
00076   | |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date of Hearing: 13th February 2004                               |
|Determination delivered orally at Hearing                         |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|13.02.2004                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)                              |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                    |
|Mr A Jordan (Vice President)                                      |
|Between:                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She seeks to  appeal  from  a
     decision of an Adjudicator, Mrs C J Boyd, deciding  that  she  had  no
     valid appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 7th March 2002,
     refusing her leave to enter after  refusing  her  asylum.   Before  us
     today she is represented by Mr Pipe, instructed by Rashid  &  Co,  and
     the Respondent is represented by Ms Brown.  We are  grateful  to  them
     both for their submissions on the difficult issue of whether there  is
     an appeal to the Tribunal against such a decision of an Adjudicator.

  2. The position in the present case is that  the  Appellant  entered  the
     United Kingdom on 9th February 2002 and claimed asylum.  She failed to
     return her forms to establish the claim and as a result of the lack of
     information the Secretary of State refused it.  There was a  right  of
     appeal to the Adjudicator:  the time limit for that appeal expired  on
     21st March 2002.  The Notice of Appeal appears to have been served  on
     10th April 2002.  That was well out of time.

  3. Before the Adjudicator, there was no appearance by either  side.   The
     Adjudicator was satisfied that  both  parties  had  been  served  with
     notice of the hearing but, in any event,  there  was  the  Adjudicator
     thought no basis for her to extend time for the Notice of Appeal.  She
     therefore decided as we have indicated that there was no valid  appeal
     before her.

  4. These proceedings are governed by the 1999 Act and the 2000 Rules.  We
     will  begin  by  setting  out  what  we  apprehend  are  the  relevant
     provisions of the  Act  and  of  the  Rules.   Section  58  is  headed
     "Appeals: General":

           "(1)  The right of appeal given by  a  particular  provision  of
                 this part is to be read with any other  provision  of  this
                 part which restricts or otherwise affects that right.


           (4)   Part III of Schedule 4 makes provision:
                 (a) with respect to the determination of appeals under this
           part, and
                 (b) for further appeals.


           (5)   For the purposes of the Immigration Acts, an appeal  under
                 this part is to be treated as  pending  during  the  period
                 beginning when notice of appeal is given  and  ending  when
                 the appeal is finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned."


  5. Paragraphs 21 and 22 of  schedule  4  are  within  Part  III  of  that
     schedule.  The part is headed "Determination of Appeals".

           "21(1)      On an appeal to him under  Part  4,  an  Adjudicator
                 must allow the appeal if he considers:
                 (a)   that the decision or action against which the  appeal
                       is brought was not in accordance with law or with any
                       other Immigration Rules applicable to the case;  or
                 (b)   if the decision or action involved the exercise of  a
                       discretion by the Secretary of State  or  an  Officer
                       that  the  discretion  should  have  been   exercised
                       differently but otherwise must dismiss the appeal.
                 ...


           22(1) Subject to any requirement of rules made under paragraph 3
                 as to leave to appeal, any party to an appeal,  other  than
                 an appeal under Section  71  to  an  Adjudicator,  may,  if
                 dissatisfied  with  his  determination,   appeal   to   the
                 Immigration Appeal Tribunal.
                (2)    The Tribunal may affirm the  determination  or  make
                 any other determination which the  Adjudicator  could  have
                 made."


  6. The 2000 Rules are made under paragraph 3 of schedule 4.   Rule  2  is
     headed  "Interpretation"  and  contains   definitions,   including   a
     definition of determination in the following terms:


           "'Determination' means the decision of the  Appellate  Authority
           to  allow  or  dismiss  an  appeal  and  the  reasons  for  that
           decision."


      Part 2 of the Rules is headed "Appeals to Adjudicators"  and  has  the
      rules relating to such appeals including rules as to time.  Rule 12 is
      the rule governing the proceedings before the Adjudicator  in  a  case
      such as the present.


           "12(1)      Where the Respondent alleges that ...


                 (b)   the Notice of Appeal was not given within the  period
                       specified by Rule 6;
                 the Respondent shall  send  to  the  Adjudicator  with  the
                 documents required under Rule 8 and to  the  Appellant  and
                 his representative (if he  has  one)  a  written  statement
                 setting out the allegation and the reasons for it  and  any
                 relevant facts relating to it."


  7. We do not need to set out the parts of that Rule which relates to  the
     Adjudicator's procedure, but sub-rule 5 is as follows:


           "(5)  Where the Adjudicator determines as  a  preliminary  issue
                 that the Notice of Appeal was not given within  the  period
                 specified by Rule 6, then, except where a deportation is in
                 force, in respect of the  Appellant,  the  Adjudicator  may
                 allow the appeal to proceed if  he  is  satisfied  that  by
                 reason of special circumstances it just to do so."


  8. So much for the statutory provisions.  It is clear in the present case
     that although  the  document  signed  by  the  Adjudicator  is  headed
     "Determination  and  Reasons",  it  does  not  allow  or  dismiss  the
     Appellant's appeal on its merits or at all.  What it does is simply to
     decline to extend time.  It is common ground,  as  we  understand  it,
     between the parties, that if that  is  in  truth  a  determination  as
     defined by Rule 2 or as intended by the  relevant  provisions  of  the
     1999 Act, then  it  would  amount  to  an  implied  dismissal  of  the
     Appellant's appeal and would carry a right of appeal (subject,  again,
     to requirements as to notice  and  time)  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal.   If  on  the  other  hand,  the  document  signed  by   the
     Adjudicator is not a determination as defined, it is difficult to  see
     that there could be a right of appeal to this Tribunal.

  9. The matter is  very  far  from  being  clear.   We  were  referred  to
     paragraph 18.164 of Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and  Practice,  5th
     Edition.   Footnote  6  to  that   paragraph   lists   a   number   of
     determinations of the Tribunal in  which  it  had  been  decided  that
     various types of decision by Adjudicators amounted  to  determinations
     for the purpose of the application of Section 20  of  the  Immigration
     Act 1971, which is the predecessor of the statutory provisions we have
     cited.  However, those decisions were all made in the  context  of  an
     Act and various Rules differing from the 2000 Rules.   In  particular,
     in the 1996 Rules, we find this:

           "2(3)(a)    an appeal is determined when written notice is  sent
                 of the decision whether or not the appeal should be allowed
                 and expressions such  as  'determination'  and  'notice  of
                 determination' shall be construed accordingly."

      We have to decide whether under the  1999  Act  and  2000  Rules,  the
      judicial  act  of  the  Adjudicator  in  the  present   case   was   a
      "determination".

 10. We begin with section 58.  As Mr Pipe pointed out, whatever  else  the
     document issued by the Appellant was, it does appear to  have  been  a
     Notice of Appeal.  He asks us to note that  under  section  58(5),  an
     appeal is to be treated as pending during the  period  beginning  when
     notice of appeal is given.  If the notice in the  present  case  is  a
     notice within that provision, then he has, he says, a  pending  appeal
     before the Appellate Authorities.  We are satisfied that section 58(5)
     is to be read as referring only to a notice  of  appeal  which  either
     begins as valid and in time, or is later accepted by the Respondent as
     in time, or is treated by the Adjudicator either as in time, or as one
     in which there are special reasons for allowing the appeal to proceed.
      In other words, we do not read section 58(5) as applying to a  Notice
     of Appeal which is not a valid, in time notice.  The reason  for  that
     is as follows.  While an appeal is pending there are  restrictions  on
     the right of the Secretary of State to remove an  Appellant  from  the
     United Kingdom.  As is well known, provisions of the Immigration  Acts
     are sometimes subject to abuse.  Without  wishing  to  make  any  such
     accusation in  the  present  case,  it  is  clear  that  to  allow  an
     unsuccessful Applicant to inhibit his removal automatically by putting
     in an invalid Notice of Appeal, long after the time fixed for  putting
     in such a notice, would enable, and possibly indeed  encourage  abuse.
     Section 58(5) does not therefore in our judgment assist the  Appellant
     in this case.

 11. There are two other matters to which we should draw attention.  One is
     that we are aware that the Court of Appeal has held that the  decision
     of the Tribunal that an application to it for permission to appeal  to
     that  Court  is  out  of  time,  amounts,  for  the  purposes  of  the
     jurisdiction under paragraph 23 of the  1999  Act,  to  a  refusal  of
     leave.  That decision is distinguishable from the present case.  There
     was no doubt that there was a  valid  appeal  before  the  Immigration
     Appellate Authorities.

 12. Another possible comparison is  with  a  case  where  the  Adjudicator
     decides that, for some reason other  than  time,  there  is  no  valid
     appeal before him:  for example, if an Adjudicator  decides  that  the
     appeal is one which an Adjudicator has no discretion to  hear.   Those
     circumstances, as it appears to  us,  are  again  different  from  the
     present.  If an Adjudicator decides that there is no  jurisdiction  to
     hear an appeal for some reason other than time, then it is right  that
     that decision should be subject to examination and re-determination by
     the Tribunal, because what the Adjudicator may have done is to decline
     to hear an appeal which was in fact valid and pending before him.   In
     the present case,  unless  the  Adjudicator  decides  to  exercise  an
     inclusionary discretion in order  to  hear  an  appeal  which  at  its
     inception is invalid, then there is no appeal before the Adjudicator.

 13. For those reasons, we find that we are not assisted in the Appellant's
     favour by any of the matters which have arisen during  the  course  of
     this hearing.  It is our view that the definition  of  "determination"
     in Rule 2 is intended to limit the right of appeal to the Tribunal  to
     those decisions which in effect put an end to a  valid  appeal  before
     the Adjudicator.  The definition is intended to exclude an  appeal  to
     the Tribunal on any interlocutory decision by the Adjudicator, and  it
     is also in our view intended to exclude an appeal to the  Tribunal  in
     cases where the Adjudicator's decision is simply that there has  never
     been any valid appeal to the authority, because the notice  of  appeal
     was out of time and time should not be extended.

 14. It follows that our decision is that the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction
     to hear an appeal against the Adjudicator's decision in this case.  We
     apprehend that the appropriate route of challenge to an  Adjudicator's
     decision of this nature would be by judicial review.  In  the  present
     case, of course, that is itself, a procedure which may be affected  by
     the passage of time.   We  should  also  add  that  this  decision  is
     specifically an interpretation of the 1999 Act and the 2000 Rules, not
     the 2002 Act and the 2003 Rules.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
