



                        BA and others (Bedoon-statelessness-risk of
                       persecution) Kuwait CG [2004] UKIAT 00256


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                                Date heard:   11 June   2003
                                          Date notified: 15th September 2004


                                   Before:-

                      DR  H  H  STOREY (VICE PRESIDENT)
                       MR  A R MACKEY (VICE PRESIDENT)
                    MRS J A J C GLEESON (VICE PRESIDENT)

                                                         Between



                                                  Appellants



                                                           and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Appearances:  Mr R Bartram, solicitor, of Luqmani Thompson  &  Partners  for
both appellants. Mr M Davidson, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
Secretary of State.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, each of whom claims to be a stateless  Bedoon  (sometimes
spelt "Bidoon"  or  "Bidun")  from  Kuwait,  appeal  against  dismissals  at
adjudicator level of their asylum appeals. The first appellant  was  refused
leave to enter following refusal to grant asylum on  17  April.  The  second
appellant was refused leave to enter following refusal to grant asylum on  1
May 1999.

2. The cases of both appellants were  remitted  to  the  Tribunal  following
Consent Orders. They have been joined for a legal panel  to  consider  in  a
combined hearing.

3. Insofar as our determination deals with the general  position  of  Bedoon
from Kuwait, it is intended as a country guideline decision, to be  followed
unless there  is  a  material  change  of  circumstances.  In  reaching  our
conclusions we have taken account of past Tribunal  decisions  dealing  with
Bedoon, including Alenezi  [2002]  UKIAT  00924  and   [2002]  UKIAT  00923.
Whilst we have found these of some assistance in clarifying the  issues,  we
have to decide the appeals before us in the light of more recent  background
evidence, although it has to be said that neither party was able to  furnish
us with as much up to date information  as  we  had  hoped.  The  background
materials we have considered include US State Department reports  on  Kuwait
for 1999 through to 2002, the Human Rights Watch  Report  entitled  Promises
Betrayed: Denial of  Rights  of  Bidun,  Women  and  Freedom  of  Expression
(October 2000), the Amnesty International 2001 report, the written and  oral
evidence of Mr Shiblak and a number of letters written in 2002 from Dr S Al-
Khaldi, adviser to the Committee on Human Rights in the Kuwaiti Parliament.

4. We should record our apologies to the parties for the  lengthy  delay  in
promulgating our determination of these appeals.  We  learnt  shortly  after
the hearing that a case involving a Bedoon claimant was before the Court  of
Appeal. We have now seen a copy of the Court of  Appeal  judgement  in  that
case, SSHD v Hamer Jasem Mohamed Al Shamri [ 2003] EWCA  Civ  912,  13  June
2003 (the "Al Shamri" case).  We  did  consider  whether  to  reconvene  the
hearing in order to invite submissions from the parties on it.  However,  we
concluded that the principal issue before the court in that case  was  quite
distinct: whether the Tribunal had erred in finding  that  intergovernmental
negotiations  to  arrange  for  the  claimant's  return  to   Kuwait   would
necessarily involve the disclosure of his asylum claim and a breach  of  the
assurance of confidentiality.  Whilst  the  Court  appeared  to  reject  the
position that Bedoon per se were  at  risk  of  persecution,  they  did  not
address that issue substantively. We do make later  reference  to  something
said in this case, but for reasons given there, we do  not  consider  it  of
significance. On 17 February 2004, in order to ensure  the  parties  had  an
opportunity to adduce more recent evidence, if any, we invited  them  to  do
so. Neither replied. Further time was taken considering  whether  this  case
should await a decision in other pending Bedoon cases: in  the  end  it  was
decided this case would come first.

5. The word "Bedoon" is from the Arabic  "bedoon" meaning "the without"  and
the term "bedoon jinsiyya" is used in Kuwait to mean  "without  nationality"
or "without citizenship". It appears that in fact the Bedoon consist  of  an
extended group of tribes spread  across  the  borders  between  Iraq,  Iran,
Syria and Saudi Arabia and of course Kuwait who are largely of  the  Shi`ite
faith. Many of these tribes have inhabited the region in  or  around  Kuwait
for centuries. The term is not to be confused with "Bedouin"  which  derives
from the Arabic word "badawi" meaning nomad. A short resume  of  the  recent
history of the  Bedoon  is  conveniently  given  in  a  recent  New  Zealand
decision Appeal No. 72635/01 [2003] INLR 629 to which we shall have need  to
refer later on. At paragraph 45 this decision states:


      "In the Human Rights Watch, Promises Betrayed:  Denial  of  Rights  of
      Bidun, Women and Freedom of Expression  (October  2000)  at  9  it  is
      stated that  there  are  approximately  120,000  Bedoons  resident  in
      Kuwait. An estimated 240,000 are living outside the country,  many  of
      whom wish to return to Kuwait but have not been permitted to do so  by
      the government. Until the mid-1980s  the  Kuwaiti  government  treated
      Bedoon as lawful residents of Kuwait whose claims to citizenship  were
      being considered, a status that distinguished them not only from other
      foreign residents but also from other groups of  stateless  residents,
      such as Palestinians from Gaza. Bedoon made up the  vast  majority  of
      the rank and file of all branches of the police and  military  and  as
      already noted, were eligible for temporary passports under Art  17  of
      the Passport Law  11/1962.  Intermarriage  among  Bedoon  and  Kuwaiti
      citizens was and is  common,  and  because  of  the  vagaries  of  the
      implementation of the Nationality Law it is not unusual for  a  single
      family to have members with different citizenship  statuses:  original
      citizenship, citizenship by naturalisation, and  Bedoon.  However,  in
      1985 the government began applying a series of  regulations  stripping
      the Bedoon of almost all their previous rights and benefits.  It  also
      fired government employees not employed by the army and police and who
      could not produce valid passports, whether issued by Kuwait or another
      country and instructed private employers to do the same.  Restrictions
      increased in the aftermath of the 1990-1991 Iraqi  occupation.  Bedoon
      government  employees  were  dismissed  en  masse  and  only  a  small
      proportion were later rehired. Beginning  in  1993  Bedoon  were  also
      required to  pay  fees  to  use  healthcare  centres,  although  those
      services remained free for Kuwaiti citizens.  More  recently,  in  May
      2000  the  Kuwaiti  National  Assembly  passed   amendments   to   the
      Nationality Law which were intended to be the final statement of which
      Bedoon would be eligible for  naturalisation  and  in  June  2000  the
      Ministry of Interior ended a nine month programme during which  Bedoon
      who  signed  affidavits  admitting  to  a  foreign   nationality   and
      renouncing claims to Kuwait nationality could apply for  a  five  year
      residency permit and other benefits".



The first appellant

6. We need to set out in short form the facts of each  case.  The  basis  of
the first appellant`s claim was that he had been  born  in  Kuwait  and  had
served in the army  until  Iraq  invaded  the  country.  Shortly  after  the
liberation of Kuwait Kuwaiti authorities had detained  and  ill-treated  him
between March and September 1991.  He  then  moved  to  the  border  regions
between Iraq and Kuwait, staying in a Red Cross camp until it was closed  in
October 1991. Subsequently he moved around, living  and  working  illegally.
When pressure was put on all Bedoon to leave by June  2000,  he  obtained  a
forged Saudi passport from Jordan and then went to the  UAE  in  July  1999,
where he worked as a taxi driver for 6 months. He then left, concerned  that
his false documents would be discovered and because he could not afford  the
cost of living there. He claimed (1) that the Kuwaiti authorities would  not
re-admit him; but (2) even if  they  did,  he  would  face  persecution  for
failing to reveal his true nationality. In a determination dated 1  February
2001 the Adjudicator, Mr A W Khan, accepted he was a   Bedoon  from  Kuwait.
He then  considered  the  position  of  Bedoon  generally,  concluding  that
although Bedoon as a grouping suffered measures  of  discriminations,  these
fell short of the threshold of persecution or serious harm.

7. Turning to the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,  the  Adjudicator
found that although he had been ill treated in 1991 and had needed  to  move
around, he and his wife and children had in fact managed to live (and he  to
work) without difficulties until they  left  in  1999.  He  noted  that  the
appellant  had  failed  to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity   to   seek
naturalisation before  June  2000  and  so  receive  a  civil  ID  card  and
permanent residency.

8. The grounds of appeal contended that the Adjudicator erred in failing  to
find that the appellant had experienced  past  persecution  and  would  face
future persecution. They contended  that  the  objective  country  materials
amply  demonstrated  that  the  Bedoon  faced  ill  treatment  and   serious
discriminatory  measures.  Just  because  the  appellant  had  not  suffered
terribly in the past did not mean that sooner or later he would  not  become
a victim of persecution. The appellant had faced detention  and  deportation
in 1991 and had then been forced to remain in his own country living  as  an
illegal immigrant dependent on black market employment.  In  particular,  it
was submitted that the Adjudicator had misunderstood the objective  evidence
concerning the ability of Bedoon to regularise their  situation  in  Kuwait.
Whereas the Adjudicator had viewed the appellant as having failed  to  avail
himself  of  opportunities  to  naturalise  and  obtain  documentation   and
permanent residency, the real effect of the June 2000  initiative  taken  by
the  government  was  to  permanently  exclude  most  Bedoon  from   Kuwaiti
nationality.  Under  this  initiative  most  could  only  regularise   their
situation by obtaining a foreign  passport  and  registering  as  a  foreign
resident, thereby renouncing claims to Kuwait  nationality.  Those  who  did
not register in this way  as  foreigners  faced  prosecution  and  potential
deportation. The fact that the appellant had chosen not to  register  before
he left would add to the problems he would face if returned.


The second appellant

9. The second  appellant`s  claim  was  that  he  had  been  employed  as  a
policeman since 1982. He had no problems prior to 1996 but once he began  to
speak  out  about  the  plight  of   the   Bedoon,   things   changed.    In
September/October  1996,  January  1997  and  in  April  1997  he   received
summonses. On each occasion he was briefly detained. From early 1997  fellow
officers made threats to his life and he was given  an  ultimatum  to  prove
his nationality or be dismissed  from  his  job  and  have  his  ID/passport
withdrawn.  He feared arrest at any moment.  He then obtained permission  to
visit Jordan for which purpose he was issued with an Art 17  passport.  From
Jordan he made his way to the UK and claimed asylum.

10. The Adjudicator, Mr H B Trethowan, in a  determination  notified  on  10
September 1999 accepted that the  appellant  was  a  stateless  Bedoon  from
Kuwait. He considered that in general, whilst stateless Bedoon per  se  were
not at risk of persecution, an appellant who is a Bedoon  and  can  show  he
has been discriminated against in respect of all or a  large  proportion  of
his basic  civil  and  human  rights  could  be  said  to  have  experienced
persecution. However, although accepting that the  appellant  had  stood  up
for the rights of stateless Bedoon, he noted that  he  and  his  family  had
managed to  "rise  above  the  discriminatory  acts  practised  against  the
majority of the Bedoon in Kuwait" by virtue of having been  able  to  obtain
and use an Art 17 passport, hold employment as a police officer since  1982,
live a reasonably normal life  in  rented  accommodation,  marry  a  Kuwaiti
citizen and obtain education to a university standard. He did not accept  as
credible the appellant`s claims to have received three summonses or to  have
been told that unless he could produce evidence  of  his  nationality  by  a
certain date, he would be dismissed. Noting that the appellant had  remained
in Kuwait until 3 months  after  the  last  summonses  he  claimed  to  have
received, he considered it was unlikely he would have waited  this  long  if
he was genuinely in fear of his own safety as a result  of  threats  he  had
received or if he genuinely feared persecution.   He  also  considered  that
there was no evidence that the appellant would be unable to use his  Art  17
passport (which was valid  until  February  2000)  in  order  to  return  to
Kuwait.

11. As regards what would  happen  to  the  appellant  having  returned,  he
concluded that the appellant and his family would be in no worse a  position
than his parents, his  two  brothers  and  three  sisters  still  living  in
Kuwait. He accepted that he would be unlikely to be  allowed  to  return  to
his job in the police force having ostensibly left  the  country  to  go  on
leave but then applied for asylum in the UK. Furthermore:

      "In the absence of any employment, and on the basis of the  background
      documents, I have to accept as being reasonably likely that  he  would
      be unable to work; that he would  have  great  difficulty  in  finding
      accommodation for himself and his family, and would certainly  not  be
      allowed to own property; that his children are likely to have problems
      with regard to education; and that he and his family would  be  denied
      any further right to travel, having abused the right previously  given
      to him".

12. He further concluded that even if he  had  considered  the  measures  of
discrimination the appellant would face to amount to  persecution,  "I  find
that by his own actions in leaving a well paid and secure position with  the
police the appellant has cynically manipulated events so as  to  enable  him
to claim that he cannot return to Kuwait, thus creating a  false  claim  for
Refugee Status".

13. We should clarify straightaway that it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
Adjudicator's apparent reliance in  the  above  passage  on  a  "bad  faith"
principle was erroneous, as the Court of Appeal subsequently made  clear  in
Danian [2000] Imm AR 96.

14. The grounds of appeal  contended  that  in  addition  to  his  erroneous
reliance on the "bad faith" principle, the Adjudicator had erred in  finding
there had  been  no  past  persecution:  the  denial  to  the  appellant  of
citizenship alone amounted to persecution. The Adjudicator was  also  wrong,
they argued, to reason that the appellant had left behind a "well  paid  and
secure position with the police", as there was  evidence  that  the  Kuwaiti
authorities had  a  policy  of  gradually  reducing  the  number  of  Bedoon
employed in the forces. Furthermore, the few privileges  the  appellant  had
were lost once he left the police force. Particular  weight  was  placed  on
the submission that the Adjudicator erred in concluding  that  the  measures
of discrimination the appellant would face did not  cumulatively  amount  to
persecution. They pointed out that, although he accepted that  in  principle
a Bedoon could show persecution if he was discriminated against in a  "large
proportion" of his basic civil and human rights, the Adjudicator  failed  to
recognise that he had in fact found that this appellant would face  measures
of discrimination in most  of  the  areas  of  life  he  had  identified  as
material: in addition to race discrimination, he had mentioned being  unable
to find work,  not  being  permitted  to  own  property,  problems  for  his
children in receiving education and denial of any further right  to  travel.
In these respects, the grounds contended, the  appellant  was  in  the  same
position as most other stateless Bedoon.  Among  other  points  raised  were
that the Adjudicator should have  understood  from  the  objective  evidence
that there  were  reasons  to  do  with  Kuwaiti  law  and  policy  why  the
appellant's superiors were pressing him to provide evidence of nationality.

15. In the grounds which accompanied the application for leave to the  Court
of  Appeal  against  the  original  Tribunal  determination  on  the  second
appellant's case, the point was made that, even if  it  were  accepted  that
the Adjudicator was right to find the  appellant  had  been  able  to  "rise
above" the discriminatory measures he faced in the past,  he  was  wrong  to
conclude that would be the case in the future. We take this point  as  being
incorporated into the present grounds of appeal.


The hearing

16. At the hearing we heard evidence  from  Mr  Abbas  Shiblak.  A  Research
Fellow at the Refugee Studies Centre, University of Oxford since  1992,  his
work has included a research project on statelessness in  the  Arab  region.
He has done work for the European Union and the Council of  Europe  and  has
written for specialist journals. He gave  evidence  amplifying  his  written
report addressing statelessness issues in the Arab region and  the  case  of
the Kuwaiti  Bedoon  in  particular.  That  report  contains  the  following
passage:

      "[The Kuwaiti Bedoon`s] continued exclusion from nationality can  only
      be understood in the light of the power struggle in a system which was
      largely based on sectarianism  and  tribalism  within  newly  emerging
      emirates striving  to  assert  their  legitimacy  and  authority.  The
      majority of the Bedoon are in fact an extended branch of tribes across
      the borders between Iraq, Iran, Syria and Saudi Arabia and are largely
      of the Muslim Shi`ite faith".

17. His report goes on to note  that  the  terms  in  which  the  Government
issued law No 22 of 3 June 2000 dealing  with  naturalisation  opportunities
for Bedoon were very restrictive: he refers to one  expert  assessment  that
less than 20% of the Bedoon could  even  formally  meet  the  criteria.  His
report also explains the legal basis of the Art 17 passport: so named  after
Art 17 of Passport Law No 11 of 1962, amended by Law No  22/1963  and  later
by Law No 15/1997. Art 17 states:

   a) A Kuwaiti passport is issued  to  those  who  are  considered  Kuwaiti
      citizens in accordance with nationality law at the time;
   b)  If necessary, the Minister of Interior may grant  passports  to  non-
      Kuwaiti civil servants working for government  agencies  if  they  are
      carrying out official duties abroad and only for the duration  of  the
      assigned mission".

18. In his oral evidence to us he explained that it may be  that  there  has
been a further fall in the number of Bedoon currently  in  Kuwait  lawfully:
he mentioned the figure of some  80,000  -  90,000.  But  whether  the  true
figure was the previous one of some 120,000 or this lesser estimate, it  was
a very considerable reduction in figures for the 1990s which  estimated  the
number lawfully resident as around 220,000. He reiterated that Law No 22  of
3  June  2000  had  provided  a  scheme  by  which  stateless  Bedoon  could
naturalise but its criteria were so narrow  they  excluded  most.  Following
the introduction of this law,  the  government  had  launched  a  nine-month
programme designed to pressure Bedoon  into  obtaining  foreign  nationality
and renouncing Kuwait nationality as a  condition  for  obtaining  residence
permits and other benefits. This had led to what he called a  "costly  trade
in forged  passports".  Less  than  1,000  had  been  naturalised  and  that
included  not  only  Bedoon  but  also  their  wives  and  some   non-Bedoon
foreigners. He had  seen  the  letter  from  the  Kuwait  Embassy  dated  31
December 2002. He re-emphasised that  Bedoon  are  recognisable  from  their
family names which in turn identify tribal origins.

19. He explained that although Kuwait law technically  defined  the  Art  17
passport in narrow terms covering  only  those  who  are  employees  of  the
state, in practice the authorities made wider use of it and did issue it  to
non-citizens, including some Bedoon, for  the  purposes  of  travel  abroad,
mainly to permit pilgrimage to Mecca (Haj). But, Haj apart, Bedoon found  it
increasingly difficult to obtain such passports. It was also the  case  that
such documents would not be issued to Bedoon who were outside Kuwait.

20.  Mr  Shiblak  said  it  was  also  his  understanding  that  in  certain
circumstances the Kuwaiti authorities through their consulates abroad  would
issue emergency documents to enable persons they  accepted  as  citizens  or
resident non-citizens to travel back urgently for a death in the  family  or
matters of this kind, e.g. when individuals have lost documents or had  them
stolen.

21. In Mr Shiblak`s view the Kuwaiti  authorities  had  for  some  time,  in
particular since 1990/1991 as a result of the  first  Gulf  War,  pursued  a
policy of trying to drive out as many Bedoon as they could.  Around  120,000
or more had left since that time and had not been  allowed  back.  The  term
now used to describe them was no longer  Bedoon,  to  denote  statelessness,
but simply "non-Kuwaiti". The government had virtually equated their  status
to that of illegal aliens. The main effect of the 2000 law was  to  withdraw
civil and political rights from Bedoon  who  had  previously  enjoyed  them.
Although those subject to prosecution under  Law  22  had  been  granted  an
amnesty in 2001, there were cases of persons  jailed  for  7  years  pending
deportation.

22. In respect of the second appellant, he had noted that whilst granted  an
Art 17 passport in 1995, he had not sought  to  renew  it  and  he  did  not
consider that if this appellant now sought  to  renew  it,  the  authorities
would do so. He would no longer qualify.

23. Although much of what Mr Shiblak told us closely reflected the  evidence
contained in other background materials, we would record that we  found  his
evidence in this case helpful and reliable.


The issues

24. There are five main issues raised by the cases before us:

               (i)         whether  these  appellants  are  stateless   (the
   nationality issue);
          ii) whether either would be accepted by the Kuwait authorities as
              someone entitled  to  return  to  Kuwait  (the  returnability
              issue);
         iii) whether Bedoon as  a  class  are  per  se  at  real  risk  of
              persecution (the persecution issue);
          iv) whether the  particular  circumstances  of  either  appellant
              would place him at a real risk of persecution;
           v) whether Bedoon can demonstrate a  Refugee  Convention  ground
              (race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership
              of a particular social group).




The nationality/statelessness issue

25. Turning to  the  first  issue,  both  appellants  maintained  they  were
stateless.  The Adjudicator in the case  of  the  first  appellant  did  not
clearly decide the issue of statelessness. Mr  Davidson  urged  us  to  find
that Adjudicator Mr Khan should have treated the appellant as a national  of
Kuwait since the appellant had failed to discharge  the  burden  on  him  of
proving he was stateless. He cited the authorities of  Bradshaw  [1994]  Imm
AR  259,  Revenko  [2000]  Imm  AR  610  and  Tecle  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1358
(C/2002/1285). He highlighted a passage in which the Adjudicator  had  noted
the appellant`s failure to avail  himself  of  opportunities  to  naturalise
before June 2000.

26. We agree with  Mr  Davidson  that  the  burden  of  proof  rests  on  an
appellant to prove his nationality or lack of it. We also agree that  for  a
person to fail to avail himself of opportunities to acquire  nationality  of
a country will  not  normally  prevent  him  being  considered  for  Refugee
Convention purposes as a national of that country: this  reflects  what  has
become known as  the  "Bradshaw  principle".  However,  this  principle  has
always been subject to  the  proviso  that  there  must  not  exist  serious
obstacles to him doing so: see L (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT 00016 paras  44-46,
which we consider to correctly state the law as enunciated in cases such  as
Bradshaw, Revenko and Tecle.

27. In our view the background evidence  in  these  two  cases  demonstrates
that the Kuwaiti authorities  constructed  their  naturalisation  scheme  so
that only a very few Bedoon could qualify and that increasingly  since  1991
their policies towards the Bedoon have been designed to  force  most  either
to obtain a foreign nationality or be rendered stateless. The only  passport
the first appellant ever held was a forged Saudi passport and he  had  spent
his time in Kuwait since 1991 living illegally and in fear  that  his  false
documents would be discovered. There was no  evidence  that  this  appellant
possessed or would be eligible for the nationality  of  any  other  country.
And, in relation to Kuwait, there was no satisfactory evidence  to  show  he
had ever had or would ever gain nationality of that country.  In  our  view,
therefore, the first appellant is also stateless.

28. The Adjudicator in the case of the  second  appellant  made  a  specific
finding that he was stateless. Mr Davidson  argued  that  the  Adjudicator's
underlying reasoning entailed a different finding. In  this  connection,  he
highlighted the emphasis placed by the second appellant  on  the  fact  that
appellant for no good reason gave up his job in the police force and  failed
to avail himself  of  opportunities  whilst  still  in  Kuwait  in  1997  to
naturalise as a national  of  Kuwait.  We  were  not  able  to  accept  this
argument. Firstly, even assuming the Adjudicator was entitled to reject  the
appellant`s evidence that he had received summonses, we do not  consider  it
was open to him to reject the appellant`s claim  that  his  job  came  under
threat and that the authorities gave him an ultimatum. We say  this  because
at this point in time we know from the objective evidence  that  very  large
numbers of Bedoon found themselves  faced  forced  out  of  employment:  the
Adjudicator himself cited a  passage  from  the  1999  US  State  Department
Report to this effect. No reason was shown why the  second  appellant  would
not have been affected in the same way as many other Bedoon.

29. Secondly, as regards his failure to avail himself  of  opportunities  to
naturalise, he left Kuwait  well  before  the  very  limited  naturalisation
programme set up under Law No 22 on 3 June 2000 came into  effect.  Further,
given that this programme was constructed  in  the  wider  context  of    an
ongoing Kuwait policy of discouraging Bedoon returns, it was not  reasonably
likely he would succeed in any  future  application  he  were  to  make  for
Kuwaiti nationality.

30. In such circumstances neither appellant can be classified as a  national
of Kuwait on the putative  basis  that  he  could  succeed  without  serious
obstacles in obtaining confirmation of such nationality upon application.

31. In assessing this matter we have borne in mind the fact,  noted  in  the
recent Court of Appeal judgment in Al Shamri that  the  Secretary  of  State
has not yet entered into negotiations with the Kuwaiti government  in  order
to secure the return of Kuwaiti Bedoon, by virtue  of  there  being  so  few
claimants from Kuwait. Whilst from what was said on behalf of the  Secretary
of State in this case it appears to be contemplated that  such  negotiations
could take place in the  future,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest,  even  if
negotiations were to be started, that they would be successful or,  even  if
they were, that it would be in the form of an agreement to recognise  Bedoon
formerly resident in Kuwait as nationals of Kuwait  (or  indeed  as  persons
entitled to civil identification documents).  An outcome of this kind  would
presuppose a very radical reversal in policy on  the  part  of  the  Kuwaiti
government towards Bedoon. The objective country  materials  simply  do  not
demonstrate any basis for considering it reasonably  likely  there  will  be
such a change.

32. Accordingly we are satisfied that both appellants are stateless.

33. It is not in dispute that for each appellant in  this  case  his  former
country of habitual residence is Kuwait. Thus risk on return in  respect  of
both must be considered by reference to Kuwait.

34. The question then arises, would their status as  stateless  Bedoon  from
Kuwait place them at real risk on return of persecution or serious harm?

35. This question interacts to some extent with the issue  of  returnability
and is best answered after we have clarified the latter.


The returnability issue

36. We turn to consider this issue next because there is an argument,  which
we need to resolve, that if the appellants would not  be  accepted  back  by
the Kuwait authorities, they would not face a real  risk  of  serious  harm.
The hearing before the  Tribunal  had  been  previously  adjourned  for  the
parties to consider this issue and make submissions upon  it.  The  Tribunal
had in mind that in a leading overseas  case  dealing  with  the  Bedoon  in
Kuwait, a decision of the  New  Zealand  Refugee  Status  Appeals  Authority
(RSAA) chaired by Mr R Haines QC, Appeal No. 72635/01 of  6  September  2002
[2003] INLR 629, it was held: (1) that Kuwait  refuses  to  acknowledge  the
right of return of, and arbitrarily denies  re-entry  to,  most  Bedoon  who
claim Kuwait as their own country: "Whatever the  limited  ability  of  some
Bedoon travelling on Art 17 passports to return to Kuwait, it is clear  that
for Bedoon like the appellant who have been expelled into Iraq and who  have
subsequently lived in that country for some period  of  time,  there  is  no
realistic possibility of being permitted  to  re-enter  Kuwait."  (paragraph
51);  and  (2)  that  where  a  Bedoon  is  not  returnable,  he  cannot  in
consequence be considered as at real risk of persecution under  the  Refugee
Convention:

      "...no fear can be well-founded for  the  purpose  of  the  Convention
      unless the evidence indicates a real ground  for  believing  that  the
      applicant for refugee status is at risk  of  persecution.  A  fear  of
      persecution is not well-founded if it is merely assumed or  if  it  is
      mere speculation...If, for whatever  reasons,  there  is  no  risk  of
      persecution in the country of origin, or if the risk is but conjecture
      or surmise, the fear of  being  persecuted  is  not  well-founded.  It
      follows that if the country of origin refuses to admit or  accept  the
      return of the refugee  claimant,  the  fear  of  being  persecuted  is
      similarly not well-founded in that country ".

37. Mr Haines saw this approach as one entailed by Art  33  of  the  Refugee
Convention  which  affords  to  the  refugee  protection  from  the  act  of
expulsion and views the issue of whether return is possible as a  matter  of
fact, not as a matter of law; see paragraphs 132- 157.

38. Before considering whether the New Zealand approach  is  one  we  should
follow, it is first necessary to assess  whether  it  is  reasonably  likely
that either of the appellants of concern to us  is  in  fact  returnable  to
Kuwait. In this regard we have to consider the background country  materials
as well as the expert report and oral testimony of Mr Shiblak.

39. Whilst it does appear possible in practice for non-citizen  as  well  as
citizen Kuwaitis outside Kuwait to receive emergency travel  documents  from
the Kuwait authorities, the strong emphasis placed in the objective  country
materials on the fact that the government continues to seek  to  reduce  the
number of Bedoon living  in  Kuwait  persuades  us  that  it  would  not  be
reasonably likely that  either  appellant  would  upon  application  receive
travel documents of any kind,  even  emergency  travel  documents  sometimes
issued for family emergencies  and  the  like.   It  is  true  that  Art  17
passports have been issued from within Kuwait to some Bedoon and indeed  one
was issued in 1995 to the second appellant in this case.  It  is  also  true
that Art 17 passports appear in practice to be issued to  a  wider  category
of persons than defined in the legal text. However, there is no evidence  to
indicate that they are issued to Bedoon outside Kuwait  who  have  not  been
issued with one before leaving. In addition, even in the case  of  a  Bedoon
who has left Kuwait  having  been  issued  with  an  Art  17  passport,  the
evidence indicates it would not be renewed once it has expired.

40. We have drawn our  conclusions  on  this  matter  principally  from  the
evidence of Mr Shiblak, although in our view his written and  oral  evidence
on this issue  broadly  reflects  the  objective  country  materials  placed
before us, as well as those considered by the New Zealand RSAA in the above-
mentioned case. In short, Bedoon lacking Art 17 passports  which  are  still
valid, will not be admitted or accepted back by the Kuwaiti authorities.

41. It may be that in practice a number of  stateless  Bedoon  are  able  to
return  illegally  to  Kuwait  via  neighbouring  countries  (as  the  first
appellant did in 1991), but we do not consider that it would be open to  the
UK authorities to countenance return by unlawful means.

42. Thus neither appellant, including the second whose Art 17  passport  has
expired, is at  all  likely  to  be  accepted  for  return  by  the  Kuwaiti
authorities in the foreseeable future. They are not, therefore, returnable.

43.  We  come  now  to  the  legal  issue  we  have  to  decide   concerning
returnability. Mr Bartram urged the Tribunal not to follow the  New  Zealand
approach. We were bound, he argued, by Saad, Diriye and Osorio  [2001]  EWCA
Civ 2008 [2002] INLR 34, a case in which the English Court  of  Appeal  held
that on an appeal a claimant was entitled to a decision on whether he was  a
refugee, notwithstanding the practicalities of whether he could  be  removed
to his country of origin. He  also  contended  that  in  assessing  risk  on
return, it was relevant that the Home Office had operated a  policy  as  set
out in a letter of 1998 under which persons  accepted  as  stateless  Bedoon
would at least be granted ELR.

44. Mr Davidson also urged the  Tribunal  not  to  follow  the  New  Zealand
approach, albeit for somewhat  different  reasons.  He  contended  that  the
underlying  logic  of  Saad,  Diriye  and  Osorio  is  that  practicalities,
especially those relating  to  re-admission,  should  never  be  allowed  to
dictate the issue of well founded fear under the Refugee  Convention,  since
in many cases the Secretary of State could not know  in  advance  whether  a
person would be accepted for re-admission by the country of  origin;  indeed
the duty of confidentiality owed by the Secretary of  State  to  the  asylum
claimant prevented him from making inquiries concerning  the  claimant  with
the authorities of the claimant`s country, at least  until  the  point  when
his claim had been finally rejected.


Our decision on returnability

45. In the appeals before us our  factual  starting-point  is  inability  to
return at the  present  time.   It  would  be  unduly  speculative  to  find
otherwise on the basis of the mere possibility in the  future  that  the  UK
authorities would enter into and  successfully  complete  negotiations  with
the Kuwaiti Embassy over this issue.

46. Our legal starting-point is  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  Saad,
Diriye and  Osorio  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  2008  [2002]  INLR  34.   Whilst  the
different New Zealand approach  was  briefly  one  which  the  Tribunal  had
previously considered should be taken in the UK also, most  notably  in  the
case of Sensitev (01/TH/1351), it has  since  been  recognised  that  it  is
incompatible with this judgment: see L (Ethiopia) [2003]  UKIAT  00016.  The
judgment  of  their  lordships  clearly  holds  that  the  existing   appeal
structure governing appeals against refusal of  asylum  entitles  appellants
to a decision as to refugee status. In each case  the  decision  facing  the
appellate authority is the hypothetical one  of  whether  removal  would  be
contrary to the Convention at the time of the hearing - i.e.  on  the  basis
of the refugee status of the appellant at that time.  Accordingly,  even  if
there are practical obstacles in the form of an effective policy of  refusal
by the authorities of the receiving state to re-admit Bedoon abroad  without
valid Art 17 passports, the appeals of the two Bedoon appellants  on  asylum
grounds nevertheless require substantive consideration on  the  hypothetical
basis of whether - if returned - an appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution.

47. In our view Mr Davidson is entirely right to  highlight  another  reason
why the hypothetical approach set out in Saad, Diriye and Osorio holds  good
in Refugee Convention appeals: the  duty  of  confidentiality  owed  by  the
Secretary of State  to  the  asylum  claimant  prevents  approaches  to  the
country of origin prior to the final determination of whether a claimant  is
a refugee. Only if he is found not to be a refugee can  contact  in  respect
of a particular case then be made  with  the  consular  authorities  of  the
country concerned.

48. We note that both the decisions made in respect of the  appellants  with
whom we are concerned pre-date Oct 2, 2000 (in the first  appellant's  case,
the decision was made on 17 April 2000 and in the second  appellant's  case,
on 1 May 1999). Thus in neither case are any human rights grounds of  appeal
before us. It is important to note this because our conclusions in  relation
to the Refugee Convention appeals must  not  be  taken  to  imply  that  the
position is similar in relation to the Human Rights Convention. It  is  true
that as a general proposition, following  the  principles  set  out  by  the
Tribunal in Kacaj (01/TH/00634) as approved in Dhima [2002] EWHC 80  (Admin)
and subsequent cases, the position in relation to risk upon  return  is  the
same under  both  Conventions.  However,  under  the  Strasbourg  Convention
practicalities affecting return cannot be hypothetically left to  one  side.
By contrast with the position under the Refugee  Convention,  success  in  a
human rights appeal does not in itself relate to any status at the level  of
international law.  Furthermore,  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  considers  that
practicalities in relation to return  are  of  central  importance.  If  the
threat of removal is not imminent, then there can be  no  violation  of  the
Convention: see Vijayanathan and Pushparajah v France  (1993)  15  EHRR  62.
Plainly if Home Office policy or practice is either  not  to  remove  or  to
return to the UK persons whose country of origin countries will  not  accept
as entitled to return, it is difficult to identify any meaningful  sense  in
which there can be said to be an imminent threat of removal in the  case  of
persons falling under this policy or practice.

49. We recognise, however, that in relation to human rights  appeals  it  is
also necessary to consider the way in which the  statutory  framework  under
the 1999 and 2002 Acts defines the  issues  which  fall  to  be  decided  on
appeal. In R (app Maksimovic) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
[2004] EWHC 1026 Admin, Mr Justice Collins held that whether  or  not  human
rights grounds stood to be considered would depend on  the  type  of  appeal
involved: the position was different under s. 69(2) than  it  was  under  s.
69(3) of the 1999 Act. Fortunately we do not  need  to  resolve  the  issues
involved in the appeals before us, since, as we  have  explained,  the  fact
that in each case the decision  appealed  against  was  pre-2  October  2000
means that human rights grounds do not arise.

50.  Dealing  exclusively  then  with  issues  arising  under  the   Refugee
Convention, it is important that we clarify one other matter.  The  question
still remains as to the proper extent of the hypothetical approach  enjoined
by Saad,  Diriye  and  Osorio.  More  precisely,  we  need  to  address  the
question, does  this  approach  wholly  exclude  assessment  of  the  likely
capacity in which appellants would be returned to their country  of  origin?



The "lawful return" approach

51. One possible line of argument in answer to this question -   touched  on
in the course of the  hearing  -  would  be  to  say  that  even  under  the
hypothetical approach it is legitimate to take into account the capacity  in
which someone would be returned to his country.  For  convenience  we  shall
label  this  the  "lawful  return"  approach.  According  to  this  line  of
argument, if one is to assess  whether  a  person  is  at  current  risk  of
persecution, one has also, logically, to envisage him as if he were back  in
his country presently. That in turn entails considering not just what  would
happen to him as a result of his physical presence back in his country,  but
also in what capacity his country (in  this  case  Kuwait)  would  have  re-
admitted him: one cannot be neutral about the capacity  in  which  a  person
would be returned, since logically every returnee returns in some  capacity,
illegal or otherwise.  According  to  this  line  of  argument,  individuals
cannot be simply considered as if  they  were  invisibly  "parachuted"  back
into their country; it has to be  envisaged  in  every  case  that  they  go
through normal controls in their country of origin and  in  accordance  with
arrangements for return made  by  the  UK  authorities  with  embassies  and
consulates responsible for the individuals concerned.

 52. In support of this line of argument it could  also  be  said  that  the
Tribunal and the courts have seen no difficulty in the  context  of  appeals
from several countries (including Sri Lanka during  the  1990s,  Turkey  and
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) ) in treating the issue of whether  a
person will be returned with or without valid travel documents  as  relevant
to assessment of risk on return. It could also  be  said  that  the  "lawful
return" approach prevents the phenomenon arising of persons being  found  to
be refugees even though in practice they are not going  to  be  returned  to
their countries of persecution.

53.  If  this  line  of  argument  were  right,  it  would   have   dramatic
consequences for how we should view the two appeals before  us.  To  explain
why, we need to jump ahead for a moment to the conclusions we go on to  draw
as to the situation of Bedoon in Kuwait generally. We  conclude  below  that
whether a Bedoon in Kuwait faces persecution  currently,  depends  crucially
on whether or not he  lacks  civil  identification  documents  (i.e.  is  an
"undocumented" Bedoon). In our view undocumented, Bedoon face  a  real  risk
of persecution. Since most Bedoon in Kuwait  are  undocumented  we  conclude
that Bedoon generally face persecution. However, we  also  find  below  that
there are a (sizeable) minority of  Bedoon  who  have  civil  identification
documents and that possession of  these  insulates  them  to  a  significant
degree from serious harm. Thus, if upon return the two  appellants  in  this
case would be considered as documented Bedoon, it would seem they could  not
demonstrate a real risk of persecution.

54. Let us recapitulate the  position  of  the  two  appellants  as  regards
documentation. The second appellant  must  have  been  a  documented  Bedoon
prior to receiving the ultimatum which led to his departure, since prior  to
that time he was a member of the Kuwait police force and was able to  obtain
an Art 17 passport. However,  having  declined  to  register  and  fled  the
country he was clearly someone who was no longer a  documented  Bedoon.  The
first appellant too appears to have been  documented  prior  to  the  1990/1
Gulf War, but not since; and he was clearly not  documented  when  he  left.
Moreover, we have found that at present  neither  is  reasonably  likely  to
become a documented Bedoon (principally because Kuwait refuses  to  re-admit
Bedoon who have left Kuwait - except for  those  who  have  current  Art  17
passports).

55. Let us next consider  how  the  present  (and  likely  future)  lack  of
documentation affects the appeals of these two appellants. We take the  view
that it means that we are to consider them as being on  return  persons  who
would fall into the category of undocumented Bedoon. On the  above  line  of
argument, however, it would be possible to assume they would  be  documented
Bedoon since if in fact they were to be returned to Kuwait,  it  could  only
ever be as persons accepted by the Kuwaiti authorities as lawfully  entitled
to re-admission. Regard could be had on this line of argument to  the  known
fact that the UK government does not seek  to  remove  persons  unless  they
have valid travel documents. That being the case, it could  then  be  argued
that the only capacity in which Bedoon from Kuwait who are in the  UK  could
ever be returned would be as persons with valid travel  documents.  But  for
them to be granted valid travel documents by  the  Kuwaiti  Consulate  would
necessarily require that the Kuwaiti authorities were  satisfied  they  were
Bedoon entitled to civil identification documents. This  last  step  in  the
argument is arguably deducible from a combination of two  factors.  Firstly,
there is the evidence  relating  to  Bedoon  who  travel  on  valid  Art  17
passports: they do not appear to have problems being re-admitted to  Kuwait.
Given the significant number of Bedoon who travel to and from Mecca for  Haj
on Art 17 passports, it would have come to the  attention  of  international
NGOs or country experts if there had  been  any  significant  occurrence  of
rejection or detention or other re-admission problems. Secondly,  given  the
government policy of not re-admitting  most  Bedoon,  it  is  reasonable  to
assume that they would not re-admit any Bedoon unless satisfied  he  or  she
was entitled to civil identification documents.

56. We do not, however, consider that this line of argument is viable for  a
number of inter-related reasons. Firstly, the argument requires standing  on
its head an assessment based on the Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97  principle
of assessment as at the date of hearing. We have found  that  presently  the
Kuwaiti Consulate is not reasonably likely to issue either appellant with  a
valid travel document. Yet by assuming that for a return to  take  place  it
would have to be on the basis of a grant of valid travel documents,  we  are
inevitably  departing  from  assessment  based  on  reasonable   degree   of
likelihood and entering into contradictory speculation.

57. Secondly, it infringes the principle of hypothetical assessment set  out
in Saad, Diriye and Osorio, since it requires taking into account  a  factor
relating to the modalities of return.

58. Thirdly, it requires taking into  account  a  future  characteristic  or
factor that  is  not  reasonably  foreseeable.  We  would  accept  that  the
approach as set out in Ravichandran and in Saad, Diriye and Osorio does  not
always mean confining assessment to a person`s present  characteristics.  It
may be appropriate, for example,  to  expect  an  individual  to  take  some
future course of action (resulting in  him  or  her  acquiring  a  different
characteristic) in order to avoid a risk of persecution  (e.g.  expecting  a
woman to obtain a divorce before returning to a country in order to  prevent
a violent husband persuading the authorities to pursue  and  harass  her  on
his behalf) and on this basis to assume they possess the new  characteristic
on return. It is also appropriate in  certain  contexts  to  assume  that  a
person is a national of country X for the  purposes  of  Art  1A(2)  of  the
Refugee Convention, even though his country of nationality does  not  accord
him nationality presently: indeed we touched on this at  paras  27-8  above.
Thus in Tecle the Court of Appeal reasoned that it was right  to  treat  the
applicant as a national of Eritrea because there were no  serious  obstacles
to his being granted it upon application. However, in  both  these  contexts
it is valid to take  account  of  a  future  characteristic  because  it  is
reasonably foreseeable that it can be acquired (being a  divorcee,  being  a
national of Eritrea). The crucial factor in the  Tecle  case  was  that  the
applicant  had  a  legal  entitlement  under  Eritrean   law   to   Eritrean
nationality (by virtue of having an Eritrean father) and that there were  no
serious obstacles to the applicant being able to acquire that nationality.

59. Finally, if this line of argument were right, it  would  entail  reading
into Art 1A(2) a further qualifying condition.  In  addition  to  having  to
show a well founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  one  would
also have to show that it is not a fear  which  could  be  obviated  by  the
modality of return. Arts 32 and 33 do address return, but  they  do  not  in
our view stipulate any qualifying condition for being  a  refugee  over  and
above that as set out in Art 1A(2).

60. Accordingly we reject the "lawful return"  approach  and  find  that  in
assessing risk on return we are obliged to consider the  two  appellants  as
undocumented Bedoon.


 Whether Bedoon as a class are per se at real risk of persecution

61.  We  can  now  turn  to  the  question  whose  answer  we  have  already
adumbrated.

62. Neither adjudicator in these appeals adjudged Bedoon as a class to  face
difficulties and hardships rising to the level of persecution.  Mr  Davidson
asked us to uphold their judgment on this issue.  Mr  Bartram  asked  us  to
find that the findings of the Adjudicators on this issue  were  contrary  to
the objective evidence and therefore wrong in law. As  noted  earlier,  part
of his submission to this  effect  was  that  we  should  regard  denial  of
nationality as in itself a persecutory act.

63. We have concluded that the Adjudicators` findings  on  this  issue  were
indeed contrary to the objective evidence. However, before  explaining  why,
we would emphasise that we have not reached this conclusion because  of  any
acceptance of Mr Bartram`s submission that  the  appellants  should  succeed
simply by virtue of the fact that they are  being  denied  nationality.   It
may be that the right to a nationality is  an  emerging  norm,  but  it  has
plainly not yet become part  of  international  law.  Given  this  state  of
affairs, we cannot see  that  denial  of  nationality  as  such  amounts  to
persecution. To the contrary,  whether  denial  of  nationality  amounts  to
persecution  is  a  question  of  fact  and  depends  upon   the   practical
consequences for an individual in the country in which he  is  being  denied
nationality. At one end of the spectrum there are countries  in  respect  of
which denial of nationality  may  have  few  practical  consequences  for  a
person's civil, political, social, economic and cultural situation.  At  the
other end of the spectrum there  are  countries  in  respect  of  which  the
consequences may be comprehensive and dire.

64. However, we do agree with Mr Bartram that as a matter of fact denial  of
nationality is a decisive factor in this case. That  is  because  in  Kuwait
the  authorities,  having  acted  to  exclude  most  Bedoon   from   Kuwaiti
nationality and from lawful residence status, have then confined  access  to
basic civil, political,  social,  economic  and  cultural  rights  to  those
having  either  Kuwaiti  nationality  or  (as  lawful   residents)   foreign
nationality.

65. What it seems to us the Adjudicators overlooked is  that  the  objective
evidence  relating  to  the  position  of  the  Bedoon  in  general  is   in
particularly  strong  terms.  The  Human  Rights  Watch  Report   for   2000
identifies  "widespread  and  systematic   discrimination   [resulting]   in
violations of civil and political rights  protected  by  the  [International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights]". The UN Human Rights  Committee  in
its Concluding Observation of 26-27 July expressed particular concern  about
the denial to the Bedoon of a significant  number  of  civil  and  political
rights guaranteed by the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
Rights (ICCPR), in particular Kuwaiti refusal to grant  many  Bedoon  living
in Kuwait  any  type  of  nationality.  Concern  was  also  expressed  about
provisions under  the  Aliens  Residence  Law  17/1959  for  deportation  of
stateless persons for failure to  regularise  their  status.  The  US  State
Department Report for 2002 highlights similar concerns,  noting  that  there
were approximately 250 Bedoon and foreigners held in  detention  facilities,
some of them pending deportation, some having been  detained  for  up  to  6
months. The report also notes that the government has stated that those  who
did  not  register  by  the  June  27  shut-off  date   for   naturalisation
applications will be subject to deportation as illegal resident,  albeit  no
such action was taken during the year.  Mr Shiblak summarised  matters  this
way:

      "They live under the most appalling conditions, denied  the  right  to
      travel, free medical care, to register marriages and in some cases  to
      have a driving license".

66. The detailed  documentation  of  the  problems  facing  many  Bedoon  in
relation to their civil and political  and  economic,  social  and  cultural
rights, as set out in the Human Rights  Watch  Report  and  other  materials
submitted, has also to be considered in historical  perspective.  The  steps
taken by the Kuwaiti authorities to marginalize the Bedoon  have  been  part
of a deliberate state policy to drive large numbers of  the  Bedoon  out  of
the country. The dramatic fall in the number of Bedoon in  Kuwait  over  the
past two decades - some 120,000 persons having left in  circumstances  often
tantamount to forced deportation - speaks for itself: We bear in  mind  that
at international  law  the  prohibition  of  forced  deportation  is  widely
considered to have the status of ius cogens.


The position of documented Bedoon

67. As intimated earlier,  we  recognise  that  not  all  Bedoon  in  Kuwait
experience persecution. On close inspection it is clear that in  identifying
the severity of the situation facing the Bedoon generally, analysts  plainly
do not have in mind all Bedoon in Kuwait.  They  principally  have  in  mind
undocumented Bedoon,  i.e.  those  who  do  not  have  civil  identification
documents. Certainly it would appear from the  US  State  Department  Report
for 2002 and the evidence of Mr Shiblak that undocumented Bedoon  constitute
a majority: some 80,000. But the US State Department Report for 2002  states
that there are also around  35,000 Bedoon who as a result of the new law  in
effect from July 2000 have been documented as citizens of  other  countries,
most having admitted to Saudi or Syrian origin. That report also notes  that
such persons, by virtue of being documented as citizens of other  countries,
have been able to obtain residency permits and other official papers.

68.  We should make clear at this point that there is also  a  small  number
of Bedoon who appear to  have  obtained  Kuwaiti  nationality.  However,  Mr
Shiblak considered their number to be negligible.  Accordingly  we  consider
they can  be  disregarded  for  the  purposes  of  assessing  the  two  main
categories of Bedoon in Kuwait: undocumented and documented Bedoon.

69. The objective country  materials  also  make  clear  in  our  view  that
documented Bedoon, i.e. Bedoon who have civil identification documents,  are
significantly insulated from the worst of the hardships and  discriminations
facing Bedoon more generally. This can best be demonstrated by noting  their
position in relation to the earlier catalogue identified by Mr  Shiblak  and
others, of serious and wide-ranging discriminations most  Bedoon  experience
as non-citizens - prevented from working with few exceptions in  the  public
or private sectors or from receiving  most  basic  government  services  and
denied rights to medical treatment, housing,  documentation,  education  and
driver's licences.

70. Dealing  first  with  employment,  albeit  there  is  reference  in  the
background materials to Bedoon being denied public and  private  employment,
it is  clear  that  documented  Bedoon  are  not  excluded  from  employment
entirely, since the same sources note  that  employers,  presumably  private
employers, are able to get away with  paying  them  one  quarter  of  normal
wages. There is also reference to some albeit very small  number  of  Bedoon
remaining in public sector employment. We  can  find  no  reference  to  any
exclusion  of  self-employment,  although   for   those   who   lack   civil
identification documents it is clear there would be added  problems  in  any
dealings with officialdom.

71. As regards health care, once again there is restricted  access  but  not
complete exclusion. The latest evidence  indicates  that  documented  Bedoon
are denied free government health care, but can access  medical  clinics  on
payment of a fee. The Human Rights Watch report of 2000 notes that in  April
2000 the Ministry of Health  implemented  a  health  insurance  scheme  that
required non-Kuwaiti citizens to pay an annual  fee  of  50KD  per  head  of
household, 40KD per dependent spouse, and 30 KD per child:  "After  requests
from the  National  Assembly's  Health  and  Social  Affairs  Committee  the
Ministry agreed to reduced fees for Bidun holding security  ID  cards,  non-
Kuwaiti wives of Kuwait men,  and  foreign  or  Bidun  children  of  Kuwaiti
women, who each pay 20KD".

72. Bedoon children remain excluded from  the  state  education  system  but
previous attempts to deny them access to private schools do  not  appear  to
have been maintained.

73.  Mention  is  made  of   Bedoon   facing   difficulties   in   obtaining
accommodation, but the references appear to relate to Bedoon  without  civil
identification certificates.

74. Whilst for Bedoon who  have  civil  identification  documents  there  is
still the possibility of action being  taken  to  deport  them,  it  appears
that, in respect of them,  the  grounds  would  be  much  narrower,  largely
confined to those who commit ordinary crimes, contravene  public  morals  or
fall into penury.

75. The difficulties faced by  Bedoon  in  registering  births,  deaths  and
marriages  again  appear  largely  confined  to   those   who   lack   civil
identification documents and who thus require letters of no  objection  from
the Ministry of Interior Executive Committee on Illegal Residents.

76. The same situation appears to obtain in respect of driving licences.

77. It remains that (all but a very small number of) Bedoon,  documented  or
not, are excluded from nationality.  As  we  have  already  noted  the  2000
naturalisation exercise led to few  Bedoon  obtaining  nationality  and  was
principally used to pressurise many to leave or prove  another  nationality.
In any event, it has not been  repeated,  despite  widespread  international
criticism of the lack of legal access to  naturalisation.  Bedoon  children,
documented or undocumented, are also excluded from Bedoon nationality,  even
if born in the territory of Kuwait.

78. It also remains that even  for  documented  Bedoon  there  is  a  highly
restrictive policy in respect of travel. Even if they  are  able  to  obtain
permission  to  travel  abroad,  by  means  of  an  Art  17  passport,   the
authorities are not obliged to, and in practice do not, allow the holder re-
entry once that passport expires.  Bedoon, documented or  undocumented,  are
also entirely excluded from the right to vote.

79. Even though being documented insulates a Bedoon from the full impact  of
several of the main discriminations described above,  it  remains  the  case
that documented Bedoon also face societal discrimination on the  grounds  of
extended tribal identity and family identity.

80.To summarise, whilst we would accept that  documented  Bedoon  experience
significant measures of  discrimination,  we  do  not  consider,  even  when
assessed cumulatively, that these give rise to persecution.

81. However, for reasons already given, we do not find  that  the  situation
of documented Bedoon alters the fact that most  Bedoon,  being  undocumented
and more seriously discriminated against in consequence face a real risk  of
persecution.

82. We have also made clear already that neither appellant in this case  can
be considered as a  documented  Bedoon  or  as  reasonably  likely  for  the
foreseeable future to become a documented Bedoon.


The possible relevance of the particular circumstances of each appellant

83. Given these conclusions,  based  essentially  on  the  position  of  the
majority of Bedoon  in  Kuwait,  it  might  appear  unnecessary  for  us  to
consider the fourth question we outlined at the  beginning,  namely  whether
the particular circumstances of either appellant would  place  him  at  real
risk of persecution. The first appellant was found  by  the  Adjudicator  to
have no particular history in the eyes of the authorities which  would  make
him of adverse interest, but equally his history did not  indicate  that  he
would be treated any differently to other undocumented Bedoon.

84.  The position with the second appellant is  less  straightforward  since
the Adjudicator`s findings appeared to view his particular circumstances  as
meaning he would not face the same serious difficulties as other Bedoon.  We
have in mind here that he found firstly that he had been able  for  most  of
life in Kuwait to "rise above"  the  difficulties  facing  most  Bedoon,  by
being able to obtain employment as a police officer and obtain education  to
a university standard etc; and he  found  secondly  that  by  having  family
connections, he would be able to  insulate  himself  from  the  difficulties
other Bedoon might face - the fact that he had  parents,  two  brothers  and
three sisters living in Kuwait and the fact that he is married to a  Kuwaiti
national.

85. However, we found earlier that  whilst  the  Adjudicator  concerned  was
entitled to reject this appellant`s claim to  have  received  summonses,  he
was wrong to conclude that he did not face an ultimatum in relation  to  his
employment. We note further that the Adjudicator himself  accepted  that  in
any event the position now was that it was not reasonably  likely  he  could
work, find accommodation or educate his children. In  deciding  whether  the
second appellant`s circumstances would be sufficient to  insulate  him  from
serious harm, the Adjudicator should not have ignored material changes  that
had taken place since he left Kuwait in 1997. The appellant`s  past  ability
to "rise above" prevailing difficulties facing Bedoon had been displayed  at
a time prior to the measures introduced in 2000 designed to drive  out  many
Bedoon and marginalize the remainder. As regards his family connections,  we
are not aware of any evidence to show that these are enough  to  prevent  an
undocumented Bedoon being treated as such.  Accordingly  we  find  that  the
second appellant also would face broadly the same treatment as  faces  other
undocumented Bedoon.


86. Accordingly we are satisfied that the individual  circumstances  of  the
appellants neither significantly add to nor detract from the situation  they
would face in common with other undocumented Bedoon.


87. For the above reasons we have concluded that both appellants would  face
a real risk on return of persecution. The findings of the  Adjudicators  the
other way in both cases were contrary to the  objective  evidence  and  thus
wrong in law.


The particular social group (PSG) issue


88.  In  order  to  qualify  as  refugees,  it  remains  necessary  for  the
appellants to show that their persecution would be by reason  of  a  Refugee
Convention ground. At the adjudicator stage in both cases and in  subsequent
submissions the focus has been on whether  the  appellants  could  establish
that they qualified by virtue of Bedoon being considered  as  members  of  a
particular social group (PSG). This was also the focus of  the  analysis  in
the New Zealand case. However, it in our view it is not  necessary  for  the
appellants to show membership of a PSG. As Mr Shiblak`s  evidence  has  made
clear, the Bedoon have an extended tribal identity and so cannot be  reduced
to persons defined simply by their statelessness.   That  is  sufficient  in
our view to bring them within  the  meaning  of  the  term  "race"  as  also
employed in Art 1A(2).





89. For completeness, however, we would add  that  we  would  also  have  no
hesitation in identifying the Bedoon in Kuwait as a particular social  group
within the meaning of Art 1A(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Applying  the
Tribunal summary of criteria as set out in the Court of Appeal  judgment  in
Montoya [2002] INLR 399, we are entirely satisfied that by virtue  of  their
extended tribal origins and the existence of a  number  of  legislative  and
societal measures of  discrimination  marking  them  out  from  others,  the
Bedoon are a particular social group. For this reason they can  be  said  to
exist independently of, and not be solely  defined  by,  these  measures  of
discrimination. We recognise that this was not the view  taken  by  the  New
Zealand RSAA in the case cited earlier,  but,  with  respect,  the  analysis
there treated the Bedoon simply as stateless persons per se. As an  analysis
of stateless persons in Kuwait per se, the reasoning of  this  decision,  at
least in relation to the PSG issue, is impeccable. But, it simply  overlooks
their tribal background and identity. On this issue, therefore, our view  is
the same as that taken by the Adjudicator, Mr Trethowan in the case  of  the
second appellant.



Summary of conclusions


90. It  may  assist  to  briefly  summarise  our  principal  conclusions  by
reference to the five main issues identified earlier:


     i) The appellants in this case are stateless persons. Given the events
        of 2000, it would be rare indeed for a Bedoon who  did  not  obtain
        nationality before leaving Kuwait to be considered as a national of
        that country by reference to Bradshaw principles.
    ii) It is not reasonably  likely  that  the  Kuwaiti  authorities  will
        accept  either  appellant  as  eligible  for  or  entitled  to  re-
        admission:  in  practice  they  are  not  currently  or  foreseably
        returnable;
   iii)  In  view  of  the  widespread  and  systematic   nature   of   the
        discriminatory measures they experience, the majority of  (but  not
        all) Bedoon in Kuwait face a real risk of persecution in Kuwait;
    iv)  The   individual   circumstances   of   the   appellants   neither
        significantly add to nor detract from the situation they would face
        in common with other undocumented Bedoon.
     v) Since the Bedoon have a  tribal  identity  and  are  not  simply  a
        collection of (mainly) stateless persons, they face persecution  by
        reason of a Refugee Convention ground of race.  They  can  also  be
        seen to form a particular social group.

91. For the above reasons both appeals are allowed.



                                                              DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT



