
ar
                      AW (Somalia - Clans- fair trial) Somalia [2004] UKIAT
00093


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 10 March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               29 April 2004

                                   Before:

                       Mr P R Moulden, Vice-President
                         Mr P R Lane, Vice-President
                              Mr M E Olszewski




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who has been given permission to
      appeal the determination of an Adjudicator,  Ms  P.S.  Wellesley-Cole,
      dismissing on both Refugee Convention and human  rights  grounds,  his
      appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him
      asylum, although he was granted limited leave to enter until  17  July
      2003.

   2. Mr R. Toal,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilson  &  Co.  solicitors,
      appeared for the appellant. Mr J. Gulvin,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, represented the respondent.

   3. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2001  and  claimed
      asylum.  The notice containing the decision against which  he  appeals
      is dated 17 July  2002.   The  Adjudicator  heard  the  appeal  on  21
      November 2002 and the decision  to  grant  permission  to  appeal  was
      promulgated on 14 March 2003.
   4. The Adjudicator  set  out  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  in
      paragraph 4 of the determination  in the following terms:

           'The basis of his claim is that he allegedly  fears  persecution
           by the Habar Gidir clan.   He claims he belonged to the minority
           Sarman clan which is the sub-clan of the Ashraf.  He  owned  his
           own tailoring shop and he lived in Mogadishu.  He fled Mogadishu
           on a few occasions when the fighting became severe and his  shop
           was allegedly looted on several occasions.  He  further  claimed
           that in 1998 militia would demand money from him and  when  they
           did this he refused and he fled to his uncle's home.  Whilst  he
           was in the market  the  next  day  the  militia  found  him  and
           abducted him.  They took him and beat  him and he  was  detained
           for three days. He claimed his brother paid for his release  and
           then fearing  for  his  safety,  he  fled  with  his  family  to
           Ethiopia.  His brother made arrangements for him  to  leave  the
           country.'


   1. Both parties were represented at the  hearing.    The  appellant  gave
      evidence as did a Somali friend, Mr H. Mohamed.

   2. The Adjudicator's conclusions in relation to the  appellant's  claimed
      clan membership are set out in paragraph 17 of  the  determination  in
      the following terms:

           'Having observed this young Somali appellant, who claimed to  be
           a member of the minority Sarman clan, which  is  a  sub-clan  of
           Ashraf give evidence, his case was predicated on his persecution
           by the Habar Gidir clan.  e
        a. He fled the capital, Mogadishu, a few times when fighting became
           severe and his shop was allegedly looted several times.  He  was
           abducted by the militia.  However,  under  cross-examination  he
           not only displayed a lack of knowledge of his clan but also  had
           a scant knowledge of his language and dialect.  The  Ashraf  are
           divided into two sub clans; namely the Hassan and Hussein.   Not
           only was he unable to give the answer Hussein when this was  put
           to him;  despite being asked twice;  but he incorrectly  replied
           that the Reersharif Magbuul was part of the  Hassan.    This  is
           wrong; it is the Hussein.   Nor was he able to give  the  number
           of divisions of the sub clans of the Hassan; there  are  four  -
           page 34 of the September 2000 report on minority groups a  joint
           Danish Dutch and British Fact Finding Mission to  Nairobi  Kenya
           details all the groups  and  subgroups  and  their  geographical
           distribution. 7.2 of this lengthy report at page 36  reads  that
           the Benadir  population  is  (sic)  Somalia  generally  speak  a
           dialect that differs from that of the major  Somali  clans.  The
           dialect spoken by the Benadiri of Mogadishu is  called  Af-Reer-
           Hamar.   Yet in court he said he did not  speak  any  particular
           dialect or have any accent, despite having lived all his life in
           Mogadishu. The clan he claims to be a member of is divided  into
           the Hassan and Hussein subdivisions -  they  were  the  sons  of
           Fatima.  He was unable to  make  this  connection  in  his  oral
           testimony and failed to say that Fatima had  sons  who  were  so
           called. He is  not  uneducated  or  illiterate  having  gone  to
           school.  He was a professional footballer and lived  in  Somalia
           all his life.  I would therefore have expected him to be a  more
           impressive and persuasive witness  when  asked  about  his  clan
           identity. Although he got some answers right  he  stumbled  over
           the other responses.  He was undermined  during  the  course  of
           cross-examination. His clan is  central  to  his  appeal  as  he
           alleged persecution by the Habar  Gidir  militia.   I  therefore
           find he is not a member of the Hassan sub clan  and  Sarman  sub
           sub clan  which is a division of the Ashraf clan;  as claimed.'

   1. In paragraph 18 of the determination the Adjudicator  found  that  the
      appellant was largely consistent in his various  accounts  of  events.
      However, she went on to find

           'But I do not consider that the militia have any further use  or
           interest in him after releasing him  when  his  brother  paid  a
           bribe.  If he had been of  any  interest  they  would  not  have
           released him. I accept that what he  said  transpired  may  well
           have occurred.  But there is nothing to suggest he would  be  of
           current interest to the authorities or militia as he appeared to
           be the unfortunate victim of sporadic violence which is  not  to
           be condoned.'

   2. The grounds of appeal submit that,  having  accepted  the  appellant's
      account of events, the Adjudicator should not have found that  he  did
      not belong to his claimed clan, sub clan and  sub  sub  clan.  In  the
      grounds of appeal, and the accompanying  witness  statement  from  the
      appellant, it is alleged that the interpretation of  the  hearing  was
      defective which  vitiated  the  determination  because  of  procedural
      unfairness.  It is argued that the Adjudicator gave too much weight to
      the appellant's failure to answer all questions about the  Ashraf  and
      failed to give proper weight to the evidence  supporting  this  claim.
      The appellant should not be expected to   display  as  much  knowledge
      about the Ashraf as a group of elders.  There was no  evidence  before
      the Adjudicator to support the contention  that  all  members  of  the
      Ashraf would be so knowledgeable.   It is also argued that the Country
      Information supports the appellant's claim that members  of  his  clan
      were treated in the manner he claimed.

   3. The appellant's representatives made an application in  the  following
      terms.

           '1.  The  appellant  seeks  directions  and  disclosure  in  the
           following matters relevant to  this  application  for  leave  to
           appeal;


        a. the name and address of the interpreter employed by the  IAA  on
           21 November 2002 so that he can be written to by Wilson & Co. to
           request that he give evidence for the appellant (Wilson & Co. is
           prepared to undertake to maintain confidentiality in respect  of
           the said interpreter's address)


        b. alternatively, that the IAA agree to pass a letter from Wilson &
           Co. to the interpreter referred to in (a) above requesting  that
           he contact Wilson & Co. as a potential witness in the appeal;


        c.  that  the  IAA  disclose  details  of  the  said  interpreter's
           qualifications to  act  as  an  interpreter  for  native  Somali
           speakers (including details of how long he has lived in Somalia,
           when he lived there and which parts of Somalia he has lived in);


        d. details of when and where the said interpreter will  be  engaged
           by the IAA to enable the appellant's expert to attend  a  sample
           of  hearings in which he will interpret in order to  assess  his
           ability as an interpreter. This is to enable  an  expert  to  be
           instructed by Wilson & Co.  to  assess  the  said  interpreter's
           ability.


        e. alternatively to (d) the court is to consider the parties to the
           appeal being directed to  instruct  a  joint  single  expert  to
           prepare a report in respect  of  observations  obtained  in  (d)
           above.


        f. a copy of the Adjudicator's record of proceedings.'

   1. This was dealt with by a Vice  President  who,  in  a  letter  to  the
      appellant's Counsel dated 9 June 2003, said,

           'Interpreters are employed by the Appellate Authority  in  order
           to  assist  it  in  its  work.  They  are  subject  to  external
           assessment  by  the  Institute  of  Linguists  and  to  internal
           assessment by the Authority's own interpreter department.    You
           seek directions enabling you to make a  further  assessment  for
           your own purposes, of the general competence  of  one  of  these
           interpreters.   The  purpose  of  that  assessment  is  entirely
           obscure.  There is no  reason  to  suppose  that  an  assessment
           arranged by yourselves would be superior to that  to  which  the
           interpreter has already been subject.  The question at issue can
           only be  whether  the  actual  interpretation  provided  at  the
           hearing was misleading. On that, I note that  no  compliant  was
           made  at  the  hearing,  either  by   the   appellant   or   his
           representative.  For the above reasons I  decline  to  make  the
           direction sought.'

   2. It is unfortunate that the letter was sent  only  to  the  appellant's
      Counsel, but it did eventually reach the representatives  and  nothing
      turns on this.

   3. Insofar as it is necessary for us  to  revisit  the  Vice  President's
      decision, as the application has been repeated, we agree with  it.  It
      is difficult  to  understand  why  if,  as  the  appellant  states  in
      paragraph  3  of  the  witness  statement,  he   had   difficulty   in
      understanding the court  interpreter  from  the  outset,  he  did  not
      mention this. In paragraph 4 of the statement  the  appellant  accepts
      that at the beginning he was asked whether  he  could  understand  the
      interpreter and he said  that  he  could.  There  is  no  satisfactory
      explanation why the appellant did not raise the point at this stage or
      at any other time during the hearing.   The terms of  the  application
      by the appellant's representatives  indicate  that  they  intended  to
      instruct an expert, presumably  an  expert  in  Somali  languages  and
      dialects,  to  shadow  the  court  interpreter.  The   appellant   has
      experienced solicitors. We enquired of Mr Toal why, as it was apparent
      that his instructing solicitors knew  there  were  experts  in  Somali
      linguistics, such an expert had not been  employed  to  interview  and
      test the appellant and then give expert evidence as to his  linguistic
      abilities and whether these indicated a connection with  a  particular
      clan, sub-clan or  sub  sub  clan.   Such  expert  evidence  is  often
      combined with detailed  testing  of  an  individual's  knowledge,  for
      example, of particular parts  of  Somalia,  clan  history  and  social
      customs.   Whilst  it  would  not  have  been  appropriate   for   the
      appellant's  representatives  to  test  the  court  interpreter,   the
      difficulties  the  appellant  faced  in  relation  to  his  linguistic
      abilities and related matters could have been addressed  by  obtaining
      such expert evidence. Mr Toal had no information as to  why  this  had
      not been done.

   4. In paragraph 19 of the determination and in relation to  the  evidence
      of Mr Mohammed, the Adjudicator said,

           'Although I place considerable weight on some but not all of the
           oral testimony of Mr Hussan Mohammad, and accept they  may  well
           have been  neighbours,  gone  to  the  same  school  and  played
           football together, although he maintained the  appellant  hailed
           from Ashraf - Hassan subsubclan, I do not believe  this  is  the
           position as  the  appellant's  own  testimony  wavered  in  this
           regard.'

   5. We do not think it appropriate to place too nice an interpretation  on
      the precise order in which the Adjudicator  reached  her  conclusions,
      nor do we find, looking at the determination  as  a  whole,  that  the
      Adjudicator failed to assess the evidence in the round.  It  was  open
      to her to find against the appellant's claimed clan membership for the
      reasons set out in paragraph 17 of the determination and then,  whilst
      accepting that the appellant and the witness were known to each other,
      to  reject  the  witness's  evidence  as  to  the   appellant's   clan
      membership. It is not appropriate to look at the passage in  paragraph
      19 on its own and claim that the only reason for the rejection of part
      of the witness's testimony was  that  the  appellant's  own  testimony
      'wavered'. There is nothing  inconsistent  in  accepting  a  witness's
      evidence about some aspects of his relationship with the appellant but
      rejecting that part of the evidence relating to his clan membership.

   6. We find that the Adjudicator did not fail to  take  into  account  the
      Country Information or to give weight to  the  extent  to  which  this
      corroborated the appellant's account of events. In paragraph 19 of the
      determination the Adjudicator states that she has taken  into  account
      the relevant Country Information.   We see no reason to doubt this. In
      paragraph 18 the Adjudicator accepted much of the appellant's  account
      of events and, taken in context, it  is  clear  that  she  did  so  by
      reference to the Country Information. There are frequent references to
      this in the determination. The fact that what  the  appellant  claimed
      happened to him was consistent with what happened to some  members  of
      the Ashraf does not of itself mean that the Adjudicator erred  in  her
      conclusions that he was not an Ashraf.

   7. We find that the reasons given by the Adjudicator in paragraph  17  of
      the determination support her conclusions about the  appellant's  clan
      membership. The reasons  are  clear  and  were  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence.  There might have been some merit in the argument  that  the
      appellant should not have been expected to display the same breadth of
      knowledge as that possessed by a group of elders interviewed  for  the
      purpose of the Joint British/Danish and Dutch  Fact  Finding  Mission,
      which commences  at  page  195  of  the  appellant's  bundle,  if  the
      questions  he  was  asked  were  esoteric  or  obscure.  However,  the
      questions were basic and go to  the  heart  of  the  identity  of  the
      Ashraf.

   8. On page 200 of the appellant's bundle, in this report,  there  is  the
      passage

           'The Ashraf elders trace their origins to the  Prophet  Mohamed,
           whose daughter Fatima had two sons with Ali,  named  Hassan  and
           Hussein.  Any member the Ashraf  community  belongs  to  one  of
           these two lines of descent, from  Hassan  or  Hussein,  and  any
           Ashraf (both females and males from the age of two) is  able  to
           identify or her or himself as belonging  to  one  of  these  two
           lines.'

   9. Two of the matters referred to by the Adjudicator in paragraph  17  of
      the determination are drawn from this passage.

  10. Mr Toal asked us not to endorse the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  the
      appellant would not be of any current interest  to  the  militias.  He
      explained that the reason was that the appellant did not  wish  to  be
      bound  by  this  finding,   applying   Devaseelam   principles,   when
      consideration was given to extending his period of leave or there  was
      a further appeal.  It appeared to  us  that  Mr  Toal  was  in  effect
      seeking to add another ground of appeal.    We declined  to  allow  an
      amendment at so late a stage and in any event can find no  fault  with
      this conclusion.

  11. This determination is reported for what it says about two matters, the
      position of official interpreters and the core of being Ashraf.

  12. The Adjudicator reached conclusions which were  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence.  The appellant has had a fair hearing and there is no  error
      of law. We dismiss this appeal.







   P.R. MOULDEN

   VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      1


