
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |HS (Risk on Return -        |
|                           |        |Detention - HIV/AIDS - Art  |
|                           |        |3) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00090                       |
|On 17 February 2004        |        |                            |
|Dictated 1 March 2004      |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28.April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr D J Parkes                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr C Williams, of Counsel instructed by
                       Arona Sarwar & Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Eritrea, born on 1 January  1970  appeals
      with leave against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  (Mr  P  P
      Murphy) dismissing her appeal against the decision of the  respondent
      made on 2 May 2001 to give directions for her removal from the United
      Kingdom as an illegal entrant following refusal to grant her asylum.

2.    The appellant claims to have travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  via
      Ethiopia.   She claimed to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  with
      false documents on 29 August 1997.    She claimed asylum on 29 August
      1997.

3.    Her appeal was heard by an Adjudicator on  30  January  2002.     The
      decision dismissing her appeal was  promulgated  on  19  March  2002.
      Leave to appeal against that decision was given by the Tribunal on 16
      April 2002 because the Adjudicator had  not  clearly  considered  the
      report of Dr Trueman.

4.    The Tribunal heard the appeal on 24 June 2002 and dismissed it  in  a
      determination promulgated on 5 August 2002.

5.    On an appeal to the Court of  Appeal,  the  Tribunal's  decision  was
      quashed and the appeal  was  ordered  to  be  heard  by  a  different
      Tribunal.  The reason for the order  was  on  the  grounds  that  the
      Tribunal erred by ignoring or placing little or no  weight  upon  the
      report of Dr  Trueman.    The  reasons  given  by  the  Tribunal  for
      rejecting the said report and or for holding that Dr Trueman was  not
      an expert witness, were irrational.

6.    Basically the argument is that the fact that Dr Truman is  a  medical
      doctor does not preclude him from giving evidence about his  personal
      experience of genuine refugees leaving from  Addis  Ababa  and  their
      patterns of making a claim for asylum.   The submission was  that  Dr
      Trueman is qualified to give such evidence given that the matter  lay
      within  his  personal  experience.     Therefore  the  appellant  was
      entitled to have  Dr  Trueman's  report  considered  and  taken  into
      account and not dismissed out of hand.

7.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant is  of  mixed  parentage,
      having an Eritrean mother and  an  Ethiopian  father.    He  did  not
      accept that the appellant is at risk of being stateless.    He  found
      that she is Eritrean.

8.    The Adjudicator accepted that  the  appellant  was  detained  by  the
      authorities, but had doubts about the length of her captivity.

9.    The Adjudicator said that two  Convention  reasons  were  offered  in
      connection with this  appeal.   These  were  her  ethnicity  and  her
      imputed political opinion.    There was also a suggestion  that  this
      was a single woman returning, and the issue  of  social  group  might
      arise.

10.   In respect of the issue of ethnicity, the Adjudicator found that  the
      appellant had taken no steps to establish her ethnic identity  as  an
      Eritrean.

11.   In respect of an imputed political opinion, the Adjudicator found  it
      reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  had  served  some  time  in
      detention, but had no political opinion.  She did not belong  to  any
      political grouping.   The only  possible  suggestion  of  an  imputed
      political opinion may be because her father might have been  involved
      with the Dergue.  She herself pointed out that  her  father  had  the
      briefest of liaisons with her mother.   She did not know her  father.
       She had no connections with her father.    The only association  she
      has with her father is that of mixed parentage.   She  has  not  been
      seen to be a political activist, and was released by the authorities.
         The Adjudicator did not accept that the appellant has  an  imputed
      political opinion to the level of a well-founded fear of persecution.



12.   As to the Convention reason  of  belonging  to  a  particular  social
      group, the Adjudicator found that this appellant  did  not  fit  into
      such a social group.

13.   As regards Article 3 of the ECHR,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      appellant was vague about torture.  He accepted that she had been  in
      custody for a period and found that the treatment  set  out  was  not
      directed at her specifically.    All those in  custody  suffered  the
      same  ill-treatment.     The  appellant  eventually   resolved   that
      custody.   She was released.  The Adjudicator did not find  that  the
      appellant's treatment reached the  relevant  threshold  of  severity.
      The appellant had not outlined any evidence whatever beyond  her  say
      so that she would suffer Article 3 continually in the  future.    The
      appellant satisfied the authorities sufficiently for the  authorities
      to release her.   Accordingly he did not accept  that  the  appellant
      was at a real risk of Article 3 difficulties were she to be  returned
      to Eritrea.

14.   At the hearing Counsel submitted  new  evidence  in  the  form  of  a
      medical report from Dr Jeanette Medway on the appellant's HIV and the
      availability of appropriate treatment in Eritrea.     Her  report  is
      dated 16 February 2004.

15.   The Home Office CIPU report of October 2003 was submitted by Ms Hart.

16.   Counsel asked the  Tribunal  to  take  account  of  Court  of  Appeal
      decisions in N and Djali and the UNCHR position paper about return to
      Eritrea.

17.   Counsel submitted that the appellant was diagnosed  HIV  positive  in
      October 2002 after the Adjudicator's determination and the Tribunal's
      determination.   It was a new ground of appeal and leave  was  sought
      to argue this ground on 20 June 2003 before a differently constituted
      Tribunal.  Ms Hart had no objection to this issue being raised  as  a
      new ground.

18.   The issues before the Tribunal are:

      (1)   Will the appellant be denied nationality because  she  did  not
           vote in the referendum.

      (2)   Will she be detained on return to Eritrea because she had  been
           detained before.


      (3)   As she is HIV positive, is there medical treatment available to
           her in Eritrea.


19.   Counsel relied on the original grounds of appeal to  the  Tribunal  in
      2002.

20.   The first ground of appeal related to  the  Adjudicator's  finding  at
      paragraph 16 that there was no risk of the appellant being  stateless.
       Counsel submitted that the Adjudicator failed to consider the Trueman
      report on the country situation in Eritrea, failed to give reasons for
      rejecting the report and failed to consider Mr Gilkes report.

21.   Counsel said that the Adjudicator made reference to the report  of  Dr
      Trueman at paragraph 11 of the determination.   At  paragraph  15  the
      Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was detained in the past.   Dr
      Trueman at paragraph 24(b) of his undated  report  said  that  in  his
      experience release from prison was a positive  factor  for  detention.
      It was Counsel's submission that by only  referring  to  Dr  Trueman's
      report,  the  Adjudicator  gave  that  report  inadequate   treatment.
      Therefore the appeal should be allowed on this basis and remitted  for
      a fresh hearing.  In the alternative if the Tribunal are able to allow
      the appeal outright then it can do so on  the  basis  of  the  current
      report of Dr Trueman.

22.   Counsel then referred us to paragraph 2.3 of  the  grounds  of  appeal
      which said that the Adjudicator's finding at paragraph 19  that  there
      was no Convention reason was irrational and suffered from  a  manifest
      want of reasoning.   It was submitted that by not voting the appellant
      manifested  a  political  opinion.     Counsel  submitted   that   the
      Adjudicator at paragraph 19 did not explain properly why there was not
      a Convention reason.    The Adjudicator did not deal  with  the  claim
      that the appellant did not vote in the referendum.  The risk to her of
      not voting in the referendum is corroborated by Dr Trueman.

23.   The next ground  of  appeal  was  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
      accepted the appellant's length of detention.   His failure to make  a
      finding on it impacted on future risk.   Counsel  submitted  that  the
      implication of Dr Trueman's conclusion is that the longer a person  is
      detained, the more that person would be at risk.  There is a  probable
      difference between a lengthy  or  shorter  detention  because  of  the
      likelihood of records being kept.     The  Adjudicator  did  not  give
      reasons for saying why he did not accept  the  appellant's  length  of
      detention.

24.   Counsel's next argument was that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  law  at
      paragraph 20 of the determination by saying that the appellant was not
      singled  out  for  prison  conditions.    He  relied  on  Jayakumaran.
      Counsel  submitted  that  the  detention  and  ill-treatment  of   the
      appellant amounted to persecution of those who did  not  vote  in  the
      referendum.   Furthermore, the manner in which she  was  detained  and
      the length of that detention crossed the threshold into Article 3.

25.   Counsel further argued that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  consider  if
      detention in the past was a powerful indication of future persecution.
        The Demirkaya point relates back to Dr Trueman's point that  release
      from prison is a positive factor for detention.

26.   Although Counsel was relying on paragraphs 2.7 and 2.8 of the  grounds
      of appeal, he said that he could not argue these grounds with the same
      force as the earlier grounds.   Paragraph 2.7 of the grounds of appeal
      argued that the Adjudicator misdirected himself in law in holding that
      Article 3 ECHR is a qualified right.  When the Adjudicator  said  "all
      of these points have to be weighed against the duty of the  respondent
      in the exercise of policy of immigration control", the Adjudicator was
      not referring to Article 3 but to Article 8.   In Counsel's  view  the
      Adjudicator  was  conducting  a  balancing  exercise,  which  is   not
      applicable to Article 3 which is a non-derogable right and  cannot  be
      interfered  with.    Counsel  recognised  that  the  extra-territorial
      effect of Article  8  has  been  curtailed  by  Ullah.     He  further
      submitted that the Adjudicator had not considered that  the  appellant
      would be discriminated against on  account  of  race  if  returned  to
      Eritrea.

27.   Counsel then turned to the new ground of appeal  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's HIV diagnosis.  He said that the appellant  was  diagnosed
      as HIV positive in the latter part of 2002 when  she  became  pregnant
      and lost the baby.   Dr Medway's report  shows  that  only  the  basic
      health systems are available to 60% of the people.   Without access to
      anti-retroviral treatment, the appellant will go on to  develop  AIDS.
      The CIPU report says that an NGO is providing free treatment and  that
      was a one-off in order to  prevent  pregnant  women  transferring  the
      virus to their unborn child.   He accepted that the  report  does  not
      deal with the cost and ease of private access to treatment.

28.   Counsel said that if we were not with him on the asylum and Article  3
      arguments, then the HIV issue was a separate issue that needed  to  be
      considered by an Adjudicator.

29.   He further submitted that the appellant has no family in  Eritrea  for
      support.   She would be a single woman returning to Eritrea.   She  is
      of mixed ethnicity.   This will lead  to  discrimination.    She  lost
      contact with her mother  when  she  left  Eritrea.    Her  mother  was
      ostracised when she had  a  child  with  an  Ethiopian  man.   If  the
      appellant is not able to  work  she  will  not  be  able  to  pay  for
      treatment.   Her facts are distinguishable from the facts in N who was
      from Uganda and the Court  of  Appeal  found  that  Uganda  does  have
      treatment for HIV sufferers.   The appellant does have a real risk  of
      developing a low CD count.  This would engage Article 3.

30.   Counsel further submitted that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  any
      medical treatment and support she is getting  here  would  lead  to  a
      violation of Article 8.

31.   Counsel submitted that the Secretary of State through no fault of  his
      did not consider proportionality in relation to Article  8.    As  per
      Edore the Tribunal is seized of consideration of the Article 8 claim.

32.   Counsel submitted that consideration of the appellant's case  suffered
      a delay of 4 years.    As  the  Adjudicator  made  findings  of  fact,
      including his acceptance that the appellant was detained in the  past,
      he would ask the Tribunal to conclude that the appellant came here  in
      good faith seeking asylum.   It is the good faith of  her  claim  that
      this appellant shares with Shala.

33.   Counsel submitted that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
      for  7  years.    The  delays  in  the  consideration  of  her  asylum
      application were not her fault.  These factors should be weighed  into
      the balance and it should be found that it would  be  disproportionate
      to remove her.

34.   He would therefore request that  the  appeal  be  remitted  to  a  new
      Adjudicator to consider the HIV element in relation to Article 8.

35.   As to the appellant's claim that she is stateless, Counsel  said  that
      Dr Trueman's report identifies key reasons why the appellant would  be
      at risk and would not be granted a passport.  She did not vote in  the
      referendum and has a history of past detention.   She is also a person
      of mixed parentage.   These  factors  together  mean  that  she  would
      suffer discrimination and would be  at  risk  of  detention  and  ill-
      treatment.

36.   In response Ms  Hart  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  directed  his
      attention  to  specific  paragraphs  of  Dr  Trueman's  report.    The
      Adjudicator had a vast amount of objective evidence which he  referred
      to in reaching his decision.

37.   Ms Hart submitted that the determination was not  flawed  because  the
      Adjudicator made  no  reference  to  the  length  of  the  appellant's
      detention.  His lack of finding as to the length of detention was  not
      sufficient to flaw his determination.

38.   Ms Hart submitted that there was no source for  Dr  Trueman's  opinion
      at paragraph 25 of his report that the Eritrean authorities  are  very
      unlikely to admit the  appellant  to  Eritrea.    Ms  Hart  said  that
      paragraph 5.7  of  the  October  2003  CIPU  report  contradicts  that
      opinion.  This states that the Operations Chief at the  Department  of
      Immigration and Nationality for Eritrea in November 2002  stated  that
      if a person's parents or grandparents were born in Eritrea, then  they
      would be entitled to Eritrean nationality.   He  also  confirmed  that
      applicants  would  not  be  asked  about  their  views,  political  or
      otherwise.   Paragraph 5.6 of the CIPU report also gives a list issued
      by the Eritrean Embassy for obtaining Eritrean nationality.    Ms Hart
      said that it was confirmed by the Tribunal in the case  of  16L  which
      refers to the Court of Appeal decision in  Tekle,  that  a  claimant's
      political opinion was not relevant as was his inability to vote in the
      referendum.  Ms Hart said that the question we need to ask is how much
      weight can be given to Dr Trueman's report.

39.   She said  that  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the  appellant  has  no
      political opinion so any misdemeanour of  her  father  would  have  no
      effect on her.  She was released by the authorities.  She  was  of  no
      interest to them.   She had no political leanings or  profile  of  her
      own.  Anything she may have relates to her father  who  she  does  not
      even know.   Furthermore at  paragraph  7  of  the  determination  the
      appellant confirmed that she was not detained because  of  an  imputed
      political opinion.   She was  released  because  she  gave  the  right
      answers.   The Adjudicator also considered the  Convention  reason  of
      social group and dismissed it.

40.   Ms Hart submitted that although the Adjudicator  did  not  decide  the
      length of time the appellant was detained,  he  found  that  the  ill-
      treatment she suffered did not reach the threshold to  breach  Article
      3.  The Adjudicator found that although the appellant had been treated
      harshly, this was not persecution.

41.   With regard to the statement from  the  appellant's  solicitor,  Arona
      Sarwar, Ms Hart said that this was not signed or  dated.    In  it  Mr
      Sarwar said that he had written to the Eritrean Embassy on 2  December
      2004 requesting information as to the requirements  for  obtaining  an
      Eritrean passport.   Mr  Sarwar  claimed  that  he  had  sent  further
      letters but had not received any written response.     He  called  the
      Eritrean Embassy on 14 January and was requested to  call  back.    He
      made further calls on 16 and 17 when the lines were engaged.     On  4
      February 2004 he managed to speak to the Embassy who informed him that
      to obtain a passport of citizenship the person must have an ID and  to
      obtain this the person will need three Eritrean witnesses  with  their
      own ID to confirm that the applicant is Eritrean.   Ms Hart said  that
      we have no copies of the  letters  that  were  sent  to  the  Eritrean
      Embassy and therefore we do not know what questions were  asked.   The
      CIPU  report  is  evidence  that  the  Eritrean  Embassy  does  answer
      questions.  She asked the  Tribunal  to  put  any  weight  we  thought
      relevant on the letter.

42.   With regard to the medical report, Ms Hart  said  that  the  appellant
      was not receiving any treatment at all.   The Court of Appeal decision
      in N is clear-cut and provides guidance.  Only exceptional and extreme
      cases can be considered.    Currently the appellant is in a reasonable
      state of health.    The question is whether treatment is available  in
      Eritrea.   Ms Hart submitted that the medical report is speculative in
      that it talks about "if  the  appellant  develops  HIV"  and  "if  she
      becomes pregnant".   She submitted that none of this  takes  us  above
      the level of N.

43.   As regards the Shala point  Ms  Hart  accepted  there  was  a  lengthy
      delay.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  1997.     The
      refusal letter was issued in 2001.    She was diagnosed as having  HIV
      in 2002.   The Tribunal hearing was in 2003.  The appellant could have
      made an application for the HIV to be considered by the  Tribunal  but
      she did not.

44.   Ms Hart said that the CIPU report sets out the  different  methods  to
      achieve Eritrean nationality.    The appellant says that she does  not
      know of three witnesses.  Ms Hart said that the three witnesses can be
      from anywhere in  the  world.    It  is  difficult  to  conceive  that
      somebody who has a mother who is Eritrean  and  was  born  in  Eritrea
      cannot find three such people.

45.   In reply Counsel  submitted  that  the  concluding  paragraph  of  the
      latest UNCHR report of 6 March 2002  is  in  line  with  Dr  Trueman's
      report and with whatever the Embassy official said to the Home  Office
      delegation.    The  UNCHR  report  says  that  the   displacement   of
      expellees, even those holding the blue card, is a  common  feature  in
      Eritrea.   UNHCR generally takes a strong view against the  return  of
      unsuccessful asylum seekers to  a  situation  of  displacement  within
      their own countries.  This is because in UNCHR's experience, displaced
      persons frequently live in conditions that  raise  serious  protection
      concerns.

46.   Counsel submitted that the medical report is not speculative  in  that
      the appellant is likely to develop full blown AIDS and in that respect
      to remove her from the United Kingdom would  amount  to  a  breach  of
      Article 3.

47.   After hearing arguments  from  both  parties,  the  Tribunal  reserved
      their determination in order to consider all the evidence.

48.    The  thrust  of  Counsel's  argument  was  that   the   Adjudicator's
      determination  was  flawed  because   he   failed   to   give   proper
      consideration to  Dr  Trueman's  report.    Although  Counsel  further
      submitted that the Adjudicator did not give proper consideration to Dr
      Gilkes report, he did not specifically draw our attention to  extracts
      of Dr Gilkes report that were of relevance to this appeal.

49.   We accept  that  the  only  mention  of  Dr  Trueman's  report  was  a
      reference to it at paragraph 11 of  the  Adjudicator's  determination.
      The Adjudicator mentioned certain pages of the report on the situation
      regarding the 1993 referendum.  He did not apply  the  report  to  his
      consideration of the appellant's appeal.  Therefore whilst  we  accept
      Counsel's submission that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  give  any  or
      adequate consideration to Dr Trueman's report, we do not find that his
      determination is flawed on account of that failure.

50.   We were not of the opinion that this appeal ought to be  remitted  for
      a fresh hearing.  The Adjudicator had accepted all of the  appellant's
      evidence with  the  exception  of  doubts  about  the  length  of  her
      detention.   In the circumstances, we took  the  view  that  we  could
      decide this appeal ourselves by considering Dr Trueman's report of  30
      May 2003.

51.   We observe from Dr Trueman's antecedents that his experience  is  very
      much limited to Ethiopia and what he has gained from discussions  with
      Human Rights Organisations, and  British  and  American  Embassies  in
      Ethiopia  about  Eritrea.    Indeed,  his  report  on  the   objective
      situation in Eritrea is taken from the US Statement Department  Report
      (paragraph 11 of his report).   The current US State Department Report
      is in the public domain and therefore we find that Dr Trueman was  not
      saying anything new.  At paragraph 18 of the report he states that  he
      has personally read over 20 statements from descendants of Eritrea who
      have fled from Ethiopia and at least five statements from children  of
      mixed parentage, who had fled from  Eritrea.     In  our  opinion  the
      experience gained from his limited contact  with  very  few  Eritreans
      cannot be regarded as an expert opinion as to the  generality  of  the
      situation for all Eritreans.   Whilst  it  is  not  our  intention  to
      disregard the limited experience of Dr Trueman, we cannot on the other
      hand give it the sort of weight Counsel expected  us  to.     We  note
      that  at  paragraph  23  of  his  report  Dr  Trueman  said  that  the
      appellant's history was familiar to him from  the  statements  he  had
      read from Eritreans and their descendants who have left  Ethiopia  and
      Eritrea.  He found her statement entirely credible.   We find that  he
      was not saying anything beyond the Adjudicator's findings.

52.   Dr Trueman at paragraph  24(b)  said  that  in  his  experience  being
      released from prison is a positive factor for detention.     Once  the
      security apparatus has shown an interest in an individual, he  or  she
      is at a higher than average risk of detention, torture,  disappearance
      and extrajudicial killing.    When he  says  "in  my  experience",  we
      presume that he is talking about his limited contacts.   This  limited
      experience, in our view, is  insufficient  to  base  an  opinion  that
      release from prison is a positive factor for detention.   Furthermore,
      he says a large part of the report is based on  objective  information
      from other sources.  He does not identify these  other  sources.    In
      the circumstances, we attach little weight  to  Dr  Trueman's  opinion
      that release from prison  is  a  positive  factor  for  detention  and
      whatever else he says.

53.   We also looked at  the  Adjudicator's  findings  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's detention.   He accepted that the appellant  was  detained
      but had  doubts  about  the  length  of  her  captivity.   It  is  our
      considered opinion that the Adjudicator's doubts about the appellant's
      length of detention  and  therefore  a  lack  of  finding  as  to  the
      appellant's length of detention  do  not  in  any  way  undermine  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions.    The  fact  is  that  the  appellant  was
      released from detention because the authorities  were  satisfied  with
      the  answers  she  gave  to  their  questions.    We  agree  with  the
      Adjudicator that however unpleasant her detention was, she was able to
      confirm the necessary political solution so that  the  authorities  no
      longer had an interest in her.   Indeed her response to question 18 at
      B(6) of her interview confirms that the authorities no longer had  any
      interest in her. She was asked "what happened in the time between  you
      being released and leaving  Eritrea?   The  appellant's  response  was
      "when returned, I tried to live a normal life but I was unable  either
      to work or educate myself.   My mother then made  the  arrangement  to
      leave."  The appellant left Eritrea in 1997.   Therefore,  given  that
      the authorities were no longer interested in the  appellant,  and  her
      departure was not on account of any fear  she  may  have  had  of  the
      authorities at the time, we cannot place any reliance on Dr  Trueman's
      opinion that release from prison is a positive  factor  for  detention
      were the appellant to be removed to Eritrea.

54.   Counsel submitted that the longer  appellant  remained  in  detention,
      the more likely it is that her detention would be on record.    We  do
      not accept this submission; it is not supported by objective material.
      But even if that  were  so,  the  same  record  would  show  that  the
      appellant was released because she was no longer of  any  interest  to
      the authorities having  satisfied  them  with  her  answers  to  their
      questions.

55.   We  now  turn  to  Counsel's  argument  that  by  not  voting  in  the
      referendum  the  appellant  had  manifested   a   political   opinion.
      Paragraph 6 of the skeleton argument of 18 August 2003 stated that the
      appellant's evidence of  persecution  for  non  participation  in  the
      referendum is plausibly  corroborated  by  the  expert  report  of  Dr
      Trueman.   The persecution identified by the  appellant  was  2  weeks
      detention in a police station followed by 1 year in a  detention  camp
      without trail.

56.   We know from the objective evidence that the referendum  was  held  in
      1993.    The Adjudicator appears to have accepted that  the  appellant
      did not vote in the referendum.  According to the  appellant,  because
      she did not vote she could not get an  identity  card  and  could  not
      enrol in school and continue with her education.   She was  unable  to
      get employment or take  part  in  any  form  of  social  and  economic
      activity.  It was because  of  this  intolerable  situation  that  she
      decided to approach the authorities and asked them to issue  her  with
      some form of documentation.    She went to the Kebele in December 1995
      and it was following on from this that she was arrested  and  detained
      for 2 weeks and then detained for a further  year.     We  can  accept
      that her failure to vote in the  referendum  was  perceived  to  be  a
      political act.  By the same token having released her from  detention,
      on account of the answers she had given, we find that the  authorities
      must have accepted that the appellant possessed  a  political  opinion
      that was not adverse to their own.   In the circumstances, there is no
      reasonable likelihood that on return to Eritrea the appellant would be
      detained on account of any imputed political opinion attributed to her
      due to her failure to  vote  in  the  referendum.    Furthermore,  the
      objective evidence does not indicate that a failure  to  vote  in  the
      referendum, which took place over 10 years ago, is still an issue that
      is likely to lead to any repercussions by the authorities.

57.   The Adjudicator had found that the treatment she  suffered  was  harsh
      but did not amount to  persecution.    We  agree  with  that  finding.
      Although we accept that the appellant need  not  be  singled  out  for
      persecution, we agree with the Adjudicator that the ill-treatment  she
      suffered in custody did not reach the threshold of severity so  as  to
      amount to a breach of Article 3.

58.   We do not accept the submission in paragraph 2.7  of  the  grounds  of
      appeal that at paragraph 21 the Adjudicator misdirected himself in law
      in holding that Article 3 is a qualified right.    It is clear  to  us
      that at paragraph 21 the Adjudicator was considering  the  appellant's
      claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, namely her  right  to  respect  for
      private and family life.  The  Adjudicator's  finding  in  respect  of
      Article 3 can be found  at  paragraph  20.    In  that  paragraph  the
      Adjudicator gave clear reasons as to why he did not  accept  that  the
      appellant was at real risk of  Article  3  difficulties  were  she  to
      return to Eritrea.  His findings in relation to Article 3 are, in  our
      view, sustainable.

59.   In the light of our consideration of the evidence before us,  we  find
      that the appellant has failed to  establish  that  on  her  return  to
      Eritrea she will be persecuted for a Convention reason or  ill-treated
      in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

60.   We note what the UNCHR  says  about  internally  displaced  people  in
      Eritrea.   We are of the view that the UNCHR's concerns are not  about
      failed asylum seekers returning to a situation where they would suffer
      persecution for a Convention reason  or  ill-treatment  in  breach  of
      their Article 3 rights.   The UNCHR are concerned with the  conditions
      faced by displaced people.   Although they say that  these  conditions
      raise serious protection concerns, they  do  not  specify  what  those
      protection concerns are.   There is insufficient information before us
      to enable us to conclude that these protection concerns are such  that
      they reach the threshold of persecution within the 1951 Convention  or
      the threshold of Article 3 ill-treatment.

61.   We accept that there was a 4-year delay in the  consideration  of  the
      appellant's asylum application.  We do not accept that she  came  here
      in good faith seeking asylum and therefore do not accept that her case
      is akin to Shala.   Her answer to question 18 clearly  indicates  that
      she left  Eritrea  not  because  of  a  fear  of  persecution  by  the
      authorities  but  because  she  was  unable  to  gain   education   or
      employment.  Furthermore, the delay in reaching a decision in  respect
      of her asylum application has worked to her advantage.   She  has  now
      been here 7 years and has been  able  to  gain  an  education.    This
      education should stand her in good stead on her return to Eritrea.

62.   We now turn to the appellant's medical condition.  The  appellant  has
      been diagnosed with  HIV.    The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the
      appellant is not currently under going any treatment.  Dr Medway  said
      that whilst the appellant has a CD 4 count of over 500  she  does  not
      require ARV treatment for her own health.   However she  needs  to  be
      monitored at this stage on a 3 monthly basis in order to  monitor  her
      CD 4 count.   Given that the appellant is not  receiving  any  medical
      treatment in the UK at the moment, her removal from the United Kingdom
      would not lead to any serious harm.    Therefore  the  appellant  does
      not come within the Razgar principle in Article 8.

63.   We also agree with Ms Hart that  the  conclusions  of  Dr  Medway  are
      speculative and are based on what is likely to happen in the future if
      the appellant has another pregnancy, has a baby  and  is  without  ARV
      treatment.   We reject Counsel's submission  that  because  Dr  Medway
      says that there is a real risk of the appellant going  on  to  develop
      AIDs at some point in the future, the  Tribunal  can  determine  today
      that at that future point when she does develop AIDS she  would  cross
      the threshold into Article 3 as she would not be able to  have  access
      to treatment for AIDS.   It would certainly be alarming  indeed  if  a
      Tribunal had to rule that an appellant cannot be removed today because
      at some point in the future, she is likely to develop full blown AIDS,
      for which she is not likely to get access to treatment.  We are  bound
      by Ravichandran and the Asylum and Immigration Act to look at  matters
      at the date of hearing, not at an indeterminate time in the future.

64.   In N Laws LJ  held  that  the  application  of  Article  3  where  the
      complaint in essence is of want of resources in the  applicant's  home
      country (in contrast to what has been available to him in the  country
      from which he is to be  removed),  it  is  only  justified  where  the
      humanitarian appeal of the case is so powerful that it  could  not  in
      reason be resisted by the authorities of a civilised state.  Dyson  LJ
      said that the question was whether the facts in  N  disclosed  a  case
      which was so exceptional and in  respect  of  which  the  humanitarian
      consequences  were  so  compelling,  that  the  IAT  might  reasonably
      conclude that Article 3 was engaged.   In his judgement the  applicant
      did not satisfy that test.    Her case was similar to that of many who
      suffer from HIV/AIDS.    They enjoy sophisticated medical treatment in
      this country which keeps the disease at bay, and  which  ensures  that
      they have a reasonable life expectancy.    If  they  are  returned  to
      their countries of origin,  they  will  be  unlikely  to  receive  the
      medical treatment that they currently enjoy, and as  a  result,  their
      life expectancies will be substantially reduced.   It  seemed  to  him
      that if the Article 3 door was open to such cases, it would be  opened
      far wider than  was  intended  by  the  signatories  to  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights, and far wider than the Court envisaged  in
      D.  Tragic though such cases undoubtedly are, unless  they  have  some
      special  feature  which  gives   rise   to   particularly   compelling
      humanitarian conditions, they do not need  the  stringent  requirement
      that they be truly exceptional in  order  to  satisfy  the  Article  3
      criteria.

65.   We find in the light of the judgment in N that  the  appellant's  case
      is neither exceptional nor in respect of the  humanitarian  conditions
      so compelling that we have to reasonably conclude that  Article  3  is
      engaged.

66.   We now turn to the issue of statelessness.   We  place  no  weight  on
      the unsigned and undated  statement  from  the  appellant's  solicitor
      Arona Sarwar.   That statement was not accompanied by the copy letters
      that were written to the Eritrean Embassy.     We  have  no  objective
      information that says that the  three  witnesses  the  appellant  will
      require, are  witnesses  who  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
      appellant was born and bred in Eritrea and we have no doubt that there
      are many Eritreans who know her  and  who  will  be  able  to  provide
      evidence of her identity.

67.   We reject Dr Trueman's opinion that the Eritrean authorities are  very
      unlikely to admit the appellant to Eritrea.  We do not know the source
      upon which his opinion is based.   Furthermore, it is contradicted  by
      the statement of the Operations Chief at the Department of Immigration
      and Nationality  for  Eritrea.    In  the  light  of  the  appellant's
      maternal  parentage,  we  find  that  the  appellant  should  have  no
      difficulty obtaining Eritrean  nationality.    We  also  rely  on  the
      decision in 16L and Tekle, which  held  that  a  claimant's  political
      opinion or his ability to vote in the referendum is  not  relevant  to
      obtaining Eritrean nationality.  In the circumstances,  we  find  that
      the appellant is not stateless.

68.   On the totality of the evidence we find that the appellant has  failed
      to discharge the burden of proof upon her in relation  to  her  asylum
      and human rights appeals.  Accordingly, her appeal is dismissed.



                                                   Miss K Eshun
                                                   Vice President











