
H-AF-V2


|                           |        |MA and others (Ethiopia -   |
|                           |        |Mixed ethnicity-dual        |
|                           |        |nationality.) Eritrea [2004]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00324                 |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 9 August 2004           |        |                            |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|22 December 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                  |
|Mr P S Aujla                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


|and between                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


|and between                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation:

For the Claimants:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel
For the Secretary of State:  Ms J Anderson of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    There are three appeals before the Tribunal.  In  CC/47612/2001,  the
    appellant ("the first claimant") appeals against the  determination  of
    an Adjudicator, Mrs J Woolley, issued on 8 November 2002, who dismissed
    her appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds against  a  decision
    made on 4 July 2001 refusing her leave to enter following  the  refusal
    of her claim for asylum and giving removal directions for Eritrea.   In
    HX/71515/2002 the Secretary of State appeals against the  determination
    of an Adjudicator, Mr P Brenells, issued on 5 March 2003,  who  allowed
    the respondent's ("second claimant's") appeal on both asylum and  human
    rights grounds against a decision made on 14 August 2001 giving removal
    directions to Ethiopia.  In CC/13744/2003  the  appellant  (the  "third
    claimant") appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A  M
    Baker, issued on 8 July 2003, who dismissed his appeal on  both  asylum
    and human rights grounds against a decision made on  24  November  2001
    refusing him leave to enter following the  refusal  of  his  claim  for
    asylum and giving removal directions for Eritrea.

The First Claimant

2.    The first claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 March 1999 and
    claimed asylum  on  arrival.   She  gave  her  current  nationality  as
    Eritrean.  Her claim for asylum was based on a fear of  persecution  in
    both Ethiopia and Eritrea.  It was her claim that she and  her  husband
    were of Eritrean nationality but had  been  living  in  Ethiopia.   Her
    husband was a member of the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF)  and  as  a
    result he had been deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea.  She had not been
    deported because she was in Dire Dawa at the time as she had gone there
    to give birth in February 1999.  When she returned to Addis Ababa  from
    Dire Dawa her neighbours told her that the authorities had been looking
    for her to deport her to Eritrea.  Her application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.

3.    The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on  9  October
    2002.  In her evidence to the Adjudicator she confirmed her belief that
    her husband was a member of the ELF although she said she could not  be
    certain because he had never told her this.  She had seen  some  papers
    which he kept from her.  When she returned to Addis Ababa she found her
    husband's parents preparing to return to Eritrea taking  her  son  with
    them.  She did not get on with them as  they  were  Christian  and  she
    Muslim.  She felt unable to go to Eritrea as she considered  she  would
    be arrested like her husband.  She stayed  with  neighbours.   At  this
    time a lot of her friends and neighbours were being deported.  A friend
    helped her leave Ethiopia via Kenya where she stayed for ten or  eleven
    days before travelling on to this country.  The Adjudicator found  that
    the first claimant, being entitled to citizenship of Eritrea, should be
    considered for Refugee Convention purposes as a national of Eritrea.

4.    As regards Eritrea,  the  Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    background information supported her claim that she would have a  well-
    founded  fear  of  persecution  there.   She  herself  had  never  been
    politically involved and there was no evidence to support an allegation
    that her husband's possible political beliefs would  be  attributed  to
    her.  Returning members of the ELF had been given posts in  government.
    There was no real risk that the first claimant  would  be  deported  to
    Ethiopia were she to be sent to Eritrea.   The Adjudicator went  on  to
    consider the issue of Ethiopian citizenship.  She found that the  first
    claimant was Ethiopian.  She noted that she had a  family  in  Ethiopia
    and had never experienced trouble there previously.  She had  taken  no
    part in politics and did not vote  in  the  referendum.   She  was  not
    satisfied that the first claimant would be persecuted for a  Convention
    reason in Ethiopia.

The Second Claimant

5.    The second claimant based her claim  on  the  following  facts.   Her
    father was Eritrean and an officer in the Ethiopian Army.  He was taken
    prisoner by Eritrean rebels in around 1990.  She  went  to  Eritrea  in
    1995 to try and find  him  and  for  this  reason  the  authorities  in
    Ethiopia came to suspect that she had taken  secret  military  training
    there.  She claimed that in September 1999  the  Ethiopian  authorities
    went to her house and took her to a prison where she remained until  25
    November 1999.  She was ill-treated when in detention but  released  on
    bail on condition that she reported for deportation on 17 January 2000.
     With the help of an agent she was able  to  leave  the  country  on  4
    January 2000 and travelled to the United Kingdom.

6.    Her claim was refused by the Secretary of State.  He did not  believe
    her account of events.  However, the Adjudicator did believe the second
    claimant's evidence.  He considered that her Eritrean  links  gave  the
    Ethiopian authorities ample reason to distrust her whether or not  they
    thought she had received military training in  Eritrea  when  she  went
    there to trace  her  father.   He  noted  in  the  background  evidence
    concerns  about  the  treatment  of  Eritreans  in  Ethiopia  and   the
    possibility that the second claimant might still be deported to Eritrea
    on return to Ethiopia.  He found that there  would  be  a  considerable
    risk of deportation for her particularly in  light  of  the  fact  that
    during the period of custody she had  experienced  real  and  not  just
    threatened persecution and because of the circumstances surrounding the
    disappearance of her father and her mixed ethnicity.

The Third Claimant

7.    The third claimant based his claim on a fear of  persecution  because
    he had distributed leaflets for the All  Amhara  People's  Organisation
    (AAPO).  He claimed that he had  been  arrested  in  December  1998  by
    security forces and detained for two days because he was  an  Eritrean.
    He was released but arrested a week later and detained for  three  days
    because he helped the Eritreans and distributed AAPO leaflets.  He  was
    beaten badly in detention.  He was taken to a hospital but  managed  to
    escape.  He left Ethiopia by car and travelled to Kenya with  a  forged
    passport.  He later travelled to Tanzania,  Mozambique,  Swaziland  and
    then to South Africa where he claimed asylum but was refused.  He  then
    travelled on to the United Kingdom arriving on 18 May 1999.

8.    The Adjudicator found that the essential core of the third claimant's
    story was credible although there were elements of embellishment.   The
    removal directions were for Eritrea.  He noted the reasons given by him
    for not wanting to go to Eritrea and commented that he did  not  regard
    the "arbitrary allocation" (as the Adjudicator  described  it)  of  the
    third claimant being proposed  by  the  respondent  as  being  remotely
    satisfactory or acceptable.  He commented that if in effect Eritrea was
    being treated as a safe area of Ethiopia to which  the  third  claimant
    could be safely and conveniently relocated, he  would  regard  that  as
    unduly harsh.

9.    However, the Adjudicator was not satisfied that there would be a real
    risk of persecution if the third claimant were to return  to  Ethiopia.
    He had left four years prior to the Adjudicator's  determination.   The
    situation for ethnic Eritreans had significantly  changed.   There  had
    been a peace  accord  and  a  cessation  of  border  hostilities.   The
    atmosphere had changed and repatriations  had  virtually  ceased.   His
    assessment of the future risk was that it was so low that  he  did  not
    consider there would be  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Ethiopia.

Features common in all three appeals

10.   In summary all the claimants originate from Ethiopia but  are  partly
    or wholly of Eritrean ethnic background.  These appeals all  raise  the
    issue of  whether  nationals  or  former  nationals  of  Ethiopia  face
    persecution as a result of their  ethnicity  arising  from  a  risk  of
    discriminatory  withdrawal  of  their  nationality  and   a   risk   of
    deportation to Eritrea.  The appeals also raise the issue of whether an
    entitlement to Eritrean nationality deprives a claimant of a  right  to
    protection under the 1951 Convention.   As  the  appeals  raise  common
    issues of fact and law, they are being heard together pursuant  to  the
    provisions of Rule 51 of the 2003 Procedure Rules with the  consent  of
    all parties.

The Grounds of Appeal

11.   The first claimant was granted permission to appeal on the issues  of
    whether the fact that she had a lawful claim  to  Eritrean  nationality
    meant that  she  would  not  be  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
    Convention and whether she would in practice be afforded protection  by
    the  Eritrean  authorities.   In  the  appeal  concerning  the   second
    claimant, the Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  on
    the ground that the  Adjudicator  had  not  given  adequate  or  proper
    reasons as to why the second claimant would be at risk of  deportation.
    It is argued that the Adjudicator had not  referred  to  any  objective
    evidence to support his  findings.   The  third  claimant  was  granted
    permission to challenge the  Adjudicator's  findings  on  the  risk  in
    Ethiopia including the argument that he  had  been  the  subject  of  a
    continuing denial of  Ethiopian  nationality  and  its  benefits  which
    amounted to persecution and that he had wrongly assessed the  risks  to
    returnees of Eritrean or part Eritrean background.

12.   The Secretary of State has indicated that  it  is  his  intention  to
    grant indefinite leave to remain to the third claimant.   By  operation
    of law his appeal will be treated as abandoned on  the  grant  of  such
    leave but, in the light of the history of these appeals and the  issues
    raised, the Tribunal does not think it  right  to  adjourn  his  appeal
    until the grant of indefinite leave.  So far as the first  claimant  is
    concerned, by letter dated 2 August 2004 the  Secretary  of  State  has
    indicated that he is cancelling the removal directions set for  Eritrea
    and intends to set any  future  removal  directions  in  the  case  for
    Ethiopia.  However, the current decision to  issue  removal  directions
    stands but we take note of the fact that there is now no  intention  of
    returning the first claimant to Eritrea. The appeals  relating  to  the
    first  and  second  claimants  fall  within  the  provisions   of   the
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  whereas  the  appeal  by  the  third
    claimant is pursuant to section 101 of the Nationality Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and is limited to a point of law.


The submissions made on behalf of the claimants

13.   Mr Fripp has  set  out  his  submissions  in  his  skeleton  argument
    entitled General  Submissions.   They  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows.  His core submission for each of the claimants on the issue of
    asylum is that:

           (i)      They  are  effectively  former  nationals  of  Ethiopia
             following de facto removal of Ethiopian nationality on a basis
             of discrimination against those  of  part  or  whole  Eritrean
             extraction;


         (ii)     They are not Eritrean nationals, and even in the event of
             de  jure  entitlement  cannot  lawfully  be   disbarred   from
             protection  given  the  absence  of  certainty  of   effective
             national protection;


         (iii)    Accordingly they are refugees under Article 1(A)(2)  1951
             Convention;


         (iv)     They cannot lawfully be removed to Eritrea.


         On the issue of human rights the core submission is:


         (i)      Statelessness per se does  not  require  a  finding  that
             exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  relevant
             provisions of the ECHR.  However the effect of  exclusion  may
             render the excluding state in breach of ECHR provisions.    On
             the facts removal from the United Kingdom either  to  Ethiopia
             or Eritrea would in each case breach relevant provisions.


14.   Mr Fripp submitted that being Ethiopians of  Eritrean  descent  meant
    that the claimants would face the following risks.  Firstly,  each  had
    been subject to  or  continued  to  face  the  risk  of  discriminatory
    withdrawal of Ethiopian nationality (denaturalisation) contrary to  the
    Ethiopian constitution.  This process and the withdrawal of  associated
    rights amounted to persecution: see Lazarevic v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 251.
     Secondly, if removed to Ethiopia, each  individual  faced  a  risk  of
    onward deportation, exclusion from that country or detention.  Thirdly,
    even if admitted to Ethiopia upon arrival at Addis Ababa, the effect of
    denaturalisation  meant  that  they  would  remain   in   Ethiopia   on
    sufferance, their position being transformed to  one  of  residence  as
    registered aliens on temporary permits.

15.   In support of the first risk it was common ground  that  between  mid
    1998 and late 2000 large numbers of ethnic Eritreans and part Eritreans
    were  expelled  from  Ethiopia.   The  numbers  recently  estimated  as
    remaining indicated a large exodus of individuals who had  either  gone
    into hiding or had accepted voluntary repatriation under various  forms
    of economic or social duress.  Many  of  those  removed  were  in  fact
    entitled to Ethiopian nationality  as  the  children  of  an  Ethiopian
    parent.   The  removals  were  indiscriminate.   There  was  continuing
    evidence of denaturalisation and deportation.  The unlawful removal  of
    nationality on a discriminatory basis had  been  at  the  core  of  the
    Ethiopian government's actions even though  there  was  an  attempt  to
    defend this conduct as legitimate state action.

16.   Mr Fripp accepted that large  scale  deportations  from  Ethiopia  of
    ethnic or part ethnic Eritreans had greatly reduced or ceased  although
    exclusionary  pressures  remained.   However,  there  was  no  evidence
    indicating that the Ethiopian authorities were willing  to  permit  the
    return of or resumption of nationality by those who had been  deported.
    In  January  2004  directives  dealing  with  the  status  of  Eritrean
    nationals residing in Ethiopia only dealt with those who had  continued
    to maintain permanent residence.  The  Ethiopian  authorities  did  not
    permit return on an EU return letter.  The acquisition  of  a  relevant
    travel document required a personal approach to the  Ethiopian  Embassy
    in London.  An applicant was  required  to  disclose  his  reasons  for
    seeking such a  document  and  to  give  details  which  would  clearly
    identify if one or both of an applicant's  parents  had  originated  in
    Eritrea.

17.   As to the second risk, whether the claimants  would  be  at  risk  of
    removal to Eritrea, Mr Fripp  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  reached
    different conclusions in different cases, probably  explicable  by  the
    evidence which had been produced in each appeal.

18.   If the claimants were permitted to remain in Ethiopia,  continued  Mr
    Fripp, they would be treated as temporarily tolerated  aliens  entirely
    without protection, given the Ethiopian government's  justification  of
    previous deportation.  The evidence showed that daily life was becoming
    more precarious for people of Eritrean origin  in  Ethiopia  after  the
    Alien Registration Order went into effect.  Mr Fripp submitted that the
    claimants were not nationals of Eritrea.   The  reality  was  that  the
    Eritrean authorities appeared  not  to  offer  any  objective  publicly
    disclosed standard for the grant of citizenship.  In  any  event  there
    would be a risk  in  Eritrea  for  those  of  mixed  Ethiopian/Eritrean
    families where a member had remained in Ethiopia in fear of  the  risks
    of moving to Eritrea.

19.   Mr Fripp argued that the fact that  a  claimant  could  seek  another
    nationality  would  not  disqualify  him  from  protection  under   the
    Convention.   The  issue  was  whether  he   already   possessed   such
    nationality.  He referred to  Canada  v  Ward  [1993]  103  DLR  1  and
    Bouianova v MEI [1993] FCJ 576.  He argued  that  L  (Ethiopia)  [2003]
    UKIAT 00016 and Tecle [2002] EWCA Civ 1358, whilst not  addressing  the
    point directly had been consistent with the  need  for  a  pre-existing
    nationality rather than the right to seek  a  fresh  nationality.   The
    requirement to apply for a nationality to which  a  claimant  might  be
    entitled as envisaged in Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR 359 was to avoid wilful
    statelessness.  In R v IAT ex parte Tewelde (unreported  heard  18  May
    2000) Sullivan  J  accepted  that  a  failure  to  make  enquiries  was
    excusable where other credible evidence clearly showed that the  result
    would be negative.  The authorities  requiring  enquiries  to  be  made
    reflected a general view that self-imposed  or  "wilful"  statelessness
    provided no  sufficient  foundation  for  reliance  upon  international
    surrogate protection.  Reasonable steps towards  a  certain  or  almost
    certain positive outcome could be expected.  This  confirmed  that  any
    recognised  or  underlying  nationality  must  be  an  accessible   and
    effective one.

20.   None of the claimants possessed  pre-existing  Eritrean  nationality.
    Reliance upon a presumed ability to seek a nationality  which  did  not
    predate the refugee claim could not vitiate a Convention  claim:  if  a
    claimant is barred from protection by such presumed ability,  Mr  Fripp
    asked, would he be barred from protection by an ability to apply as  an
    aspiring immigrant to any other  country?   An  ineffective  or  purely
    formal nationality did not disbar an individual  from  refugee  status:
    Jong Kim Koe v MIMA [1997] 306 FCA.  The issues of law raised  in  this
    appeal were not raised in G (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT 00091.  Removal  to
    Eritrea for these claimants would be a decision made not in  accordance
    with the law and  would  be  contrary  to  the  Convention.   Mr  Fripp
    submitted that even if the claimants  could  be  returned  to  Eritrea,
    there continued to be a risk of human rights violations in that country
    including a risk of refoulement to Ethiopia.

The submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State

21.   Ms Anderson submitted that the position in Ethiopia and  Eritrea  was
    unique.  The populations had been mixed.   When  hostilities  commenced
    and the separate nation state of Eritrea came into  existence,  it  was
    important for both states to determine who  their  citizens  were.   In
    each case a current well-founded  fear  had  to  be  shown.   Lazarevic
    provided a  very  tenuous  basis  for  an  argument  that  deprival  of
    citizenship would amount on the  present  facts  to  persecution.   She
    submitted that no general risk arose for  all  Ethiopians  of  Eritrean
    ethnic origin.  Each case must be looked at to see whether there was  a
    specific individual risk.  In any event there was a different situation
    now that hostilities had ended.  It was  impossible  to  say  that  all
    Ethiopians of Eritrean or part Eritrean background fell into a category
    of individuals who faced expulsion.  There was now no general risk.

22.   The Convention provides  that  an  asylum  applicant  must  seek  the
    protection of any country of which he is a citizen.  The  principle  in
    Bradshaw should apply in refugee law.  There was nothing  unreasonable,
    Ms Andrew added, in expecting someone to apply for citizenship if  they
    could avoid the  risk  of  persecution  in  one  country  by  obtaining
    citizenship of another.  The only exception to Bradshaw was the  narrow
    exception that someone could not reasonably be expected  to  apply  for
    citizenship if that brought with it a risk of persecution.

The Background Evidence

23.   The Tribunal will now turn to the background evidence.  The claimants
    have produced two bundles: A1 containing  folders  A-X  and  bundle  A2
    enclosing folders Q-A1.  The respondent produced a bundle R indexed and
    paginated 1-205.  This bundle contains the Ethiopia CIPU  Report  April
    2004 at R4-102 and the Eritrea April 2004 Report R103-194.

24.   The background to the creation of the state of Eritrea is set out  in
    the Eritrea report at paragraphs  4.1-12.   The  border  conflict  with
    Ethiopia between 1998-2004 is summarised in paragraphs 4.13 - 4.20  and
    there is a parallel report in the Ethiopia CIPU  Report  at  paragraphs
    4.10-4.21 of the conflict between the two states.  It is common  ground
    that following the outbreak of war in 1998, the  Ethiopian  authorities
    began  a  process  of  expelling  70,000  Eritreans  and  the  Eritrean
    authorities subsequently expelled a similar number of  Ethiopians  from
    Eritrea.  Paragraph 4.13 of the Ethiopia report refers  to  an  Amnesty
    International Report of January 1999 stating that Ethiopia's policy  of
    deporting people of Eritrean origin after war between the two countries
    broke out  in  May  1998  had  by  then  developed  into  a  systematic
    countrywide operation to arrest and  deport  anyone  of  full  or  part
    Eritrean descent.  A full analysis of the  expulsions  between  Eritrea
    and Ethiopia is set out in the Human Rights  Watch  Report  of  January
    2003 (at A1J).  The expulsions by Ethiopia are covered in the report at
    pages 18 to 30 and by Eritrea at pages 30 to 36.   At  page  30  it  is
    recorded that expulsions from Ethiopia continued  after  May  2000  but
    gradually decreased over time.  During 2000 911 Eritrean nationals were
    returned to Eritrea under the auspices of the ICRC  delegation.   There
    was a protest about the forced expulsion in June 2001 of 704  residents
    of Eritrean origin from Tigray to Eritrea.   The  Ethiopian  government
    claimed that the group consisted of persons  who  had  forfeited  their
    Ethiopian citizenship and had left voluntarily.  It was  promised  that
    this would not happen again.  A further 312 people of  Eritrean  origin
    were deported in November 2001.  This group consisted of  residents  of
    Addis Ababa who had sought "voluntary" deportation  to  join  relatives
    deported in earlier groups.  A group of 100 people of  Eritrean  origin
    were later deported in March 2002.

25.   Repatriations  and  forced  expulsions  of  Ethiopians  from  Eritrea
    substantially  accelerated  in  July  and  August  2000.   The   exodus
    continued in 2001 but decreased dramatically in the  first  quarter  of
    2002  from  a  weekly  average  of  1000   repatriations   during   the
    corresponding period in 2001 to a few dozen.  In February 2002 a  group
    of 134 people left for Ethiopia under the auspices of the ICRC and  the
    agency repatriated another group of 144 people in March 2002.

26.   There is an issue between the  parties  as  to  whether  there  is  a
    continuing risk of deportation.  In the 2004 Ethiopia CIPU  Report  the
    question of deportations and repatriations is dealt with at  paragraphs
    6.133-136.  It is recorded at paragraph 6.136 that in June 2003 a total
    of 153 Ethiopians and 75 civilians were repatriated to their respective
    countries under ICRC auspices in two  operations  in  June  2003.   The
    issue is also dealt with in the Eritrean report  at  paragraphs  6.177-
    184.  Repatriation of approximately 380 Ethiopians to Ethiopia is noted
    in paragraph 6.183.  The issue of deportations is covered in the expert
    reports of both Mr Gilkes and Professor Cliffe.  It  is  accepted  that
    the main flow of deportations has come to an end but  according  to  Mr
    Gilkes deportations or repatriations have certainly  not  stopped.   In
    paragraph 2.12 of his report he refers to  the  repatriations  in  June
    2003.  He records that in October 2003 another 198 people crossed  from
    Eritrea to Ethiopia and more  recently  another  155  from  Eritrea  to
    Ethiopia.

27.   It is Mr Gilkes' view that the evidence suggests that  both  Ethiopia
    and Eritrea are steadily continuing to deport  each  other's  citizens.
    Although numbers have certainly fallen substantially since  their  high
    point between 1998 and 2001, there has been no indication  that  either
    country is prepared to bring policies of deportation  or  repatriation,
    however implemented, to an end.   This  view  is  shared  by  Professor
    Cliffe who makes the point that when the Ethiopian government had  been
    challenged about expulsions after June 2000 it had  claimed  that  such
    groups  consist  of  "persons  who  had   forfeited   their   Ethiopian
    citizenship".  This information is sourced to Human Rights Watch (HRW).



28.   The other background evidence relating to the treatment of  Ethiopian
    citizens of Eritrean or part Eritrean  ethnicity  is  more  mixed.  The
    overall picture which emerges is  this.  Initially  the  expulsions  of
    those of Eritrean origin from Ethiopia was justified on  the  basis  of
    national security but in July 1999 the Ethiopian  government  issued  a
    press release declaring that those who had registered to  vote  in  the
    1993 referendum on Eritrean independence had thereby acquired  Eritrean
    citizenship and  the  government  was  justified  in  rescinding  their
    citizenship rights: HRW January 2003 Report at page 20.  In August 1999
    the government ordered people of Eritrean origin between 18  and  older
    who had voted in the 1993 referendum as well as those who had  formally
    acquired Eritrean citizenship to register for alien residence  permits.
    This report records that daily life became more precarious  for  people
    of Eritrean origin in Ethiopia after this order.  Their identity  cards
    had to be renewed every six months so that people  of  Eritrean  origin
    remained uncertain of their ability to reside permanently  in  Ethiopia
    and discrimination by local authorities and private individuals  became
    more pervasive.  There was an intense atmosphere of  hostility  towards
    people of Eritrean origin in Ethiopia.  In the USINS Report at  A1C  it
    is recorded that while the actions of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  had
    caused great harm and suffering  to  people  of  Eritrean  origin,  the
    response of the Ethiopian public appeared to  have  been  mixed.   Some
    were sympathetic to the plight of their neighbours whilst  others  were
    not.  This issue is also considered by Mr Gilkes in paragraphs 4.8-4.11
    of his report.  He notes that  Ethiopians  of  Eritrean  origin  remain
    possible  targets  for  harassment  and  in  his  view  there  are   no
    indications that attitudes have generally changed for the better.

29.   Professor  Cliffe  was  asked  to  consider  the  position  of  these
    claimants and to offer an opinion as to whether they remained protected
    by their right of citizenship in Ethiopia.  It is his  view  that  they
    technically remained Ethiopian citizens until leaving that country  but
    like many of those who were cited as Eritreans after the  beginning  of
    the war between the two countries, their rights of citizenship were  in
    practice unilaterally derogated.  To  all  intents  and  purposes  such
    people have been stripped of their Ethiopian citizenship and have  lost
    the basic right of being able to live in what they consider to be their
    own country.  Without a valid passport and given their residence in the
    United Kingdom, they would have to go through a process  of  reclaiming
    citizenship and a positive outcome cannot be  guaranteed.   They  might
    well hesitate to embark on  that  process  as  the  treatment  and  the
    general situation of those dubbed Eritreans in Ethiopia mean that  they
    can no longer rely on the protection  that  being  a  citizen  normally
    guarantees.  There is no likelihood that they would be allowed back  or
    given identity documents.

30.   Professor Cliffe makes the point that a change in the status of those
    with Eritrean origins at present living in Ethiopia  was  signalled  in
    the Ethiopian government directive in January 2004 for determining  the
    residence status of  Eritrean  nationals  in  Ethiopia.   However  this
    directive only applies to  a  person  of  Eritrean  origin  who  was  a
    resident in Ethiopia when Eritrea became an independent state  and  had
    continued  to  maintain  permanent  residence  in  Ethiopia  until  the
    directive was issued.  The Tribunal has also been referred to  evidence
    from the Ethiopian community  centre  in  the  UK:   A1W.   It  is  the
    experience of this organisation that claimants who actually attend  the
    Ethiopian Embassy are refused if  they  have  an  Eritrean  background,
    which cannot be kept secret because it is apparent  from  the  passport
    application forms which require information about parents  origins  and
    birth places.   A copy of the application form appears at A1K.

Conclusions : the risks arising from mixed ethnicity

31.   The Tribunal would summarise  its  conclusions  from  the  background
    evidence as follows.  We are not satisfied that the evidence shows that
    Ethiopians of  Eritrean  or  part  Eritrean  ethnicity  fall  within  a
    category which on that basis alone establishes that they have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.  However, the Tribunal accepts that if the
    reality of the situation for an individual claimant is that he  or  she
    is effectively deprived of citizenship which leads to  treatment  which
    can properly be categorised as persecution then, subject to  the  other
    requirements of the Convention, there is a right to  claim  to  refugee
    status.  This is really no more than saying that the facts relating  to
    each individual must be carefully assessed in  the  light  of  all  the
    evidence.

 32.  The Tribunal was referred to the judgments of the Court of Appeal  in
    Lazarevic.  In his judgment, Hutchinson L J said:

         "If a state arbitrarily excludes  one  of  its  citizens,  thereby
         cutting him off from enjoyment of all those  benefits  and  rights
         enjoined by citizens and duties owed by a state to  its  citizens,
         there is in my view no difficulty in accepting that  such  conduct
         can amount to persecution.  Such a person may  properly  say  both
         that  he  is  being  persecuted  and  that  he  fears  [continued]
         persecution in the future.  I see no reason given  the  scope  and
         objects of the Convention,  not  to  accept  Professor  Hathaway's
         formulation; and I am encouraged to do so by the fact  that  Simon
         Brown LJ cited it in terms which  at  least  implied  approval  in
         Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 at 107."


33.   The point Hutchinson LJ sought to emphasise is  that  such  behaviour
    can amount to persecution.  The deprival of citizenship  by  itself  is
    not necessarily persecutory.  It is the consequences of the deprivation
    of citizenship which may in the particular circumstances  of  the  case
    amount to persecution.  If it leads to treatment which can properly  be
    categorised as causing serious harm, it will amount to persecution.  In
    summary, an effective deprival of citizenship does not by itself amount
    to persecution but the impact and consequences of that decision may  be
    of such severity that it can be properly categorised as persecution.


34.   One such consequence may be that if returned to Ethiopia there  would
    be a risk of deportation or  repatriation  to  Eritrea.   Although  the
    number of deportations has dropped drastically in recent  years,  there
    is evidence that they have not stopped  altogether.   The  numbers  are
    certainly very small in comparison with what they were between 1998 and
    2000 and although some level of deportation remains,  the  Tribunal  is
    not satisfied that is now a government policy of mass deportations  and
    it must follow that there is now no real risk for persons  of  Eritrean
    descent generally of deportation on return.  This does not mean that on
    the particular facts of an individual case a person will not be able to
    argue that there are specific reasons personal to him why he is at risk
    of deportation by the Ethiopian authorities.

35.    The  Tribunal  accept  that  some  Ethiopians  of  Eritrean  descent
    remaining in Ethiopia may be at risk of persecution  because  of  their
    ethnicity.  This depends upon the individual facts of each appeal.  Our
    conclusions in this respect follow on and  are  inevitably  interlinked
    with our conclusions  on  the  issues  arising  from  the  deprival  of
    nationality.  The Tribunal accepts that the risk categories  identified
    by Mr Fripp are capable of giving rise to a  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  We do not accept, however, that they apply as a matter  of
    course to anyone who can show that  he  is  an  Ethiopian  of  Eritrean
    ethnicity albeit they may apply in the individual  circumstances  of  a
    particular claimant.

36.   Mr Fripp referred the Tribunal to L (Ethiopia), Amha and Amha  [2002]
    UKIAT 08171, G (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT 00091, A (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT
    00113, A (Ethiopia) [2004] UKIAT 00046 and W  (Ethiopia)  UKIAT  00074.
    In none of these  cases  was  the  Lazarevic/deprivation  of  Ethiopian
    nationality point raised before the Tribunal  or  seen  as  having  the
    legal effect argued for by Mr Fripp.  Insofar as these cases relate  to
    a risk on return to Ethiopia, they were decided on their own  facts  on
    the basis of the information put before the Tribunal.  In our  judgment
    that was the right approach.  In any event even if one or more could be
    read as intending a more general position, those findings would  depend
    on the country conditions as at the date of the hearings.

Entitlement to dual nationality

37.   The Tribunal will now turn to the issue of whether if  the  claimants
    are at risk of persecution in Ethiopia, they do not qualify as refugees
    because they can look to the Eritrean authorities for protection.   The
    starting point is in the provision of Article 1(A)(2) of the Convention
    which provides that in the case of a  person  who  has  more  than  one
    nationality, the term "the country of his nationality" shall mean  each
    of the countries of which he is a national, and a person shall  not  be
    deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of  his  nationality
    if, without any valid reason based on well-founded  fear,  he  has  not
    availed himself of the protection of one of the countries of  which  he
    is a national.

38.   In the UNHCR Handbook paragraphs 106 and 107 read as follows:

    "106.  This clause, which is largely self-explanatory, is  intended  to
          exclude from refugee status all persons  with  dual  or  multiple
          nationality who can avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  at
          least one of the countries of which they are nationals.  Wherever
          available,   national   protection    takes    precedence    over
          international protection.


    107.   In examining the case of an  Applicant  with  dual  or  multiple
          nationality, it is necessary however to distinguish  between  the
          possession  of  a  nationality  in  the  legal  sense   and   the
          availability of protection by the country concerned.  There  will
          be cases where the Applicant has the nationality of a country  in
          regard to which he alleges no fear, but such nationality  may  be
          deemed to be ineffective as it does  not  entail  the  protection
          normally  granted  to  nationals.   In  such  circumstances   the
          possession of the second nationality would  not  be  inconsistent
          with refugee status.  As a rule, there should have been a request
          for and a refusal of, protection before  it  can  be  established
          that a given nationality is ineffective.  If there is no explicit
          refusal of protection, absence of a reply within reasonable  time
          may be considered a refusal."

39.   Mr Fripp has referred the Tribunal to Hathaway, the  Law  of  Refugee
    Status and in particular to pages 57-59.  In this  passage  two  points
    are made.  The first is  that  a  major  caveat  to  the  principle  of
    deferring to protection by a state of citizenship is the need to ensure
    effective rather than merely formal nationality.  It is not enough  for
    a claimant to carry a second passport from a non-persecutory  state  if
    that state is not in fact willing to afford protection  against  return
    to  the  country  of  persecution.   The  second  point  is  that  dual
    nationality is not to be equated with  the  right  to  claim  a  second
    nationality.  After referring to a case involving an apparent right  to
    qualify for  British  nationality  as  well  as  Irish  nationality  in
    circumstances where the claimant had never  been  admitted  to  British
    territory outside Northern Ireland  and  gave  uncontradicted  evidence
    that entry into the United Kingdom had been refused  to  other  persons
    similarly situated, Hathaway goes on to write as follows:

         "The dilemma here is a logical extension of the concern to  ensure
         effective nationality before assessing the adequacy of  a  refugee
         claim: only the degree of risk in those states that are  known  to
         be obliged to allow the re-entry of the Claimant is  relevant,  as
         it is to one of those states that the putative  refugee  would  in
         most cases be sent back if not admitted to the country of refuge."

40.   In Canada v Ward the Supreme Court of Canada considered the issue  of
      dual  nationality.  Mr  Fripp  submitted  that  the  court   drew   a
      distinction between cases where it was clear that  a  person  was  in
      fact a national of a given country and situations which provided that
      a person had a right to apply for citizenship.  He submitted that the
      question of obtaining protection in a given  country  would  only  be
      relevant with respect to those countries where  the  person  actually
      had acquired citizenship at the date of the  hearing.   In  our  view
      this proposition cannot be drawn from the judgment of the court.   La
      Forest J accepted that the  appeal  board  must  consider  whether  a
      claimant was unable or unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection
      of each and every country of nationality.   When  commenting  on  the
      benefits which flowed from Convention refugee status  in  Canada,  La
      Forest J said: "None of these provisions requires assurance that  the
      claimant has exhausted his or her  search  for  protection  in  every
      country of nationality".  We are not satisfied  that  the  court  was
      holding that a person entitled to a second nationality  but  who  had
      not taken up that entitlement could not be regarded  as  having  dual
      nationality.  The comment deals with the  extent  of  the  evidential
      burden on a claimant holding  dual  nationality  when  assessing  the
      ability of the country of second nationality to  provide  protection.
      It must also be read in the  context  of  the  court's  view  that  a
      country should be presumed capable of providing  protection  for  its
      nationals subject to rebuttal of that presumption by cogent evidence.

41.   In the subsequent Canadian case  of  Bouianova  judicial  review  was
    sought of a Board decision holding that a Latvian  citizen  was  not  a
    Convention refugee because she also held Russian citizenship and  there
    was no evidence of persecution against her in Russia.   It  was  argued
    that the applicant was not a Russian citizen because she had  to  apply
    to request that citizenship and have her passport stamped.  Rothstein J
    held that the applicant, by simply making a request and submitting  her
    passport to be stamped, became a  citizen  of  Russia.   There  was  no
    discretion by the Russian officials to refuse her citizenship.  He  did
    not think that the necessity of making an application  which  in  those
    circumstances was nothing more than a formality meant that a person did
    not have a country of nationality just because they chose not  to  make
    such an application.  The applicant by virtue of her place of birth was
    entitled to be a citizen of Russia.  Having regard to the changes  that
    had taken place in the former USSR there were  obviously  consequential
    new arrangements for citizenship in the countries  formally  comprising
    the USSR.  Such arrangements entitled the applicant to be a citizen  of
    Russia by  filing  an  application  and  submitting  her  passport  for
    stamping.  That was sufficient to take her out of the category of  "not
    having a country of nationality".

42.   In L (Ethiopia) now styled YL (Nationality  -  Statelessness-Eritrea-
    Ethiopia) Eritrea CG,  the  Tribunal  dealt  with  the  application  of
    Bradshaw stating in paragraph 44 as follows:

         "44.     Since it is common ground that the Appellant is  not  yet
             recognised as a national of Eritrea, it may be asked why it is
             legitimate to even consider  whether  she  is  a  national  of
             Eritrea?  Fortunately in order to answer this question  we  do
             not need to embark on  an  analysis  of  the  complexities  of
             nationality law.   That  is  because,  following  Bradshaw  we
             consider it settled law that when a  person  does  not  accept
             that the Secretary of State is correct about his  nationality,
             it is incumbent on him to prove it, if need be  by  making  an
             application for  such  nationality.   That  is  all  the  more
             necessary in the case of someone  claiming  to  be  a  refugee
             under  the  Refugee  Convention.    Under   that   Convention,
             establishing nationality, or statelessness, cannot be left  as
             something that is optional for the Claimant.   The  burden  of
             proof is on the Claimant to prove his nationality (or lack  of
             it).  To leave it as an optional matter would make it possible
             for bogus Claimants to benefit from  international  protection
             even though in law they had nationality  of  a  country  where
             they would not be at risk  of  persecution  -  simply  by  not
             applying for that nationality.  Furthermore, leaving it as  an
             optional matter would render unnecessary key provisions of the
             definition in Article 1(A)(2) which require  a  person  to  be
             outside the country of his nationality or outside the  country
             of his former  habitual  residence  and  which  place  special
             conditions on persons who have more than one nationality.   As
             was said by Rothstein J in the Canadian Federal Court case  of
             Bouianova a case dealing with statelessness,  "the  definition
             should not be interpreted in such a manner as to  render  some
             of its words unnecessary or redundant".


         45.      Bearing in mind that the burden of  proof  rests  on  the
             Claimant it is  always  relevant  to  enquire  in  such  cases
             whether a person has taken steps to apply for the  nationality
             of the country in  question  or,  if  they  have  taken  steps
             whether they have been successful or unsuccessful.


         46.      We  would  accept  that  in  asylum  cases  the  Bradshaw
             principle has to qualified to take account  of  whether  there
             are valid reasons for a Claimant not approaching  his  or  her
             embassy or consulate -  or  the  authorities  of  the  country
             direct - about an application for  citizenship  or  residence.
             In some cases such an approach could place the Claimant or the
             Claimant's family at risk, because for example it would  alert
             the authorities to the fact the Claimant had  escaped  pursuit
             by fleeing the country.  However, by no means can there  be  a
             blanket assumption that  for  all  Claimants  such  approaches
             would create or increase risk.  It is a matter to be  examined
             on the evidence in any particular case.   The  UNHCR  Handbook
             does not require a different position to be  taken:  paragraph
             93 clearly contemplates a case by case approach."

43.   In each case it will be an issue of fact  whether  a  claimant  is  a
    national of a particular state.  The issue is not so much  whether  the
    application for citizenship is  determinative  of  status  rather  than
    declaratory of a  pre-existing  status;  the  relevant  distinction  is
    rather between situations where there is an entitlement to  nationality
    as opposed to a possibility of a nationality being granted in line with
    a particular immigration policy.  It  is  this  distinction  which  was
    highlighted in Mr Fripp's rhetorical question as to whether a  claimant
    should be barred from protection by an ability to apply as an  aspiring
    immigrant to a country to which he has had no previous connection.  The
    answer to that submission is that in respect of those  countries  there
    is no evidence of entitlement to nationality.

44.   In the  present  appeals  there  is  on  the  face  of  the  Eritrean
    legislation an entitlement to nationality.  The situation  in  Ethiopia
    and Eritrea is similar  in  at  least  one  important  respect  to  the
    situation Bouianova where the constituent parts of the former USSR made
    new arrangements  for  citizenship.   Following  the  establishment  of
    Eritrea as an independent  state  within  the  territory  of  what  had
    previously been the state of Ethiopia, both countries  made  provisions
    for citizenship.  The claimants assert that they have been  effectively
    deprived of their Ethiopian citizenship.  The reason for this is  their
    Eritrean background.  If in fact they qualify for Eritrean  citizenship
    and there are no serious obstacles to their being able to apply for and
    obtain such citizenship, there is  no  reason  in  principle  why  they
    should not look to the Eritrean authorities  for  protection.   In  our
    judgment it is not open to a claimant by doing nothing and  by  failing
    to make an application for citizenship to defeat the provisions of  the
    Refugee Convention.

45.   In summary the Tribunal is satisfied that if the evidence shows  that
    a claimant is a national or is entitled to nationality  of  a  country,
    the provisions of Article 1(A)(2) apply.  He shall not be deemed to  be
    lacking the protection of the country of his nationality if without any
    valid reason based on a well-founded fear he has not availed himself of
    the protection of that country.  In most cases this will involve making
    an application for his nationality to be recognised.  Putting it simply
    a claimant cannot decline to take up a nationality properly open to him
    without a good reason, which must be a valid reason based  on  a  well-
    founded fear.  A claimant cannot benefit from his own  inaction  unless
    that inaction  has  a  proper  basis  because  he  is  fearful  of  the
    consequences.

46    The Tribunal accepts that the protection offered by a state of second
    nationality must be "effective" as envisaged in the UNHCR Handbook  and
    in Jong Kim Koe which endorsed a comment from Professor Hathaway's book
    that there is a need to ensure effective rather than formal nationality
    and that it is not enough that the claimant carries a  second  passport
    from a non-persecutory state if that state is not in  fact  willing  to
    afford protection.    It must therefore be a question of fact  in  each
    case whether a claimant has a nationality which will provide  him  with
    effective protection.


The facts of the three appeals: the first claimant

47.   The Tribunal must now apply these principles  to  the  facts  of  the
    three appeals before us.  The first claimant was found  not  to  be  at
    risk in Ethiopia.  It was for the Adjudicator to assess  whether  there
    was a real risk of deportation.  She noted that the first claimant  had
    had no problems until her husband was deported and that her mother  and
    sister had not apparently  been  troubled  despite  being  of  Eritrean
    origin.  She had family in Ethiopia, had not experienced trouble  there
    previously,  took  no  part  in  politics  and  did  not  vote  in  the
    referendum.  In these  circumstances  the  Adjudicator's  findings  and
    conclusions are properly sustainable on the evidence.  She went  on  to
    find that the first claimant was entitled to  citizenship  of  Eritrea.
    She commented at paragraph 58 of her  determination  that,  not  having
    been refused protection of that country,  she  may  be  held  to  be  a
    citizen.  Certainly there had been no  refusal  of  protection  because
    there  had  been  no  application  for   citizenship.    However,   the
    Adjudicator was entitled to find that the first claimant  was  entitled
    to citizenship and she went on to find that in any event she  would  be
    at no real risk in Eritrea.

48.   The only grounds of appeal on which permission was granted relate  to
    the issue of whether the first claimant could reasonably be expected to
    look to the Eritrean authorities for protection and whether  she  would
    be at risk there.  Removal directions were made to Eritrea.  There  was
    power in law to do so.  The Tribunal is satisfied that the  Adjudicator
    was entitled on the evidence before her to find that the first claimant
    could look to the Eritrean authorities for protection and would not  be
    at risk of persecution there.  As the Tribunal have already  noted  the
    Secretary of State has indicated that  he  is  cancelling  the  removal
    directions for Eritrea and intends to set any future removal directions
    for Ethiopia.  Mr  Fripp  was  certainly  unaware  that  this  was  the
    Respondent's intention until the beginning of  the  hearing.   However,
    the Tribunal cannot ignore the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  no
    longer  intends  to  remove  this  claimant  to   Eritrea.   In   these
    circumstances there is no purpose in  the  Tribunal  assessing  whether
    there would now be a  risk  on  return  to  Eritrea.   In  summary  the
    Adjudicator's conclusions were properly open to her on the evidence and
    on the basis that there will not be a  removal  to  Eritrea  the  first
    claimant's appeal is dismissed.

The second claimant

49.   The second case relates to the Secretary of  State's  appeal  against
    the Adjudicator's determination allowing the appeal on both asylum  and
    human rights grounds.  The grounds  essentially  take  issue  with  the
    Adjudicator's  reasoning  that  the  second  claimant   would   be   at
    considerable risk of deportation.  The grounds refer  to  an  authority
    which held that deportations from Ethiopia had stopped and  argue  that
    no adequate reason was given why those findings were not followed.   As
    the Tribunal have already indicated we  are  satisfied  that  there  is
    evidence albeit on a much smaller scale of deportation and repatriation
    between Ethiopia and Eritrea.   The  Adjudicator  accepted  the  second
    claimant's version of events which he noted was corroborated  not  only
    by her own brother but by another witness.  The Adjudicator came to the
    view that deportation to Eritrea could not be ruled out.  It does  seem
    to us that he based his decision on an assumption that all  persons  of
    Eritrean descent were at risk of deportation.  On the contrary, he took
    into account the circumstances in which the second  claimant  had  been
    detained, the fact that her father had been sent to  Eritrea  and  that
    during a period of detention the  second  claimant  had  suffered  ill-
    treatment which the Adjudicator clearly regarded as  persecutory.   The
    Tribunal is satisfied that the Adjudicator's reasoning  is  both  clear
    and adequate.  He has explained why he took the view that on the  facts
    of this particular case there was a real risk of deportation.   Removal
    directions are to Ethiopia and no issue is raised in the  grounds  that
    the  second  claimant  could  look  to  the  Eritrean  authorities  for
    protection.  Accordingly, the appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.

The third claimant

50.   The Tribunal will deal briefly with the third appeal in the light  of
    the indication that this claimant is to be granted indefinite leave  to
    remain.  The Adjudicator was not satisfied that there would be  a  real
    risk of persecution on return to Ethiopia.  That finding  was  properly
    open to him on the evidence but the removal directions were to Eritrea.
     His reasoning when dealing with this issue is certainly  confused,  as
    highlighted by the Vice President when granting permission  to  appeal.
    There is no question of  Eritrea  being  treated  as  a  safe  area  of
    Ethiopia.  The point made by the Secretary of State is that  the  third
    claimant was entitled to Eritrean citizenship and there was  no  reason
    why  he  could  not  look  to  the  authorities  in  that  country  for
    protection.  The findings made by the Adjudicator do not deal with that
    issue but with the consequences of being returned to  a  country  where
    the third claimant had not previously lived.  The Tribunal is satisfied
    that the Adjudicator did err in law by failing to deal adequately  with
    whether there was a real risk of persecution or treatment  contrary  to
    article 3 on return to Eritrea. We  would  allow  this  appeal  to  the
    extent of remitting it for a fresh hearing on these issues but we  also
    note the reality of the position that this appeal will  be  treated  as
    abandoned on the grant of indefinite leave.

Decisions

51.   In summary the  appeal  of  the  first  claimant  is  dismissed.   In
    relation to the case of the second claimant, the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.  The appeal of the third claimant is  allowed  and
    remitted for a fresh hearing but will be treated as  abandoned  on  the
    grant of leave.




                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT





Approved for electronic transmission
