

JH
|                                                    OH ( risk -   |
|Ba'athist father) Iraq [2004] UKIAT 00254                         |
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 12 July 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........15th September 2004.....                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)                                  |
|Mr K Craig                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms V Prais of Counsel, IAS (Tribunal Unit)
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals to the  Tribunal  with  permission  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D N Bowen, in which  he  dismissed
      his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  16  August  2003,
      issuing directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  asylum
      having been refused.

   2. The hearing before us took place on 12 July 2004. Ms V  Prais  of  the
      IAS appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr P Deller  appeared  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State.

   3. The Adjudicator found the appellant to be  credible.  The  appellant's
      claim was that he was a Kurd and that his  father  had  been  involved
      with the Ba'ath party and had  been  murdered  in  January  1999  when
      ambushed by a group of people.  In his evidence, he  stated  that  his
      father had made enemies because many  people  had  been  arrested  and
      executed or deported because of his father's enquiries and activities.
      He said that because  his  father  had  become  a  martyr,  the  Iraqi
      Government supported the family financially.

   4. The appellant started work in 1996 to support his family. He became  a
      simple member of the Ba'ath party.  He did not undertake  any  duties,
      but attended meetings when asked.

   5. On 20 March 2002, he was asked to attend the Ba'ath party headquarters
      meeting and told that he would have to join the  Fidayi  Saddam  group
      and go to  Palestine  to  fight  against  Israel  and  to  change  his
      ethnicity from Kurdish to Arab. He was  given  a  period  of  time  to
      consider this.  In April 2002 the authorities came  to  his  shop  and
      detained him, and told him he had a month to decide what to do. As  he
      feared execution, he decided to leave and he went to his aunt's  house
      for a few days and thereafter with the assistance of an agent he  left
      Iraq in May 2002 and came to the United Kingdom via Turkey.

   6. He claimed that shortly after the fall of Saddam Hussain's government,
      his brother was killed in Iraq by unnamed men and produced a fax  from
      his aunt concerning this. He feared that  he  would  suffer  the  same
      fate. He said he could  not  live  in  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Area,
      because of what his father had done, and was  at  risk  of  a  revenge
      attack.

   7. The Adjudicator noted the objective evidence but concluded that  there
      was nothing to  show  that  the  appellant  faced  any  real  risk  of
      persecution or breach of his human rights on return.  In  the  grounds
      of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator  failed  to  consider  the
      objective evidence properly. Ms Prais developed  this argument in  her
      submissions to us. She relied both on the bundle of objective evidence
      that had been before the Adjudicator and  a  fresh  bundle  containing
      more up-to-date objective evidence. She also placed some  reliance  on
      the Home Office Iraq country report of April 2004. She took us to page
      56 of Bundle 1, this being the bundle that was before the Adjudicator,
      comprising an extract from the Washington Post concerning  attacks  on
      and killings of former members of the Ba'ath party. There was evidence
      of revenge killings on a regular basis. This could also be  seen  from
      the BBC News Extract at Page 60 of the bundle.  She also  referred  to
      the Home Office Bulletin 6 of 2003 at page 61 of the bundle concerning
      reprisals against Ba'ath party members and  threats  to  Ba'ath  party
      members' families.


     8. Ms Prais also referred us to paragraphs  6.115   to  6.125  of  the
        April 2004 country report.   There  was  evidence  of  killings  in
        general. People from the previous regime were  targeted.  She  also
        referred us to pages 2-3 of the bundle of fresh objective  evidence
        concerning revenge killings, and also an Amnesty report at pages 18
        and 19. The appellant could  be  regarded  as  being  a  vulnerable
        returnee as defined by ECRE in the document at pages 13 and  14  of
        the bundle on account of his association with his father. He was at
        risk both on account of his own membership of the Ba'ath party  and
        by association with his father.


     9. Mr Deller argued that, with regard to risk in his  own  right,  the
        appellant had been a very low member of the  Ba'ath  party,  having
        done little  more  than  attending  meetings.  There  was  evidence
        concerning no more than isolated  incidents  with  regard  to  such
        people and this did not amount to a real risk. Paragraph  6.126  to
        paragraph  6.127  of  the  April  2004  country   report   provided
        assistance on the issue of risk to family members of  Ba'ath  party
        members. There was a risk if a person was there at  the  time  when
        the Ba'ath party member was attacked, but there was no risk in this
        regard as the father was dead.  There was no real risk as a  family
        member per se. The general question of ongoing protection needs had
        to be looked at in  that  context.  The  level  of  activity  in  a
        person's history seemed to be  relevant.   The  appellant  was  not
        somebody who had been involved at any  level  as  an  activist  and
        neither as regards the separate factors  nor  cumulatively  did  he
        face any real risk.

  10. Ms Prais, had no points to make by way of reply.

  11. We consider first the question of any risk to the appellant on account
      of his own involvement in the Ba'ath party. Here,  as  we  have  noted
      above, the Adjudicator recorded his evidence that he became  a  simple
      member of the Ba'ath party but did not undertake any duties though  he
      attended meetings when asked. Ms Prais took us to the Washington  Post
      item at page 56 of the first  bundle  dated  May  19  2003.  There  is
      reference to Iraqis beginning to track down and kill former members of
      the ruling Ba'ath party.  It is said that it is difficult to say  what
      number of former Ba'ath  party  officials  have  been  killed.  It  is
      thought that killers were working from lists looted from Iraq's bombed
      out security service buildings.  In other cases, Ba'athist  icons  and
      irksome party officials identified with the  Hussain  government  were
      being killed. The  BBC  news  item  dated  20  June  2003,  refers  to
      systematic demolition of up to 30 houses  belonging  to  Ba'ath  party
      officials.

  12. Paragraphs 6.115 to paragraph 6.125 of the April 2004  country  report
      are  concerned  specifically  with  reprisals  against  Ba'ath   party
      members. It seems from paragraph 6.115 that sources told the  2003  UK
      Danish fact finding mission that Iraqis differentiated  between  those
      who joined the Ba'ath party because it was necessary for them to do so
      in order to get jobs, whereas others such as members of  the  security
      services who committed crimes against them and any  former  Ba'athists
      who were known to have abused their position were  being  targeted  by
      way of reprisals and these would  be  mainly  former  members  of  the
      intelligence service, the security service or the Fedayeen Saddam, but
      even in those categories one source said that  many  people  known  to
      have  committed  abuses  would  be  targeted.  That  could  mean  that
      relatively low ranking Ba'ath party members could be at  risk  because
      they had operated at street level.

  13. Paragraph 6.116 refers to a report in the  Seattle  Times  of  20  May
      2003, concerning Iraqis tracking down and killing  former  members  of
      the Ba'ath party. This item contains much of the same  information  as
      is to be found in the Washington Post report of 20 May 2003. There  is
      reference specifically to a former member of the Fedayeen Saddam and a
      former officer in Saddam Hussein's  internal  security  service  being
      murdered in Basra in separate incidents in May 2003.

  14. There is also reference at Paragraph  6.117  to  a  report  concerning
      traditional courts offering non-violent  routes  for  pursuing  claims
      against Saddam Hussain's henchmen. There is further mention  of  other
      reprisals against particular individuals who seem to have been on  the
      whole party officials and people with  some  position  in  the  party,
      though there is reference at paragraph 6.120 to a low  ranking  Ba'ath
      member who was a security guard at a sewage plant being killed in June
      2003. This person was said not to be a senior  member  of  the  party.
      Other examples are given at paragraph 6.122  and  paragraph  6.123  of
      killings of Ba'ath party members.

  15. In reviewing this evidence as a whole, we consider that Mr  Deller  is
      essentially right to suggest as he did, that there is  no  generalised
      risk, at least not one amounting to a  real  risk  of  harm  facing  a
      person with such a low profile in the past as the  appellant.  Neither
      did he hold any official position nor was he a person who operated  at
      street level where there would be people who could have suffered as  a
      consequence of his actions. In  effect,  all  he  did  was  to  attend
      meetings. The chances of  him  being  recognised  as  such  and  being
      singled out for any form of reprisal appear to us to be remote in  the
      extreme and to fall some way short of amounting to a real risk in this
      regard.   There  are  minimal  examples  of  such  persons  sustaining
      reprisals of any kind in the objective evidence, and the risk  is,  as
      we say, a remote one only.

  16. We consider next the risk that the appellant might face as a member of
      the family of a Ba'ath party member. Most  of  the  evidence  concerns
      reprisals against former Ba'ath party members.

  17. Paragraphs 6.126 to Paragraph 6.127 of the April 2004  country  report
      deal briefly with this issue. It is said that there is little evidence
      of widespread deliberate targeting of the  families  of  Ba'ath  party
      members in reprisal attacks, and a source informed the 2003 UK  Danish
      fact finding mission that the families of Ba'ath  party  officials  or
      people associated with the former regime  would  not  be  targeted  in
      revenge for crimes committed during the  Saddam  regime,  saying  that
      Muslims do not attack family members, and  such  reprisals  would  not
      occur in Iraq. There was, however, some  evidence  of  family  members
      being caught up in reprisals on the Ba'ath  party  member  themselves.
      Examples are given  of  families  of  Ba'athists  being  injured  when
      attacks were carried out on the Ba'athists themselves.  As  Mr  Deller
      reminded us, it is the case, however, that the appellant's father died
      in 1999 and he therefore does not face any risk of that account.

  18.  There is no indication that such  matters  as  the  revenge  killings
      carried out to which we were referred by Ms Prais at pages 2 and 3  of
      her bundle from the IAS research analysis are directed at families  of
      Ba'ath party members. There is reference here at page 3  to  targeting
      of former Ba'ath party members, but that falls within  the  issues  we
      have considered above, and we have already made our findings on  that.
      Clearly, there are problems of insecurity, for example as referred  to
      in the Amnesty report at page 19 of Ms Prais second bundle,  and  also
      there is a further reference at page 40 to killings  of  a  number  of
      civilians including former Ba'ath party members, some of which  appear
      to have been revenge attacks. Again this falls within the matter  that
      we have considered above. We do not consider that the  evidence  shows
      that there is a risk to the appellant as a family member of  a  former
      Ba'ath party member. Clearly, he is not at  risk  of  any  harm  as  a
      consequence of attacks on his father since his  father  is  dead.  Nor
      does the evidence show that reprisals  are  carried  out  against  the
      families of Ba'ath party members. Accordingly,  we  consider  that  he
      does not face a real risk on this ground either.

  19. In conclusion, therefore, neither separately, as a consequence of  his
      own limited involvement in the Ba'ath party or as a family member of a
      Ba'ath  party  member,  or  cumulatively,  do  we  consider  that  the
      appellant faces any real risk on return of persecution  or  breach  of
      his human rights. We do not consider
      that it has been  shown  that  the  Adjudicator  fell  into  error  in
      reaching his  conclusions,  and  as  a  consequence,  this  appeal  is
      dismissed.





                                                                   D K Allen
                                                              Vice President



