
Heard at Field House | | | |
|On: 15 April 2004          |        |YL ( Rely on SEF ) China    |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00145          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
| Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                  |
|08 June 2004                                                      |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Miss J M Braybrook                                                |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between:                                                          |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before  us,  the  appellant,  hereinafter  'the  Secretary  of  State'  was
represented by Mr  D. Saville, a Home Office Presenting  Officer,  and  the
respondent, hereinafter the claimant,  was  represented  Mr  M.  Kraehling-
Smith of Counsel, instructed by McLaughlin & Co. Solicitors.

The claimant is a citizen of China.  She was born on 25 October 1965 and so
is now thirty-seven years old.  In a determination promulgated on 28 August
2003 an Adjudicator, Mr George Jamieson, sitting at  Belfast,  allowed  her
appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  that  she  was  not
entitled to refugee status and that removing her was not  contrary  to  her
rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.  It is  against  that
decision that the Secretary of State now appeals.

The grounds of appeal essentially make two points.  They complain that  the
Adjudicator wrongly attached weight to  a  medical  report  that,  properly
understood,  had  no  relevance  and  the  Adjudicator  misunderstood   the
significance of the form SEF, that is the  form  to  be  completed  by  the
appellant issued to a person after she claimed asylum.

In essence it was the claimant's case that she practised Falon Gong and had
incurred the wrath of the Chinese authorities as a result.   In  particular
she claimed that she had been severely tortured by the Chinese  authorities
who used a distinctive and, in our experience at least, unusual method.  It
is said that they put a chemical agent inside a jacket  and  then  required
the claimant to wear the jacket whilst standing under the  hot  sun.   This
caused the chemical agent to react with her skin leaving her with  blister-
like burn marks over her body and groin.

There was some medical evidence  from  a  Dr  Martin  Emmanuel,  a  general
medical practitioner practising from  an  address  on  the  Falls  Road  in
Belfast.  In an undated report to the  claimant's  solicitors  Dr  Emmanuel
reported  scarring  and  hypo-pigmentation  and  other  problems   on   the
claimant's body and said that  he  had  transmitted  photographs  to  a  Dr
Virginia Murray who is a consultant in  toxicology  at  Guy's  Hospital  in
London.  Those were sent 'For an opinion on what agent may have been  used,
in the powder'.

The Adjudicator concluded that the claimant had indeed been tortured in the
way that she described.   He  dealt  with  this  at  paragraph  15  of  his
determination where he also considered the medical report.  The Adjudicator
said 'It is one of the deficiencies of the medical report that it is unable
to state whether a toxic agent  was  used,  resulting  in  the  appellant's
burns, but I attach some weight to the fact that the doctor has transmitted
the appellant's photos to a toxicologist in London 'for an opinion of  what
agent may have been used, in the powder, and await her opinion'.

With the help of both advocates we  have  looked  very  carefully  at  this
passage in an effort to ascertain the Adjudicator's intended meaning.   The
Adjudicator did, in his words, 'attach some weight' to the  fact  that  the
medical practitioner had sent the photographs to a toxicologist.   We  have
read the medical report several times but it is quite plain to us that  the
general medical practitioner did not know what had caused the injuries that
he had seen and he did not form the view that the  injuries  were  in  fact
caused by a powder, whether administered in the circumstances described  by
the claimant or at all.  The general medical practitioner had decided  that
the suggestion that the injuries were caused by a powder was  one  that  he
could not assess properly on the limited material before him and  he  asked
for the help of a toxicologist.  This is not at all the same as the medical
practitioner saying that he accepted that it was reasonably likely that the
injuries had been caused by chemicals, still less in the circumstances that
the claimant described.  No weight whatsoever should have been attached  to
the fact that he sent photographs to a toxicologist.  The  general  medical
practitioner's letter is not any kind of medical or  other  expert  opinion
that the injury was caused by chemical agents.   All  the  general  medical
practitioner did was  recognise  that  as  a  possibility  that  he  wanted
investigated further.

We do not know how much weight  the  Adjudicator  attached  to  this.   His
reference to 'some weight' might be thought, colloquially,  to  mean  "some
but not very much" although in fact the word "some"  does  not  necessarily
have that meaning.  It may have been his view that a lot of  weight  should
have been attached to it.  We do not know.  It is quite clear  to  us  that
the Adjudicator should not have attached any weight whatsoever to the  fact
that  the  general  medical  practitioner  had  sent   photographs   to   a
toxicologist.  It is also plain that he did attach  some  weight  and  that
weight was instrumental in his reaching the conclusion  that  the  claimant
was telling the truth about her injuries.

Mr Kraehling-Smith invited us to say that the Adjudicator was  entitled  to
reach the conclusion that he did on the claimant's oral evidence alone  and
so we should not conclude that the Adjudicator was wrong  because  he  gave
some weight to the medical evidence.  The problem  with  that  argument  is
that the Adjudicator did not reach the decision that he  did  on  the  oral
evidence alone.  He reached it after giving some  weight  to  something  to
which he should have given no weight.  With great respect  the  Adjudicator
was wrong.  The reasons  he  gives  to  support  his  conclusion  that  the
claimant was injured as she describes are inadequate.  This finding on  our
part seriously undermines the confidence we can have in the determination.

Additionally the Adjudicator misunderstood the  significance  of  the  form
SEF.  The Adjudicator noted that there were inconsistencies between  points
made in the form SEF and the claimant's later oral evidence, whether  given
to the Adjudicator or to an interviewing officer.  The Adjudicator was  not
concerned about these inconsistencies.  He said  in  paragraph  12  of  his
determination the appellant "may well have signed this document but it  was
prepared by her solicitor and the purpose of  her  SEF  was  to  give  some
general indication of the [the claimant's] asylum claim".  That is not  the
purpose of the SEF, or more accurately, the  "Statement  of  Evidence  Form
-SEF Self Completion-."  The purpose of the form SEF is  explained  on  the
form SEF.  The printed rubric at the top of the form says 'You  should  use
this part of the form to tell the Secretary of State why  you  qualify  for
asylum in the United Kingdom.'  There is a declaration at the  end  of  the
form.  It is in very clear terms.  The declaration says 'You must now  read
the declaration at 1 below and sign it.  You are personally responsible for
the accuracy of the statements contained in this form, and the  declaration
must be signed  by  you  and  not  by  any  other  person,  including  your
representative.'  It then sets out how a minor should complete the form.

The declaration is in these terms: 'I hereby apply for asylum in the United
Kingdom.  The information I have given is complete and is true to the  best
of my knowledge.   I  am  aware  that  making  a  false  statement  or  any
representation  may  constitute  an   offence   or   to   the   immigration
legislation.'

The point is emphasised under the heading 'Part D -  Further  Information'.
This says: 'If there is anything else which you think may  be  relevant  to
your application  for asylum and which you have not mentioned elsewhere  on
this form,  please  give  details  below,  using  additional  sheets  where
necessary.'  Then the following words are underlined: 'you  should  mention
any compassionate circumstances or humanitarian reasons why you should  not
be removed from the United Kingdom should your application  for  asylum  be
refused.'

The following words also appear: 'Providing  all  relevant  information  at
this stage will greatly assist us in considering your claim.  If you do not
mention information relating to you claim, of which you are aware  at  this
stage, but you  seek  to  rely  on  that  information  later,  there  is  a
possibility that that information may not be believed.'

As is usually the  case,  the  appellant  was  invited  to  attend  for  an
interview and did attend.  Standard forms have been prepared to assist  the
interviewer.  An indication of the importance that the Secretary  of  State
attaches to the form SEF is apparent at the start of  the  interview.   The
following words were read to the claimant who was required to sign  a  note
to say that she understood what had been explained to her.   This  included
the following statement: 'I have read all the information in the  Statement
of Evidence Form you sent us.  There is no need  for  you  to  repeat  this
information today.  This interview gives me the opportunity to ask you  for
some further details on the information  form.   You  will  also  have  the
opportunity to add to, amend, or clarify the information which you provided
on the form.'

Then, at the start for the interview  itself,  two  questions  were  asked.
These questions were printed to assist the interviewing officer to ask them
properly.  Question 1 is in these terms 'Who  completed  the  Statement  of
Evidence Form which  you  submitted  in  support  of  your  asylum  claim.'
Question 2 is in this form: 'Are you fully aware of its  contents  and  are
you satisfied that it fully explains  the  reasons  why  you  are  claiming
asylum.'  In answer to the first question the claimant indicated  that  her
solicitor  had  helped  her  and  to  the  second  question  she   answered
unequivocally with the word 'Yes'.

The Secretary  of  State  argues  that  it  is  not  satisfactory  for  the
Adjudicator to brush aside inconsistencies in the  way  that  he  has  and,
despite Mr Kraehling-Smith's best endeavours, we find that  we  agree  with
the Secretary of State.

It is right to say that the claimant has given her evidence in a consistent
way after the form  SEF.   This  is  something  that  the  Adjudicator  was
entitled to consider and, if he was so minded, something to which he  could
give considerable weight.  However, there are inconsistencies that have  to
be explained and it not satisfactory for the Adjudicator to explain them in
the way that he did.  At the very least there should  have  been  a  proper
explanation for his decision not to attach any weight to the answers  given
in the form SEF.

The grant of permission to appeal to the Tribunal included the phrase  'The
Tribunal  may  wish  to  give  some  guidance  on   the   significance   of
discrepancies between an SEF  and  oral  evidence  and  in  particular  the
function of and weight to be attached to the SEF.'  We have decided  to  do
that.

When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he  is  usually  made  the
subject of a 'screening interview' (called, perhaps  rather  confusingly  a
"Statement of Evidence Form - SEF Screening-).  The purpose of that  is  to
establish the general nature of the claimant's case so that the Home Office
official can decide how best to process  it.   It  is  concerned  with  the
country of origin, means of travel, circumstances of arrival in the  United
Kingdom, preferred language and other matters that might help the Secretary
of State understand the case.  Asylum seekers are still  expected  to  tell
the truth and answers given in screening interviews can be compared  fairly
with answers given  later.   However,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  a
screening interview is not done to establish in detail the reasons a person
gives  to  support  her  claim  for  asylum.   It  would  not  normally  be
appropriate for the Secretary of State to ask supplementary questions or to
entertain elaborate answers and an inaccurate summary  by  an  interviewing
officer at that stage would be excusable.  Further the screening  interview
may well be conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after a long journey.
 These things have to be considered when any  inconsistencies  between  the
screening interview and the later case are evaluated.

The Statement of Evidence Form -SEF Self Completion-  (that  is  the  "SEF"
that the adjudicator considered) is an entirely different document.  As has
been explained above, it is the appellant's  opportunity  to  set  out  his
case.  The asylum seeker has to  return  the  form  by  a  specified  date,
usually about a fortnight after the form is  given  to  him.   However  the
asylum seeker is allowed to choose his own interpreter and obtain  all  the
assistance he wants in order to complete the form.  He is in control of how
the form is answered.  It is hard to imagine a fairer  way  to  enable  the
claimant to set out his case.  That being so, the Secretary of  State,  and
if it comes before him, an Adjudicator, is entitled to assume  that  it  is
right.

It is one of the core functions of legal representatives to take a client's
instructions and faithfully reproduce them in an orderly  and  intelligible
form.  That can be a difficult and time consuming job but it  is  something
that legal representatives really should get right.

We  recognise,  of  course,  that  sometimes  mistakes  will  be  made  and
sometimes, for whatever reason, claimants will withhold information until a
later  stage  or  will   answer   questions   inaccurately   or   downright
untruthfully.  However, the starting point must be that the form SEF  is  a
complete and accurate statement of a case.  If it is not,  and  the  asylum
seeker has been advised properly, he will say  so  at  the  first  possible
opportunity so that complaints can be investigated and put  right.   If  an
error has been made by solicitors then  the  Secretary  of  State,  or  the
Adjudicator, can expect  to  see  evidence  from  the  solicitor  concerned
explaining how the mistake came to be made  and  exhibiting  any  notes  or
instructions in support.  It is hard to see why a claimant who had been let
down in this way would  not  waive  any  privilege  that  prevented  proper
instructions  being  disclosed.   Solicitors  who  carelessly  set  out   a
claimant's case can be expected to be reported to their professional body.

If an application is refused and a person appeals to an Adjudicator,  there
will be a direction that the claimant prepares a  full  witness  statement.
The very least that this must do is confirm the contents of the form SEF or
explain thoroughly its deficiencies.  Of course, if this is  not  done  and
points have to be made an Adjudicator may permit them to be  made  in  oral
evidence  or  they  may  emerge  in  cross-examination  but   a   competent
representative will deal with them before that stage and, in the absence of
a proper explanation,  an  Adjudicator  should  be  very  slow  to  believe
evidence introduced at a late stage.

I hope it is clear from the above that it is the view of the Tribunal  that
forms SEF must be completed carefully and accurately and the  Secretary  of
State and the Adjudicator is entitled to assume that this  has  been  done.
If, for any reason, it is not the case then it is incumbent upon the asylum
seeker to give a full and proper explanation for any deficiency at an early
stage.  The case has been reported so that this can be made clear.

It may be that there are perfectly proper reasons for  the  inconsistencies
in this case.  We do not know what they are and it is plain to us that  the
Adjudicator has not given proper weight to the contents of  the  form  SEF.
It is also  plain  us  that  this  has  affected  the  reliability  of  his
credibility findings as a whole.

We are sorry it has been necessary to criticise  the  Adjudicator  in  this
way.  It is not intended to attack the determination as a whole,  which  in
many ways was a properly structured  and  careful  document,  but  it  does
contain these two errors which we find are sufficient taken together,  and,
at least in the case of the misunderstanding of the SEF,  on  its  own,  to
make the determination unreliable.  The only way that this can be  remedied
is for the case to be heard again.

In the circumstances we allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent
that we direct that it be heard again  by  an  Adjudicator  other  than  Mr
Jamieson.





                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
                                                               15 April 2004

