
Heard at Field House
On 5 February 2004

 TV (Ukaine - prison conditions) Ukraine [2004] UKIAT 00222

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                              12 August 2004

                                   Before:

                      Dr H.H. Storey, (Vice President)
                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr M. Blundell, Home Office

                                  Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant: Mr H. Norton-Taylor, Counsel instructed by
                                  White Ryland, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an Adjudicator,
      Mr L.A. North, following a hearing  in  Nottingham  on  4  April  2002
      dismissing the Claimant's human rights appeal but allowing his  appeal
      on human rights  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  previously
      rejected both claims.


   2. The Claimant is a citizen of Ukraine and was born on 22 May 1978.   He
      is 25 years old.  He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 2
      November 2001 avoiding immigration controls.  He claimed asylum  on  5
      November 2001.  On 12 November 2001, the Secretary  of  State  made  a
      decision to issue removal directions for  the  Claimant's  removal  to
      Ukraine.  This gave rise to a right of appeal to the Adjudicator under
      paragraph 69 (5) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  which  the
      Claimant duly exercised.

The Claimant's case

   3. As appears from paragraph 14 of the determination, the Claimant joined
      the Ukrainian National Assembly  (UNA)  closely  associated  with  the
      paramilitary Ukrainian National Self Defence  Organisation  (UNSO)  in
      1997 whilst an undergraduate and attended a demonstration on  9  March
      2001 that was violently broken up by the  police.   The  Claimant  was
      arrested and released on 10 March 2001  without  charge.   During  the
      course of his detention he was  beaten  to  such  an  extent  that  he
      required treatment in hospital.  He was  required  to  return  to  the
      police station on 12 March 2001 and released the same  day.   However,
      on 23 May 2001 he was again seen at the police station and released on
      condition that he remained in town.  He subsequently received a  court
      summons and it was this that prompted him to leave Ukraine.   He  left
      the country on 30 October 2001 travelling by car via Poland.

The Adjudicator's decision

   4. In paragraph 24 of the determination, the Adjudicator found  that  the
      Claimant had been beaten by the Ukrainian police as a  result  of  his
      participation in a demonstration.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  this
      amounted to persecution because the demonstration was unlawful, albeit
      the authorities used excessive force to dispel the demonstrators.  The
      authorities  were  not,  so  the  Adjudicator  found,  targeting   the
      demonstrators for their  political  opinions  but  because  they  were
      involved in an unlawful demonstration.  The Adjudicator found that the
      actions of the police may well have been over-zealous  attempts  by  a
      poorly disciplined security  force  to  maintain  public  order.   The
      Adjudicator went on to find that the Claimant would not be targeted as
      a  result  of  his  political  views.   Accordingly,  the  Adjudicator
      dismissed the asylum claim.  There is no appeal from that decision.


   5. However, the Adjudicator allowed the claim under the ECHR.   He  said,
      in paragraph 26 of the determination:

           "My reasons for allowing the Appellant's human rights appeal are
           that I am satisfied that he will face prosecution on his  return
           to the Ukraine either for his involvement in  the  demonstration
           or because of his failure to surrender to the request to  attend
           for  questioning  or  the  summons  to  appear  at  court.   The
           background information is clear that  bail  is  unlikely  and  a
           lengthy period of pre-trial detention and  possibly  post  trial
           detention are likely.  Because of my findings, noted  above,  as
           to the conditions the appellant would face  while  in  detention
           and the fact that those conditions fall lower than  the  minimum
           internationally [sic] level, I find that the appellant is highly
           likely to experience inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  at  the
           least, and a serious possibility of torture, if he  is  returned
           to Ukraine.  I am satisfied that the  national  requirement  for
           registration of addresses and internal travel documents make  it
           unlikely that the appellant will successfully  avoid  detection.
           For  those  reasons  I  find  it  [likely]  the  appellant  will
           experience treatment contrary to Article 3 if he is returned  to
           the Ukraine."

The appeal to the Tribunal

   6. The Secretary of State appealed against that finding.  In the  grounds
      of appeal, it is argued that the Adjudicator failed  to  say  why  the
      Claimant would experience treatment of  such  severity  as  likely  to
      engage Article 3.


   7. Mr Blundell, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,  relied
      on the judgment in Hariri [2003] EWCA Civ 807 in which  the  Court  of
      Appeal drew extensively upon the decision of the Tribunal  in  Muzafar
      Iqbal [2002] UKIAT 02239 where the Tribunal stated in paragraph 57:

           "In cases which rest  not  on  a  personal  risk  of  harm  (for
           example, where the police or prison staff would  have  cause  to
           target a Claimant) but on a risk of serious harm  said  to  face
           people generally, for example in this case all persons  detained
           pending trial, it cannot be said that they  would  face  a  real
           risk  of  serious  harm  unless  in  that  country  there  is  a
           consistent pattern of gross and systematic violations  of  their
           human rights whilst in detention."

   8. This passage was approved by Laws LJ in Hariri as reflecting  no  more
      nor no less than the reality of the  situation;  the  fact  that  ill-
      treatment or misconduct might be routine  or  frequent  would  not  be
      enough.  Laws LJ said in paragraph 8:
           "5. At this stage, the appellant's argument before the  IAT  was
           that he was at risk of ill-treatment if returned as a member  of
           a class, rather than on account of facts  special  to  him.  His
           essential complaint, and the point  on  which  Ward  LJ  granted
           permission to appeal, is that the IAT in paragraph 10 applied  a
           standard of proof for the establishment of a risk of persecution
           or treatment contrary to Article 3 which is higher than, and  at
           variance from, the standard established in the jurisprudence. In
           short, it imposes greater burdens on an applicant than should be
           imposed having regard to the test set out in Sivakumaran  [1988]
           1 AC 958, in  their  Lordship's  House,  namely:  "a  reasonable
           degree of likelihood" of relevant ill-treatment.  This  requires
           proof of a  real,  that  is,  not  a  fanciful,  risk;  but  its
           perceived incidence may well be less, perhaps a good deal  less,
           than a formal probability of 51 per cent or more. It  is  common
           ground that  the  Sivakumaran  standard  applies  as  surely  in
           appeals brought under the European Convention on Human Rights as
           it does in refugee appeals as such. The  appellant's  target  in
           this argument is the requirement, adopted at paragraph 10 of the
           IAT determination which I  have  read,  to  show  "a  consistent
           pattern of gross and systematic violation of  fundamental  human
           rights" by way of punishment for draft evasion  or  unauthorised
           departure from the country, before  a  case  of  persecution  or
           Article 3 ill-treatment could be accepted...

           7. Mr Nichol submits that this approach is  flatly  inconsistent
           with Sivakumaran, and that it is wrong in principle to treat the
           approach to Article 3 of the Torture Convention as a  legitimate
           read-across to the 1951 Refugee Convention and Article 3 of  the
           European Convention on Human Rights. In his skeleton argument he
           has enumerated a number of differences between the two  sets  of
           provisions.

           8. In my judgment, however, the appellant's arguments all forget
           one simple but central fact in the case. It is that  the  points
           concerning the  appellant's  individual  circumstances  had  all
           fallen  away.  When  it  came  to  paragraph  10  of   the   IAT
           determination,  his  case  depended  entirely  upon   it   being
           established that there was a real  risk  that  he  would  suffer
           unlawful ill-treatment, as I have said, as a member of  a  class
           or perhaps two classes: draft evaders and those who had left the
           country without authority. In those circumstances, as  it  seems
           to me, the "real risk" - the conventional Sivakumaran standard -
           could not be  established  without  its  being  shown  that  the
           general situation was one in which ill-treatment of the kind  in
           question generally happened: hence  the  expression  "gross  and
           systematic." The point is one of logic. Absent evidence to  show
           that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  because  of  his   specific
           circumstances, there could be no  real  risk  of  relevant  ill-
           treatment unless the situation to which the appellant  would  be
           returning was one  in  which  such  violence  was  generally  or
           consistently happening. There is nothing else in the  case  that
           could  generate  a  real  risk.  In  this  situation,  then,   a
           "consistent  pattern  of  gross  and  systematic  violation   of
           fundamental human rights", far from being at variance  with  the
           real risk test is, in my judgment, a function or application  of
           it.
   9. The approach that we have set out above should be viewed in the  light
      of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Batayav  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
      1489.  This appeal proceeded solely in  relation  to  the  appellant's
      claim to the protection of Article 3 of the  European  Convention  and
      the only issue was whether the return of the appellant to the  Russian
      Federation would put the United Kingdom in breach of Article 3 because
      of the conditions of detention in the Russian penal  system  in  which
      the appellant would be held in Russia.  Sedley LJ said:
           37. I want to add a  word,  however,  about  the  evaluation  of
           conditions which are alleged to create a real  risk  of  inhuman
           treatment. The authority of this court has  been  lent,  through
           the decision in Hariri, to the  formulation  that  ill-treatment
           which is "frequent" or even "routine" does not  present  a  real
           risk to the individual unless it is "general" or "systematic" or
           "consistently happening": see paragraphs 9 to 10 in the previous
           judgment.
           38. Great care needs to be taken with such  epithets.  They  are
           intended to elucidate the jurisprudential concept of real  risk,
           not to replace it. If a type of car has a  defect  which  causes
           one vehicle in ten to crash,  most  people  would  say  that  it
           presents a real risk to anyone who drives it, albeit crashes are
           not generally or consistently happening. The  exegetic  language
           in Hariri suggests  a  higher  threshold  than  the  IAT's  more
           cautious phrase in Iqbal,  "a  consistent  pattern",  which  the
           court in Hariri sought to endorse.
           39. There is a danger, if Hariri  is  taken  too  literally,  of
           assimilating risk to probability. A real risk is in language and
           in law something distinctly less  than  a  probability,  and  it
           cannot be elevated by lexicographic stages into  something  more
           than it is.


  10. Given that the Adjudicator has not approached the case by  considering
      whether there was a consistent pattern  of  violations  of  the  human
      rights of those in detention  sufficient  to  engage  Article  3,  the
      Adjudicator had not adopted the correct approach and the  Tribunal  is
      enabled to consider the  appeal  afresh  based  on  the  Adjudicator's
      findings of fact.  Mr Norton Taylor did not pursue his submission that
      the Adjudicator's approach was correct and that  he  was  entitled  to
      reach the conclusion that he did on the basis  of  clear  findings  of
      fact.

The background material

  11. When the Adjudicator considered the appeal, he had before him  the  US
      State Department report for 2000, published in March  2001.   We  were
      referred to these passages:


        "The Government's human rights  record  was  poor  in  some  areas;
        however, the Government continued to  respect  the  rights  of  its
        citizens in other areas. In previous  years,  police  and  military
        committed extrajudicial killings; however, there were no reports of
        such  incidents  during  the  year.  Police  and  prison  officials
        regularly tortured and  beat  detainees  and  prisoners,  sometimes
        resulting  in  death.  Prison  conditions  are  harsh   and   life-
        threatening.  There  were  instances  of   arbitrary   arrest   and
        detention. Lengthy pretrial detention in very poor  conditions  was
        common, and detainees often spent months in pretrial detention  for
        violations that involved little or no  prison  time  if  convicted.
        Long delays in trials are a problem. The Government rarely punishes
        officials who commit abuses.  The  SBU,  police,  and  Prosecutor's
        Office have drawn domestic and international  criticism  for  their
        failure to take adequate action to  curb  institutional  corruption
        and abuse in the Government. [Claimant's supplementary bundle pages
        10-11.]


        There was no improvement during  the  year  in  prison  conditions,
        which  are  harsh,  life-threatening,  and  do  not  meet   minimum
        international   standards.   Prison   officials   intimidated   and
        mistreated inmates. Due in part  to  the  severe  economic  crisis,
        prisons and detention centers were severely overcrowded and  lacked
        adequate sanitation and medical facilities. According  to  official
        statistics, funding for prisons decreased by almost 14 percent over
        the last 3 years. During  the  year,  the  Government  announced  a
        general  amnesty   for   34,800   inmates   intended   to   relieve
        overcrowding. Because the country lacks a well-developed system  of
        suspended sentences, and the law  does  not  differentiate  between
        misdemeanors and felonies,  at  least  one-third  of  inmates  were
        convicted of only minor violations.
        Conditions in pretrial detention  facilities  routinely  failed  to
        meet minimum international standards. Inmates sometimes  were  held
        in investigative isolation for extended periods  and  subjected  to
        intimidation and mistreatment by jail  guards  and  other  inmates.
        Overcrowding is common in these centers. For example, the  pretrial
        detention center in Kiev, houses 3,500; it was constructed to  hold
        2,850 persons.


        According to official sources, information on the physical state of
        prison walls and fences as well as  pretrial  detention  blocks  is
        considered to be a government secret. However, the  press  reported
        freely about harsh prison conditions.  In  1998  there  were  1,901
        deaths in prisons and detention facilities, which was more  than  3
        times the death rate  of  the  general  population.  Poor  sanitary
        conditions result in deaths from diseases such as tuberculosis  and
        dysentery. There are frequent incidents of murder by fellow inmates
        and suicide.  [Claimant's supplementary bundle page 12]
The US State Department report for 2002, released 31 March 2003 is not
substantially different:
        "According to complaints received from the Office of the  Ombudsman
        and human rights NGOs, prison officials intimidated and  mistreated
        inmates...According to official statistics of the Penal Department,
        in the first 6 months  of  2001,  there  were  865  deaths  in  the
        prisons. Poor sanitary  conditions  resulted  in  300  deaths  from
        diseases such as tuberculosis and  13  from  dysentery  during  the
        first half of 2001. There were frequent incidents  of  killings  by
        fellow inmates, and in the first half of 2001, 13 individuals  were
        reported officially  to  have  committed  suicide,  although  human
        rights groups believed the actual figure to be higher.
        Prisoners were permitted to file complaints to the Ombudsman  about
        the conditions of detention, but human rights groups reported  that
        inmates were punished for doing  so.  In  January  2001,  the  Rada
        passed  amendments  to  the  Penal  Code  that  relaxed  Soviet-era
        restrictions in high-security prisons  and  removed  a  requirement
        that all prisoners' letters should be read.
        Conditions  in  pretrial  detention  facilities  also  were  harsh.
        Inmates sometimes were held in investigative isolation for extended
        periods and subjected to  intimidation  and  mistreatment  by  jail
        guards and other inmates. Overcrowding was common in these centers.
        Although there were no official  figures,  local  lawyers  believed
        that the pretrial detention center in Kiev housed as many as  6,000
        persons, although its capacity was estimated to be 3,500.  The  SBU
        still maintained its own pretrial centers at year's  end,  although
        it had announced in 2001 that it would  close  them.  According  to
        Human Rights Ombudsman Nina Karpachova, approximately one-third  of
        detainees were tortured.
  12. These passages are the source of some of the  material  found  in  the
      Country Assessment prepared by CIPU.  The relevant paragraphs in  CIPU
      are as follows:
      Prisons and Prison Conditions
      5.22   Prison  conditions  are  harsh  and   do   not   meet   minimum
      international standards. Due in part to  severe  economic  conditions,
      prisons and  detention  centres  are  severely  overcrowded  and  lack
      adequate sanitation and medical facilities.  In  June  1999,  official
      statistics put the prison population at 223,900, including  42,600  in
      pre-trial detention, twice that of 1992. In addition, prison officials
      intimidate and mistreat inmates, who are subject to  regular  beatings
      as well as torture, which has sometimes led to  death.   According  to
      official statistics of the Penal Department, in the first 6 months  of
      2001, there were 865 deaths in the prisons.  Poor sanitary  conditions
      resulted in 300 deaths from diseases such as tuberculosis and 13  from
      dysentery during the firs half of 2001. There were  frequent  killings
      by fellow inmates, and in the first half of 2001, 13 individuals  were
      reported officially to have committed suicide.


      5.23  Because the country lacks a well-developed system  of  suspended
      sentences and the law does not differentiate between misdemeanours and
      felonies, at least one-third of inmates have been  convicted  of  only
      minor offences. In response to the overcrowding,  a  mass  amnesty  in
      July 1999 released some 40,000 inmates


      5.24   Diplomatic  representatives  and  human  rights  monitors  have
      reported that it  has  become  more  difficult  to  obtain  access  to
      prisons. In addition, cases were reported of  prisoners  being  denied
      correspondence, and limited to one family visit  per  year.  Prisoners
      may complain to the Human Rights Ombudsman  about  the  conditions  of
      detention, but human rights groups have  reported  that  inmates  were
      subsequently punished for initiating complaints.
  13. The overview of the human rights situation is in these terms:

      Overview

      6.1   The 1996 Constitution provides a legal framework for  protecting
      civil and human rights [11] which reflects Ukraine's commitments as  a
      member of the  Council  of  Europe  (since  November  1995)  [9b]  and
      signatory to a number of international human rights instruments,  [9a]
      including the European Convention on Human Rights. [9b] However,  many
      constitutional  provisions  still  await  the  passage   of   enabling
      legislation, while many areas of life are still  regulated  by  Soviet
      law and practices, which means  that  actual  human  rights  practices
      often do not conform  to  constitutional  requirements.  During  1999,
      there was limited progress in some areas  of  Ukraine's  human  rights
      record, although serious problems persist.  The  government  has  made
      little effort to punish officials who have committed or abetted  human
      rights abuses or to end such abuses.[11]


      6.2   A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups
      operate in Ukraine without government restriction,  investigating  and
      publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government  officials
      are  generally  co-operative  and  responsive  to  their  views,   but
      enquiries into penal conditions, which are a significant human  rights
      concern, are limited by their  status  as  state  secrets,  and  human
      rights groups have reported increased difficulties in investigating in
      this area. In January 1998, the President signed the law creating  the
      Parliamentary   Commissioner   on   Human   Rights,   which    is    a
      constitutionally mandated  independent  human  rights  ombudsman,  and
      parliament elected the first Ombudsman in April 1998. However, the law
      does not provide any significant enforcement authority or provide  for
      penalties for obstructing the Ombudsman's enquiries. Nevertheless, the
      Office of  the  Human  Rights  Ombudsman  has  still  been  active  in
      investigating human rights violations, and states  that  most  of  the
      complaints  it  has  received  involve  abuses  by   law   enforcement
      personnel. Citizens have the right to file appeals about alleged human
      rights  violations  with  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights   in
      Strasbourg. According to one human rights expert, some 13,000  appeals
      were made to the Court in 1998 and some 200 cases  were  accepted  for
      review.[11]


      6.3   Citizens have the right to file  appeals  with  the  ECHR  about
      alleged human rights violations.  Since 1997,  Ukrainians  have  filed
      approximately 4,000  applications  with  the  court.   There  were  10
      decisions  on  Ukrainian  cases  during  2002:  8  cases  were   ruled
      inadmissible, 1 was found partially admissible and in 1 case the Court
      ruled that the  applicant  had  been  deprived  of  his  right  to  an
      impartial tribunal in Ukraine. [11a]


      6.4   The Constitution prohibits torture, but there have been numerous
      reports of torture and ill-treatment of suspects in police custody and
      prisons throughout Ukraine, in contravention of its commitments  as  a
      party to the Convention against Torture and Other  Cruel,  Inhuman  or
      Degrading Treatment  or  Punishment,  as  well  as  the  International
      Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights.[4b]  Police  and   prison
      officials regularly beat detainees and prisoners, and there have  been
      persistent reports that Berkut (special militia units or riot  police)
      troops beat and torture inmates as part of regular training exercises.
      Two forms of torture reported are the "swallow"  method,  whereby  the
      detainee is placed on his stomach and his feet are tied to  his  hands
      behind him, forcing his back to arch, and the "baby elephant"  method,
      whereby a gas mask is placed on the victim's  head  and  the  flow  of
      oxygen is slowly reduced. Another form of torture employed  is  called
      the "monument" method, whereby the  detainee  is  suspended  from  his
      hands on a rope and beaten. Some detainees are beaten until they waive
      their  right  to  a  lawyer.  There  is  no  effective  mechanism  for
      registering complaints about mistreatment or for obtaining redress for
      such actions. Prisoners may address complaints  to  the  Human  Rights
      Ombudsman, who has received widespread reports of torture in pre-trial
      detention, but this avenue is  limited  by  the  Ombudsman's  lack  of
      enforcement authority, prisoners' fears of punishment  for  initiating
      complaints, and insufficient effort on the part of the  government  to
      end such practices or to punish those responsible. One  positive  step
      is a new Criminal Code that came  into  effect  on  1  September  2001
      mandating 3 to 10 years imprisonment for torture.[11] and  on  28  May
      2002,  in  the  first  case  brought  by  the  Ombudsman  against  law
      enforcement agencies, the Frankivskiy district court in  Lviv  ordered
      the the Lviv prosecutor's office and the Security Service  of  Ukraine
      to pay damages to the parents of a man tortured  to  death  in  prison
      [56]


      6.5   Ukraine committed itself to a moratorium on the death penalty on
      joining the Council of Europe in November  1995.  However,  subsequent
      reports indicated that at least 212 people were executed between  then
      and March 1997, which led the Council  of  Europe  to  adopt  a  third
      resolution, in January 1998, condemning the continuing  executions  in
      Ukraine and threatening it with expulsion should  more  executions  be
      carried out. Reports indicated that at least  345  prisoners  remained
      under sentence of death at the  end  of  1998,  which  caused  further
      international concern and doubts over Ukraine's commitment  to  ending
      the death penalty.[4a],[4c] However, in February 2000, the Rada passed
      amendments to the Criminal Code which abolish  the  death  penalty  in
      Ukraine and signed a special protocol of the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights to this effect on 3  May  2002  [47].  Crimes  previously
      punished  by  the  death  penalty   are   now   punishable   by   life
      imprisonment.[14]
  14. The Amnesty International report of 15 October 2001 states:
           Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by  police
           officers  persisted  and  appeared  to  be  widespread.   Prison
           conditions  continued  to  fall  below   international   minimum
           standards and were frequently cruel, inhuman and degrading.


           Torture and ill-treatment
           Allegations of torture  and  ill-treatment  by  police  officers
           continued. AI's long-standing concerns  were  reflected  in  the
           reports of three  visits  by  the  European  Committee  for  the
           Prevention of Torture (CPT) to Ukraine in 1998, 1999  and  2000,
           which were published in October 2002. The CPT concluded  in  its
           report on its visit in 2000 that people in the  custody  of  the
           police ran a significant risk of being  physically  ill-treated,
           particularly at the time of  arrest  and  during  interrogation,
           almost invariably for the purposes of extracting a "confession".
           During its 1998 and 2000 visits the  CPT  encountered  "numerous
           allegations" of ill-treatment, which included kicks, punches and
           blows  with  a  truncheon.  However,  the  CPT   also   received
           allegations of more severe forms of  ill-treatment  which  could
           amount to torture. These included electric shocks, pistol whips,
           burns using cigarette lighters, asphyxiation by  placing  a  gas
           mask or plastic bag over  a  detained  person's  head,  beatings
           while handcuffed and suspended by the legs or arms, and beatings
           on the soles of the feet. Allegations of ill-treatment were  not
           confined to police custody. During its  2000  visit  to  several
           prisons the CPT encountered a  number  of  allegations  of  ill-
           treatment  which  included  blows  with  fists,  various  wooden
           objects and rubber batons or tubes. Disturbingly, the CPT stated
           that many detainees in police  holding  facilities  and  prisons
           appeared afraid to talk to members of its delegation  or  to  be
           examined  by  its  medical  members  for  fear   of   subsequent
           reprisals.


           Harsh prison conditions
           Only very limited progress was made in improving  conditions  in
           pre-trial  detention  centres  and  prisons,  which  fell  below
           international  minimum  standards.  Endemic   overcrowding   was
           exacerbated by a general policy of remanding  criminal  suspects
           in custody and the infrequent use of non-custodial  punishments.
           Delays in the administration of justice  resulted  in  prolonged
           periods of pre-trial detention.  After its visit to  Ukraine  in
           2000 the CPT described conditions at the SIZO No.  15  detention
           centre in  Simferopol  as  characteristic  of  conditions  often
           experienced  by  prisoners.  "[The  majority]  of   the   prison
           population... were subjected to appalling  material  conditions.
           Inmates were crammed into  severely  overcrowded  dormitories...
           with virtually no natural light, often poor artificial  lighting
           and inefficient ventilation ... Furthermore,  the  establishment
           was unable to provide each prisoner with a bed; consequently, in
           many dormitories, inmates had to take turns to sleep. While some
           dormitories had been freshly painted, many others were dirty and
           infested with cockroaches and other vermin."

The appellant's case before the Tribunal
  15. At the hearing of the appeal, Mr  Norton-Taylor  sought  to  introduce
      some material that was not before the Adjudicator.  At page 39 of  the
      Claimant's supplementary bundle is the first of a series of  documents
      that are said to evidence criminal proceedings against the Claimant in
      the Ukraine.  These have never been tested in any previous hearing and
      the Tribunal is uncertain of their provenance.   The  documents  were,
      however, considered by Robert Chenciner in a  report  prepared  on  or
      about 21 September 2003, after the  Adjudicator's  determination.   He
      comments in the report that Article 71 of the criminal code carries  a
      punishment of 2 to 12 years imprisonment.  His report at paragraph 1.3
      relating to prison and detention conditions is extremely short and  is
      derived from the material we have set out extensively above.   We  are
      prepared to take this new material into account but bear in  mind  the
      uncertainties associated with it.
  16. We were also referred to  a  report  by  Dr  Rosaria  Puglisi  of  the
      University of Leeds that was faxed to the Tribunal shortly before  the
      hearing.  Of this report we were referred to page 2  in  which  it  is
      said that the systematic failure  of  the  Ukrainian  institutions  to
      guarantee the rights of suspects in pre- and post-trial detention  has
      prompted Amnesty International to conclude that "a  wide  gap  between
      law and reality still exists."   Dr Puglisi refers to  the  report  of
      the  International  Helsinki  Federation  quoting  the   Parliamentary
      Ombudsman is saying that  30  percent  of  prisoners  are  victims  of
      torture and that the lack  of  any  effective  mechanism  to  register
      complaints  against  mistreatment  and  abuse   contributes   to   the
      perpetration of such behaviour.  (See page 5 of the report.)  Much  of
      the report uses the same sources as we have used.
  17. Mr  Norton-Taylor  referred  us  to  the  decision  of  the  ECtHR  in
      Kalashnikov, as an example of a case where poor prison conditions  are
      capable of violating Article 3 of the ECHR.  The Court considered  the
      overcrowded conditions in a Russian detention establishment  where  18
      to 24 men were housed in a cell designed for  8  measuring  17  to  20
      square metres.  The cell was infested with  vermin,  leading  to  skin
      disease and fungal infections.  Each bed was used by 3 inmates who had
      to sleep in 8-hour shifts.  The cell was  constantly  lit  and  noisy.
      Smoking was permitted inside the cell  which  was  ill-ventilated  and
      stuffy.  The toilet facilities did not afford adequate  privacy.   The
      cell was filthy and  dilapidated.   Those  conditions  amounted  to  a
      breach of Article 3 - see paragraph  102.    The  applicant  spent  an
      aggregate of 5 years in detention, most of which was awaiting trial.
  18. Mr Norton-Taylor conceded that in  Ukraine  the  period  of  detention
      following a trial and conviction was speculative.  He  submitted  that
      it ranged from 2 years to 15 years.  We accept the  submission  of  Mr
      Blundell in this regard to the effect that if the fact  of  trial  and
      conviction was speculative, the risk of post-trial  detention  becomes
      so speculative as to fail to establish that there was a real  risk  of
      its happening at all.  Furthermore, it was the Claimant's case that he
      was arrested with several hundred others in the  clashes  that  formed
      part of the demonstration on 9 March 2001.  In the almost three  years
      that have followed, the Claimant has not produced any  information  as
      to whether others were convicted  of  offences  arising  out  of  this
      incident and, if  there  were,  what  sentences  were  imposed.   This
      information must be capable of verification.  For  these  reasons,  we
      find that the appellant has  failed  to  establish  that  he  will  be
      convicted  or  sentenced  to  imprisonment,  although  it  remains   a
      possibility.
  19. However, we consider that the Claimant has established that he faces a
      period of pre-trial detention.  Our reasons are as  follows.   In  the
      first place, the background material establishes it is likely that the
      period  will  be  lengthy.   In  the  second  place,   this   material
      establishes that conditions are poor, with overcrowding and inadequate
      sanitation.  There is a risk  of  intimidation  and  ill-treatment  by
      prison officials.  These conditions are caused in  part  by  the  huge
      prison population compared with the size of the population (224,000 in
      custody out of a population of 49 million - of which some 43,000  were
      in pre-trial detention in 1999).  The ECHR does not guarantee for this
      Claimant that prison conditions will be of a particular standard or in
      accordance with European or British norms.  Whatever the reference  in
      the material to international standards may mean,  Ukrainian  prisons,
      like  many  others,  fall  below  the  European  and  United   Kingdom
      standards.  Nevertheless the  Claimant  is  required  to  establish  a
      consistent pattern of  serious  violations  of  the  human  rights  of
      detainees of a severity to violate the threshold set by Article 3.  It
      is only by establishing such a consistent pattern that he will satisfy
      the "real risk" test that triggers the right not to be returned.


  20. The material to which we have referred is a catalogue of serious human
      rights abuses taking  place  in  the  Ukrainian  prison  system.   The
      difficulty with which the Tribunal is faced is in making an assessment
      of the scale and frequency of these abuses.  In that regard,  we  find
      it extremely difficult not to attach significant weight to one of  the
      assessments  that  attempts  to  quantify  the  incidence  of   abuse.
      According to Human Rights Ombudsman Nina Karpachova, approximately one-
      third of detainees were tortured.  The Tribunal expresses some concern
      as to the basis on which this calculation is made.  It  is  not  clear
      whether the information comes from inmates themselves, in spite of the
      suggestion that many are reticent to complain.   Its  reliability  has
      not been established beyond reasonable doubt.  If  the  assessment  is
      made simply on those cases that have been reported to her, it may  not
      provide a conclusive or reliable statistic for  condition  across  the
      entire penal system.   Nevertheless, particularly given that  we  have
      to decide only whether there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that
      the appellant will face  ill-treatment  in  pre-trial  detention,  the
      Tribunal cannot lightly disregard this evidence.


  21. Against this evidence, there is some evidence that the  government  is
      taking steps to address some of the  problems.   Steps,  for  example,
      have been taken to reduce overcrowding.   The  figures  for  the  Kiev
      detention centre,  for  example,  whilst  demonstrating  an  occupancy
      significantly beyond its design capacity (6,000 although designed  for
      3,500) may not be worse than overcrowding in some European facilities.
       Overcrowding is not, in itself, a  violation  of  an  inmate's  human
      rights.  Similarly, the deaths  in  custody,  although  high,  include
      deaths from natural causes and this may be a reflection  of  the  poor
      state of the physical health of those prior  to  detention.   It  also
      appears that the government has taken steps to address the problem  of
      torture,  albeit  under  pressure  form  the  Council  of  Europe,  by
      introducing an amendment to the Criminal Code  specifically  aimed  at
      criminalising it.  In May 2002, a successful prosecution was brought.


  22. In spite of these reasons for limited optimism, the material  that  we
      have set out above cannot, in  our  judgment  permit  a  finding  that
      Article 3 will not be  breached.   In  reaching  this  conclusion,  we
      consider that it is only relatively  recently  that  the  Ukraine  has
      sought to bring itself under European scrutiny.  The  authorities  are
      aware of the problem and are addressing it, albeit with  only  limited
      success on current information.  The fact that there is a Human Rights
      Ombudsman prepared to make outspoken criticisms of failings within the
      system is a mark of the government's efforts to make improvements.

  23. However, we would emphasise that the material that  we  have  used  is
      relatively  out-of-date.   In  that  sense,  the   decision   may   be
      historical.  For this reason we do not consider the findings  we  have
      made should necessarily be regarded  as  of  continuing  relevance  in
      future cases.    Nevertheless, the material before  us  establishes  a
      reasonable likelihood that the  Claimant  faces  a  violation  of  his
      Article 3 rights.


  24. This was the conclusion reached by the Adjudicator.   Having  reviewed
      the material,  we  consider  the  Adjudicator  reached  a  sustainable
      decision.  For these reasons, we dismiss the appeal.


Decision:  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.




Andrew Jordan
Vice President
4 July 2004
Approved for electronic distribution
