

              ZB (Russian prison conditions) Russian Federation CG [2004]
UKIAT 00239
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                               Date of Hearing: 13 July 2004
                                 Date Determination notified: 27 August 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)
                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms C Nicholas, instructed by Dare Emmanuel
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr T Otty, instructed by Treasury Solicitors

Conditions in prisons in the Russian Federation have greatly improved  since
the time that gave rise to the decision of the ECtHR in Kalashnikov  and  in
2004 it cannot be said in general that they breach Article 3.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Russian  Federation,  appeals  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T Ward, dismissing his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 23 October  2001  to  direct
     his removal from the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal  entrant  after
     refusal of asylum.  This appeal is before us in pursuance of an  Order
     of the Court of Appeal, which set aside an  earlier  determination  of
     the Tribunal and directed that the Appellant's appeal be reheard by  a
     differently-constituted panel.

  2. Originally, the Appellant's  appeal  was  on  Refugee  Convention  and
     Article 3 grounds.  So far as concerns most  of  the  matters  he  has
     raised in the course of his appeal, he has been unsuccessful, and  the
     judgments in the Court of Appeal [2003] EWCA Civ 1489 confirm that  we
     are concerned with only a limited argument.  We gratefully  adopt  the
     following summary of the Appellant's case and of  our  task  from  the
     judgment of Munby J (with whom Mummery LJ and Sedley LJ agreed).

           "2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Russian Federation.   He
                 is of Tuvan (Mongolian) ethnic origin.  His claim to asylum
                 was based  on  his  fear  of  persecution  by  the  Russian
                 authorities on account of his non-Russian  ethnic  original
                 and the inevitability  of  imprisonment  both  for  'draft'
                 evasion caused  by  his  unwillingness  to  participate  in
                 military action in Chechnya and for illegal drug dealing  -
                 the appellant's case was that he was not a drug  dealer  in
                 the ordinary sense but someone who, albeit  illegally,  was
                 selling  medicines  to  Chechens,  in  part  at  least  for
                 humanitarian reasons.   The  appellant  had  in  fact  been
                 imprisoned but managed to escape and made his way  to  this
                 country.


           3.    So far as concerns the appellant's claim to the protection
                 of the Geneva Convention it turned on whether what he faced
                 on return to Russia was persecution  or  only  prosecution.
                 In granting the appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  this
                 court on the Article  3  point  only  Lord  Justice  Sedley
                 observed that there was no viable  Geneva  Convention  case
                 here for the reasons given below.  Mr Ogunbiyi who appeared
                 before us for the appellant has  not  sought  to  challenge
                 that ruling.  The appeal has accordingly  proceeded  solely
                 in relation to the appellant's claim to the  protection  of
                 Article 3 of  the  European  Convention.   Only  one  issue
                 arises, namely whether the return of the appellant  to  the
                 Russian Federation would put the United Kingdom  in  breach
                 of Article 3.  the sole remaining basis for asserting  that
                 it might turns on the conditions of detention in the  penal
                 system in which the appellant would be held in Russia.


           4.    There are many cases in which an asylum seeker's claim  to
                 the protection of the European Convention in reality stands
                 or fails with his claim to the  protection  of  the  Geneva
                 Convention.   This  was  plainly  not  such  a  case.   The
                 appellant's  claim  to  the  protection   of   the   Geneva
                 Convention,  although  founded  in  large  measure  on  the
                 conditions he might  be  expected  to  have  to  endure  if
                 returned to a Russian prison, was based on his fear that he
                 would be  singled  out  for  persecution  as  a  non-ethnic
                 Russian draft evader and convicted drug dealer.  His  claim
                 to the protection of Article 3 of the European  Convention,
                 in  contrast,  was  founded  not  on  his  own   particular
                 circumstances but on  the  conditions  faced  generally  by
                 persons,  whether  or  not  the  victims  of   persecution,
                 incarcerated in the Russian prison system.   The  dismissal
                 of his claim to the protection  of  the  Geneva  Convention
                 accordingly could not be  in  any  way  determinative,  nor
                 necessarily even indicative, of his quite separate claim to
                 the protection of Article 3.


           ...


           33.   In the circumstances the proper course, in my judgment, is
                 for us to give the Secretary of State permission to  adduce
                 the new evidence and to allow the appeal to the  extent  of
                 remitting the case to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  for
                 rehearing on such evidence, including but  not  limited  to
                 that which we have been shown, as either side may now  wish
                 to adduce.  It will be for the Tribunal  to  determine,  in
                 the  light  of  all  the  evidence,   whether   there   are
                 substantial grounds for believing that the  appellant  will
                 face a real risk of treatment that violates  Article  3  if
                 returned  to   a   Russian   prison.    Central   to   that
                 investigation, as it seems to me, will be  a  consideration
                 of the extent to which conditions  in  the  Russian  prison
                 system have or have not improved since Kalashnikov."


  3. The reference to Kalashnikov is to Kalashnikov v Russia (2002) 36 EHRR
     587, a decision of the European Court of Human Rights  pre-dating  the
     Tribunal's judgment in this case but not cited to it.


  4. Although Ms Nicholas did her very best to  persuade  us  that  we  are
     concerned with wider issues affecting the Appellant, it seems clear to
     us that our task is that identified in the paragraphs from  Munby  J's
     judgment which we have cited.  The Appellant's Article 3 claim is  not
     dependant upon his own personal characteristics, as the learned  judge
     made clear in paragraph [4].  We have to decide  whether  the  general
     prison conditions in Russia, to which the  Appellant  will,  he  says,
     inevitably be exposed, are at the  present  time  such  as  to  breach
     Article 3.


  5. Before we embark upon that task, there are  two  further  observations
     which we must make.  The first is that Kalashnikov v Russia is, as its
     title  suggests,  a  case  in  which  a  citizen  of  Russia   brought
     proceedings against  his  own  country  for  breach  of  the  latter's
     obligations under the European Convention on  Human  Rights.   In  the
     Court's  judgment,  the  Russian  Government  is  recorded  as  having
     conceded most of the facts alleged by  the  Claimant,  and  also  that
     prison  conditions  within  the  Russian  Federation  fell  below  the
     standard set by other member states of the  Council  of  Europe.   The
     position is summarised by Munby J at paragraph [25]:

           "The decision in Kalashnikov establishes, on facts  conceded  by
           the Russian Federation, that any person held in a Russian prison
           at the time Kalashnikov was imprisoned was at real risk - indeed
           at clear risk - of degrading treatment.  Kalashnikov revealed  a
           consistent pattern  of  gross  and  systematic  -  even  if  not
           intentional - violations of the human rights of  those  detained
           in Russian prisons."


  6. The learned judge goes on to say at paragraph [27]:


           "The question is simply whether there  are  substantial  grounds
           for believing that there is a real risk that if the appellant is
           returned to the Russian  Federation  he  will  be  subjected  to
           degrading treatment such as to involve a breach  of  Article  3.
           Kalashnikov, in my judgment, demonstrates that, prima facie, the
           answer to that question is that he will  be  subjected  to  such
           degrading treatment, and therefore his return to Russia is prima
           facie unlawful."

  7. No doubt that last sentiment is entirely justified on the basis of the
     particular facts in Kalashnikov because not only were  they  admitted,
     but they led to the strongest  of  conclusions.   We  would,  however,
     express some caution about any assumption that, in general, a judgment
     of the European Court of Human Rights on  an  internal  case  on  past
     facts should be regarded as having (even prima  facie)  an  inevitable
     result on the determination of expulsion claims predicated  on  future
     risk.

  8. The second issue is this.  After the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
     in this case, the Court of Session held on 26 April 2004 in  Napier  v
     The Scottish Ministers (Lord Bonomy) that conditions in Barlinnie jail
     in Glasgow in the period  20  May  to  27  June  2001  had  themselves
     amounted to a breach of a Claimant's human rights.  At the hearing, we
     investigated  with  the  parties  whether  they  wished  to  make  any
     submissions arising out of that judgment.   Ms  Nicholas  specifically
     disavowed any intention to rely on  it  as  indicating  any  level  of
     harshness of conditions (short of those  exemplified  in  Kalashnikov)
     that would amount to a breach of Article 3.

  9. We need say no more about these two issues.

 10. The Claimant in Kalashnikov originally applied to the Court  in  1998.
     His detention, which formed  the  subject  of  the  Court's  judgment,
     lasted from 29 June 1995 to 26 June  2000.   He  was  in  a  detention
     facility or 'SIZO' (????)  in  Magadan  for  most  of  his  period  of
     detention, although he spent about  three  months  in  a  penitentiary
     establishment (or ordinary prison).  His own claimed  account  of  the
     circumstances of his detention is set out in paragraphs 14  to  20  of
     the Court's judgment as follows:

           "14.  As regards the  first  period  of  his  detention  in  the
                 Magadan detention facility, the applicant alleged  that  he
                 had been kept in a cell measuring 17 square  meters  ('m2')
                 where there were 8 bunk beds.  However,  it  nearly  always
                 held 24 inmates;  only rarely did the number  fall  to  18.
                 As there were three men to every bunk,  the  inmates  slept
                 taking turns.  The others would lie or sit on the floor  or
                 cardboard boxes waiting for their turn.  It was  impossible
                 to sleep properly as the television was on around the clock
                 and, during the day, there was much commotion in the  cell.
                 The light in the cell was never turned off.


           15.   The lavatory pan in the corner  of  the  cell  offered  no
                 privacy.  A partition separated it from a wash  stand,  but
                 not from the living area and dining  table.   The  lavatory
                 pan was elevated from the floor by half a meter  while  the
                 partition measured 1,1 meters in  height.   Therefore,  the
                 person using the  toilet  was  in  the  view  of  both  his
                 cellmates and a prison guard observing the inmates  through
                 a peep-hole in the door.  The  inmates  had  to  eat  their
                 meals in the cell at the dining  table  which  was  only  a
                 meter away  from  the  toilet.   The  meals  were  of  poor
                 quality.


           16.   The cell, which had no ventilation, was stiflingly hot  in
                 summer and very  cold  in  winter.   Because  of  the  poor
                 quality of the air in the cell, a window had to remain open
                 all the time.   Being  surrounded  by  heavy  smokers,  the
                 applicant was forced  to  become  a  passive  smoker.   The
                 applicant claims that he was never  given  proper  bedding,
                 dishes or kitchen utensils.  He  only  received  a  quilted
                 mattress   and   a   thin   flannel   blanket   from    the
                 administration, and had to borrow  kitchenware  from  cell-
                 mates who had received these items from relatives.


           17.   The cells of the  detention  facility  were  overrun  with
                 cockroaches  and  ants,  but  no  attempt   was   made   to
                 exterminate them.  The only sanitary precaution  taken  was
                 that once a week the guards gave the  inmates  a  litre  of
                 chloride disinfectant for the lavatory.


           18.   He contracted  a  variety  of  skin  diseases  and  fungal
                 infections,  losing  his   toenails   and   some   of   his
                 fingernails.  During the trial from 11 November 1996 to  23
                 April 1997 and from 15 April  1999  to  3  August  1999,  a
                 recess was ordered so that he could be treated for scabies.
                  On six occasions detainees, with tuberculosis and syphilis
                 were placed  in  his  cell  and  he  received  prophylactic
                 antibiotic injections.


           19.   The applicant submitted that he could  only  take  a  walk
                 outside his cell one hour per day and that usually  he  was
                 only able to take a hot shower twice a month.


           20.   Finally, the applicant stated that, following his transfer
                 back to the same facility on 9 December 1999, the detention
                 conditions  had  not  materially  improved.   He  was   not
                 provided with proper bedding, towels or kitchenware.  There
                 was no treatment available for his skin disease  due  to  a
                 lack of proper medication.  His cell was still overrun with
                 cockroaches  and  there  had   been   no   anti-infestation
                 treatment for 5 years.  However, in  March-April  2000  the
                 number of inmates in his 8-bed cell was reduced to 11."

 10. We need to set out in full the Court's analysis of those facts, which,
     as we have said, were largely admitted.

           "97.  The Court notes from the outset that the cell in which the
                 applicant was detained measured between 17 m2 (according to
                 the applicant) and 20.8 m2 (according to  the  Government).
                 It was equipped with  bunk-beds  and  was  designed  for  8
                 inmates.  It may be questioned whether  such  accommodation
                 could be regarded as attaining  acceptable  standards.   In
                 this  connection  the  Court  recalls  that  the   European
                 Committee for the Prevention  of  Torture  and  Inhuman  or
                 Degrading Treatment of Punishment ('the CPT') has set 7  m2
                 per prisoner as an approximate, desirable guideline  for  a
                 detention cell (see the 2nd General Report -  CPT/Inf  (92)
                 3, � 43), ie 56 m2 for 8 inmates.  Despite  the  fact  that
                 the cell was designed  for  8  inmates,  according  to  the
                 applicant's submissions to the Court the  usual  number  of
                 inmates in his cell throughout his detention was between 18
                 and 24  persons.   In  his  application  for  release  from
                 custody of 27 December  1996,  the  applicant  stated  that
                 there were 21 inmates in his  8-bed  cell.   In  a  similar
                 application of 8 June 1999, he referred to 18 inmates  (see
                 paragraphs 43 and 73 above).   The  Court  notes  that  the
                 Government, for their part, acknowledged that, due  to  the
                 general overcrowding of the detention facility, each bed in
                 the cells was used by 2  or  3  inmates.   Meanwhile,  they
                 appear to disagree with the applicant as to the  number  of
                 inmates.  In their submission there were 11 or more inmates
                 in the applicant's cell at any given time and that normally
                 the number of inmates was 14.  However, the Government  did
                 not submit any evidence to substantiate  their  contention.
                 According to the applicant,  it  was  only  in  March-April
                 20900 that the number of inmates was reduced  to  11.   The
                 Court  does  not  find  it   necessary   to   resolve   the
                 disagreement between the Government and  the  applicant  on
                 this point. The figures submitted  suggest  that  that  any
                 given time there was 0.9 - 1,9 m2 of space  per  inmate  in
                 the applicant's cell.  Thus, in the Court's view, the  cell
                 was continuously,  severely  overcrowded.   This  state  of
                 affairs in itself raises an issue under Article  3  of  the
                 Convention.    Moreover,   on   account   of   the    acute
                 overcrowding, the inmates in the applicant's  cell  had  to
                 sleep taking turns, on the basis of  eight-hour  shifts  of
                 sleep per  prisoner.   It  appears  from  his  request  for
                 release from custody on 16 June 1999, that at that time  he
                 was sharing his bed with two other inmates  (see  paragraph
                 74 above).  Sleeping conditions were further aggravated  by
                 the constant lighting in the cell, as well as  the  general
                 commotion and noise from the large number of inmates.   The
                 resulting deprivation of  sleep  must  have  constituted  a
                 heavy physical and psychological burden on  the  applicant.
                 The  Court  further  observes  the  absence   of   adequate
                 ventilation in the applicant's cell which held an excessive
                 number of inmates and  who  apparently  were  permitted  to
                 smoke in the cell.   Although  the  applicant  was  allowed
                 outdoor activity for one or two hours a day,  the  rest  of
                 the time he was confined to his cell, with a  very  limited
                 space for himself and a stuffy atmosphere.


           98.   The  Court  next  notes  that  the  applicant's  cell  was
                 infested with pests and that during his detention no  anti-
                 infestation  treatment  was  effected  in  his  cell.   The
                 Government   conceded   that   infestation   of   detention
                 facilities with insects was a problem, and referred to  the
                 1989 ministerial guideline obliging detention facilities to
                 take disinfection measures.  However, it  does  not  appear
                 that this was done in the applicant's cell.  Throughout his
                 detention the applicant contracted  various  skin  diseases
                 and fungal infections, in particular during the years 1996,
                 1997 and 1999, necessitating recesses in the trial.   While
                 it is true that the applicant received treatment for  these
                 diseases, their recurrence  suggests  that  the  very  poor
                 conditions  in  the  cell  facilitating  their  propagation
                 remained  unchanged.   The  Court  also  notes  with  grave
                 concern that the applicant was detained on  occasions  with
                 persons suffering from syphilis and tuberculosis,  although
                 the Government stressed that contagion was prevented.


           99.    An  additional  aspect  of  the  crammed  and  insanitary
                 conditions described above was the  toilet  facilities.   A
                 partition measuring 1,1  meters  in  height  separated  the
                 lavatory pan in the corner of the cell from  a  wash  stand
                 next to it, but not from the living  area.   There  was  no
                 screen at the entrance to the toilet.   The  applicant  had
                 thus to use the toilet in the presence of other inmates and
                 be  present  while  the  toilet  was  being  used  by   his
                 cellmates.  The photographs provided by the Government show
                 a filthy, dilapidated cell and toilet area,  with  no  real
                 privacy.  Whilst the  Court  notes  with  satisfaction  the
                 major improvements that have apparently been  made  to  the
                 area  of  the  Magadan   detention   facility   where   the
                 applicant's  cell  was  located  (as  shown  in  the  video
                 recording which they submitted to the Court), this does not
                 detract from the wholly unacceptable conditions  which  the
                 applicant clearly had to endure at the material time."


 11. We have been referred to a great  deal  of  material  post-dating  the
     facts which were the subject of complaint in Kalashnikov, in order  to
     enable us to make findings on the  general  circumstances  in  Russian
     prisons at the present time.  One important and wide-ranging  document
     is the report of a visit to the Russian Federation carried out by  the
     European Committee for  the  Prevention  of  Torture  and  Inhuman  or
     Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT).  That report was published in
     June 2003, although the visit on which it was based  had  taken  place
     some eighteen months previously.  The published  report,  however,  is
     accompanied by the Russian Government's response, which is  not  dated
     in any very obvious way but must follow the CPT's  submission  of  the
     report in July 2002.  We have  also  looked  at  US  State  Department
     reports, CIPU reports, reports of relevant United  Nations  Committees
     in 2002 and 2003, an interim resolution of  the  Council  of  Europe's
     Committee of Ministers  following  the  judgment  in  Kalashnikov,  an
     Amnesty International report of 2002 and  the  most  recent  entry  in
     Amnesty International's yearbook, the United Nations High Commissioner
     for  Human  Rights'  Standard  Minimum  Rules  for  the  Treatment  of
     Prisoners, a letter to the European Union  from  Human  Rights  Watch,
     dated 19 March 2004, part of a  UNHCR  paper  on  claimants  from  the
     Russian Federation, dated May 2004, and other documents put before  us
     by the parties.

 12. There can be no conceivable  doubt  that  the  general  conditions  in
     prisons in the Russian  Federation  have  shown  improvements  in  the
     period since Kalashnikov himself was detained.  For this reason, older
     materials are of very little value save for  purposes  of  comparison.
     The Human Rights Watch letter, which  is  generally  critical  of  the
     human rights situation in the Russian Federation,  says  that  "As  of
     today, the only institution that has seen truly significant reform  is
     the prison system".

 13. Another feature of the materials we have read is that they  appear  to
     show that the conditions in SIZOs are liable to be rather  worse  than
     those in other detention facilities.  It will  be  recalled  that  the
     majority  of  Kalashnikov's  own  detention  was  in  a   SIZO.    The
     Appellant's case, however,  is  based  on  the  inevitability  of  him
     serving a prison sentence for crime.  Such sentences are not generally
     served in SIZOs, which are largely used for detention  pending  trial,
     although they may occasionally be used for holding sentenced prisoners
     before they are allocated to a  penal  colony.   One  of  the  factors
     specifically mentioned by the Court in Kalashnikov was the  length  of
     time for which the Claimant had been held in poor facilities.   It  is
     not, and indeed cannot be, part of the Appellant's case that he is  at
     risk of being held for a long time in a SIZO.

 14. The evidence before us shows  with  great  clarity  that  the  Russian
     prison system no longer suffers the severe  problems  of  overcrowding
     that were identified in Kalashnikov and by international observers  in
     the late 1990s and a little later.  The amount of space available  per
     prisoner now contrasts very favourably with that which Kalashnikov was
     allowed to occupy in his SIZO in 1995 to  1999.   The  CPT  delegation
     records at paragraph 45 that progress was being made in addressing the
     issue of overcrowding and recommends an allowance of 4 m2 per  person.
     In its reply, the Russian Government was  able  to  say  that  in  the
     Vladivostok SIZO 1, which the delegation had  visited,  the  allowance
     was now 3.8 m2.  In the US State Department report  for  2002,  it  is
     said that the introduction of the new Criminal Procedure  Code  (which
     came into force on 1 July 2002)  had  had  the  effect  of  "virtually
     eliminating the problem of overcrowding in [SIZOs]".   The  delegation
     of the Russian Federation reporting to the Human Rights  Committee  of
     the United Nations in October 2003  summarised  improvements  made  in
     Russian prisons since 1998.  Only three percent of  detention  centres
     (that is to say,  SIZOs)  were  currently  overcrowded  compared  with
     seventy percent in 2000.  Each  detainee  throughout  the  system  had
     access to 4 m2 of living space.   A  human  rights  service  had  been
     established to monitor the observance of human rights  in  the  prison
     system.   The  prison  establishments  were  open   to   international
     inspection.  In commenting  on  the  report,  another  member  of  the
     Committee remarked that although progress was commendable, some of the
     problems of prison conditions related to health and sanitation.  On  6
     November 2003, the Human  Rights  Committee  noted  that  it  remained
     concerned about  reports  of  poor  hygiene  and  violence  by  prison
     officers in some places  of  detention,  and  encouraged  the  Russian
     Government to continue to make  progress.   The  US  State  Department
     report for 2003 (published February 2004) again  records  the  virtual
     elimination of overcrowding, although there  is  reference  to  health
     concerns in detention facilities.  A minute from the  British  Foreign
     and Commonwealth Office, dated 9 June 2004, again records  a  fall  in
     the Russian prison population.  So far as the health of  prisoners  is
     concerned:

           "5.   Conditions in some prisons, and  especially  in  pre-trial
                 detention   centres   (SIZOs)   remain   very   poor   with
                 overcrowding, poor diet and little exercise contributing to
                 sanitation and health problems.  Deputy Head of the  Prison
                 Service, Alla Kuznetsova, said in October 2003 that  almost
                 three quarters of prisoners (590,000 people) suffered  from
                 serious  health  problems.   She  said  that  one-third  of
                 inmates had mental problems, 26,000 had syphilis, 1,500 had
                 hepatitis and 74,000 had TB.  Public health  measures  have
                 had some effect in stemming the spread  of  TB  (eg  Deputy
                 Minister Kalinin noted in November 2003 that the  incidence
                 of TB had reduced by 27% in 2003), but have  not  contained
                 the spread of HIV.  HIV/AIDS infection rates now  stand  at
                 around 37,000 prisoners, up from 5,000 in 2000."

 15. Ms Nicholas conceded, as she had to, that overcrowding cannot  now  be
     seen as  a  major  or  universal  problem  in  Russian  prisons.   She
     submitted, however, that the remaining problems, in  particular  those
     relating to health, were such as to show that  it  would  still  be  a
     breach of Article 3 to cause anyone to be subject to the prison regime
     in Russia.  Many of her arguments were, as  we  have  already  hinted,
     marred by being  based  on  out-of-date  material:   but  the  general
     concerns about health in Russian prisons are widely shared and we must
     treat them seriously.  We have just set out the figures  available  to
     the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on various diseases, and there  is
     no reason to suppose that they are not accurate.  There are also  some
     figures for deaths in detention.  The 2003 US State Department  report
     indicates a figure in former years of 10-11,000 deaths in custody  per
     year, of which about 2,500 were in SIZOs.  It is not  clear  what  the
     prison population was at the time  of  those  figures.   It  looks  as
     though it may have  been  over  one  million.   Despite  Ms  Nicholas'
     efforts to persuade us, we have no basis for drawing conclusions  from
     the number of deaths:  we do not know what number of deaths  would  be
     expected in a similarly-aged population not in custody, nor do we know
     to what extend the figures are  affected  by  the  health  profile  of
     criminals (rather than detainees) in the population.

 16. In its analysis of the facts in Kalashnikov,  the  European  Court  of
     Human  Rights  clearly  regarded  overcrowding  as  the  single   most
     important feature. What is equally important, as it seems  to  us,  is
     that their comments show that they regarded the overcrowding as having
     contributed to many of the other difficulties  which  Kalashnikov  had
     suffered.  In paragraphs 97 to 99, which we set out above, the need to
     share sleeping accommodation, the stuffy  atmosphere  and  the  toilet
     facilities  are  specifically  attributed  to  the  overcrowding   and
     "crammed" conditions.  The constant lighting in the cell was itself  a
     consequence of the need to sleep in shifts, because two-thirds of  the
     inmates would be awake at any time.  The  contracting  of  disease  by
     contagion is an obvious consequence of overcrowding,  and  infestation
     by pests is not very far removed from that cause.

 17. It is further notable that the Court commented that  the  overcrowding
     (apparently taken in isolation) raised an issue under Article  3,  but
     gave no indication that similar issues were raised by any of the other
     individual matters of which the Claimant complained.  Its judgment  is
     that the factors taken together, caused and compounded as they were by
     the primary problem of overcrowding, amounted to a breach  of  Article
     3.

 18. It is clear that an appellant who cannot rely on the overcrowded state
     of the prisons, as in our judgment the Appellant cannot today,  has  a
     much weaker argument.  He  is  deprived  of  the  major  factor  which
     enabled Kalashnikov to show that he was entitled to relief against the
     Russian Government.  But Ms Nicholas' problem is not merely  that  her
     argument is weaker than Kalashnikov's was:  it is  an  argument  of  a
     completely different nature.  An Appellant who could base  himself  of
     the situation as it was at the  time  of  Kalashnikov's  ill-treatment
     could quite properly say that subjecting him to prison  conditions  in
     Russia inevitably meant that he would be subject to a  combination  of
     circumstances which amounted to an affront to human dignity.  With the
     circumstances as they are today, however, the Appellant can say little
     more than that subjecting him to  prison  conditions  in  Russia  will
     (apparently, but by an unquantified amount)  raise  the  risk  of  his
     contracting certain medical conditions.

 19. The difference between these two arguments lies in two areas.   First,
     the link between prison and the danger is much more tenuous.  It is an
     essential part of  a  factual  matrix  within  which  Kalashnikov  was
     decided that the Russian  Government  admitted  that  Kalashnikov  was
     treated no differently from any other prisoner.  Thus it was  accepted
     that all prisoners were treated in the way that Kalashnikov  was,  and
     it would follow that any prisoner would be treated  in  the  way  that
     Kalashnikov was.  But it cannot be suggested today that every prisoner
     is necessarily going  to  suffer  harm  from  the  increased  risk  of
     disease.  Even on the most up-to-date figures, for example, it appears
     that nearly ninety-five percent of the prison population are  not  HIV
     positive, and even that figure means little without knowing  what  the
     incidence of the condition is in the general population in Russia.

 20. Secondly, the conditions to which Kalashnikov was subjected came as an
     inseparable combination, because the overcrowding led to all the other
     difficulties.  Without the overcrowding, there is no reason to suppose
     that the medical risks ought to be taken in combination at all.  There
     may be a heightened risk of contracting any of these  conditions;   it
     does not follow that there is a heightened risk of contracting all  of
     them.

 21. In fairness to the Appellant we should add two matters raised  by  the
     evidence which were not specifically mentioned by Ms Nicholas.   These
     are the harsh regime and the risk of ill-treatment by prison officers.
      So far as the regime is concerned, although  it  is  evidently  hard,
     particularly in penal colonies, it has not been suggested that  it  is
     so harsh as to amount in itself to a breach of Article  3.   (If  that
     were the case, it is extremely surprising that neither Kalashnikov nor
     any other judgment to which we have referred has said so.)   The  risk
     of ill-treatment by prison officers, which is referred to in  some  of
     the materials, does not appear to be anything other than  slight,  and
     the risk must be regarded in any event  as  reducing  because  of  the
     steps which are now being taken to oversee prisoners' rights  and  the
     conduct of prisons generally.  We think therefore that Ms Nicholas was
     right to ignore both these factors:  neither of  them  show  any  real
     increased risk to the Appellant of breach of his rights under  Article
     3.

 22. We return then to the matters upon which she did rely.  Taken  at  its
     best, the Appellant's argument is that conditions in  Russian  prisons
     are still rough and rather unhealthy.  If the risk of his  contracting
     various diseases is elevated by his being in prison, that  is  clearly
     not something which ought to be ignored, although it is right  to  say
     that we have no clear evidence of the level of any increase  of  risk.
     We very much doubt whether there is anything in the evidence before us
     which would entitle us to say that there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
     Appellant will  suffer  from  any  of  the  diseases  mentioned  as  a
     consequence of his detention in a Russian prison or penal colony.

 23. But even if he were able to establish a real risk of  that,  he  would
     not be entitled to succeed, because in order to succeed in  this  case
     he needs to show a real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.
     There is not in our view the  slightest  basis  for  saying  that  the
     conditions in Russian prisons today are such as to amount to a  breach
     of Article 3 for each prisoner.  The general argument, on which  alone
     the Appellant is entitled to rely in this appeal,  entirely  fails  on
     the basis of the facts as they are today, in contrast to the state  of
     Russian prisons at the time when Kalashnikov was detained.   For  that
     reason, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
