
ar          ST (Cessation - Medical Treatment) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00052


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing  : 17 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               23 March 2004

                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                                Mrs E Morton


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr J. McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent : Mr G. Vencatachellum, Counsel, instructed by  French  &
Co.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant is the Secretary  of  State.  He  appeals  against   the
      decision  of an Adjudicator, Mrs C.M. Graham, allowing the  appeal  of
      the respondent, a national of  Turkey,  against  the  decision  giving
      directions for removal following refusal to  grant  asylum.  To  avoid
      confusion the  respondent is hereafter referred to as the claimant.

2.    The Adjudicator found the claimant entirely credible. She accepted  he
      had been a low level supporter of the PKK  since aged fourteen who had
      been arrested and detained on four occasions  between  July  1998  and
      July 1999. She also  accepted that whilst in  detention  he  had  been
      subject to an  "appalling history of physical and  sexual  abuse"  and
      that,  as  a  result,  he  was  in  psychological  terms  a  seriously
      debilitated and vulnerable man.

3.    She refused the asylum appeal, however, because she considered   there
      had been a dramatic change  in  the  situation  in  Turkey  since  the
      claimant left in August 1999. She concluded that as the  claimant  was
      not an active member of the PKK  and had never claimed to be more than
      a low level supporter, he would not be at risk on return.

4.    Albeit allowing the  Article 3 grounds of appeal, the Adjudicator  did
      not do so because  of  any   concern  about  ill-treatment   from  the
      authorities on return. Her conclusions on this aspect of the case were
      entirely consistent with  those she reached on the asylum  claim:  She
      allowed it solely out of concern for the claimant's genuinely  serious
      psychological problems. She added:

             "The road to rehabilitation for the appellant will be  a  long
             and at times a distressing one, and one  throughout  which  he
             will need the continual support of those in whom he has placed
             his trust."

5.    That disposes of the first ground of appeal which was  to  the  effect
      that the Adjudicator had failed to show, following  Kacaj  01/TH/0634*
      why her Article 3 conclusions  differed  from  those  she  reached  in
      respect of the  asylum  claim. Ill health is one of the exceptions  to
      the Kacaj principle of common criteria.

6.    The second ground of appeal,  however,  was  more  pertinent.  It  was
      submitted that the Adjudicator had paid insufficient attention to  the
      finding of the European  Court of Human  Rights in the case of Bensaid
      v UK [2001] INLR 325 that future prognoses of  mental  conditions  are
      essentially speculative and that the priority of  treatment  available
      in the  Contracting State is not of itself determinative of an Article
      3 claim. It was contended that there is treatment  available  for  the
      claimant in Turkey and so the Adjudicator erred in finding that return
      would involve a real risk of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.

7.     There  is  one  aspect  of  this  submission  that  we  can   discard
      immediately.  The case of Bensaid does  not  contain  a  holding  that
      future prognoses of mental conditions are inherently speculative.  The
      Court did find the specific medical evidence in that case speculative,
      but it did not attempt to  generalise.  Plainly  medical  evidence  is
      capable of affording material evidence going to the  issue  of  future
      risk, albeit it will rarely if ever be determinative  of  that  issue,
      since medical experts are not  country  experts:  see  P  (Yugoslavia)
      [2003]  UKIAT  00017.   We  shall  return  to  the  question  of  what
      significance the medical evidence  in this case had below.

8.    However, the grounds do properly  identify  a  serious  error  in  the
      Adjudicator's assessment of risks arising from the claimant's  medical
      condition. The Adjudicator nowhere took into  account  the  extent  to
      which medical treatment would be available to the claimant in  Turkey.
      It is clear from the case of Bensaid  that if upon return  a  claimant
      is reasonably likely to be able to access relevant  medical  services,
      even if they are not in the  immediate  locality,  a  claimant  cannot
      show that return would expose him to a real risk of serious harm. That
      also accords with commonsense.

9.    In this case the Adjudicator had before  her  the  CIPU  Report  which
      included a description of medical services in Turkey.

10.   We recognise that even where there is  appropriate  medical  treatment
      available in the country of destination, there may  be  unusual  cases
      where the mere act of  disruption  or  cessation  of  ongoing  medical
      treatment in the receiving country can give rise to  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm.  To take an extreme case, removal of a person who is  on
      a life-support machine in the UK  and for whom  long-haul  air  travel
      would be too dangerous an option, may conceivably be able to show that
      removal would be contrary to his human rights, although we  would  add
      that we understand there to be Home Office  policies  in  place  which
      would  ensure such a  removal was not effected.

11.   Given that we  have  found  there  is  appropriate  available  medical
      treatment for this claimant in Turkey, the question  then is, was  his
      an unusual case where the mere act of cessation of  medical  treatment
      in the UK  would place him at Article 3 risk?

12.   There has been some criticism made by Mr McGirr in  this case  of  the
      efficacy of the medical evidence. He argued that Helen Bamber, OBE, OU
      (Essex), founder and former Director the Medical  Foundation  for  the
      Victims  of  Torture,  was  not  qualified  to  make   a   psychiatric
      assessment. In our view this was a quite  extraordinary  argument.  It
      may be that Helen Bamber is not  a  qualified  psychiatrist,  but  her
      experience and expertise in assessment  of  the  physical  and  mental
      problems experienced by victims of torture is virtually  unparalleled.
      It is also noteworthy that in this case her assessment was  based  not
      on a one-off interview but on a number of interviews with the claimant
      stretching over a period of some  eighteen  months,  between  December
      2001 and June 2003.  Furthermore, she  took steps  to  complement  her
      own initial  report  with  one  from  Dr  John   Rundle,  the  Medical
      Foundation's neurologist.

13.   The question remains, however, whether the  medical  assessments  made
      by  the   Medical   Foundation  demonstrate  that  the  mere  act   of
      disruption of the claimant's ongoing medical treatment would cross the
      Article 3 threshold, a threshold defined in  N  [2003]  EWCA  1369  as
      having to be extreme and exceptional.
14.   The claimant's condition  as assessed by Helen Bamber  in  the  latest
      Medical Foundation report was  as  follows.  He  was  still  suffering
      symptoms consistent with  Post  Traumatic Stress  Disorder.  She  made
      reference to an episode of self-harm and under the heading "  Suicidal
      ideation", she wrote: "On each occasion I have seen Mr Terbas  he  has
      expressed suicidal thoughts". Although his confused and anxious  state
      on  the  last  occasion  meant  that  Ms  Bamber  could  not  make   a
      comprehensive up-to-date assessment, she concluded that as  a   result
      of  his severe episodes of torture and  sexual  abuse  in   Turkey  he
      remained a "seriously disturbed and vulnerable man, still  preoccupied
      with aspect of his torture, particularly sexual torture ...".  As well
      as suffering from PTSD, he was depressed, expressed suicidal  thoughts
      and was a 'seriously traumatised  and  vulnerable  man   who  requires
      medical investigation and  long-term  psychological  treatment".   She
      noted that as Mr  Terbas  had  now  moved  to  London,  she  would  be
      arranging for  him to attend counselling sessions. She ended:   "Faced
      with the possibility of return to Turkey, I would  be  most  concerned
      for his well-being."

15.   As troubling as the  Medical  Foundation's assessment is,  we  do  not
      consider that it demonstrates that disruption of his  treatment  would
      in itself cause the claimant serious harm.  Ms Bamber does not specify
      to what extent her concerns about his return to Turkey related to  her
      opinion about medical  facilities there, but in any event she is  not,
      and does not purport to be, an expert on  Turkish  medical  facilities
      and standards.  And  in  any  event,  we  have  already  explained  by
      reference to objective country  evidence  that  there  were  would  be
      appropriate available treatment in Turkey for this claimant.

16.   The Adjudicator placed  emphasis  on  the  claimant's  need  for  "the
      continued support of those in whom he has placed his  trust".   It  is
      apparent that the claimant has built up trust  in Ms Bamber and  other
      medical experts he has sought help from in the UK. It  is  unfortunate
      -and remiss of the claimant's representatives - that we do not have up-
      to-date evidence about the counselling sessions Ms Bamber said in June
      2003 were to be arranged for the claimant. But,  even  assuming  these
      have in fact gone ahead and continue, there  is  nothing  to  indicate
      that it is crucial to the claimant's physical and moral integrity that
      his  treatment  be  continued  with  the  same  individuals.  We   are
      confident  that  the    Medical  Foundation,  who  is   one   of   the
      organisations which has participated  in the Istanbul Protocol and has
      a wide range of international contacts, could assist  in   signposting
      the claimant to appropriate medical experts in Turkey in a position to
      provide some continuity in the  nature and type of treatment currently
      received by this claimant.


17.   Accordingly we find that the Adjudicator was not entitled to  consider
      that the claimant could not resume appropriate medical treatment, in a
      climate of trust, in Turkey.  Accordingly there was  no  proper  basis
      for considering there was a serious risk to  the  claimant's  physical
      and moral integrity.

18.   For the above  reasons  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.






                                 H.H. STOREY
                                  CHAIRMAN
                           -----------------------
      1


