
ar

PS (Ltte - Internal Flight -  Sufficiency  of  protection)  Sri  Lankan  CG
[2004] UKIAT          00297


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 4 October 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             28 October 2004
Decision reserved
                                   Before:


                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                        Mr K Drabu  (Vice President)
                            Professor D B Casson




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Miss J. Richards, Counsel, instructed  by  the  Treasury
Solicitor
For the respondent : Mr N. Param-Jorthy, Counsel, instructed by S.  Satha  &
Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal concerns a Sri Lankan  national  of  Tamil  ethnicity  who
      claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution and of treatment in
      breach of his protected human rights under Article 3 of the   European
      Convention of both the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation  Tiger
      Tamils of Eelam (LTTE) in Sri Lanka.  His claimed fear  of  the  state
      authorities was rejected by reason of the changed circumstances  which
      now apply in Sri Lanka and there is no appeal before us in relation to
      that part of the Adjudicator's decision.  The  issues  before  us  are
      firstly, whether, as found by the Adjudicator, the appellant has  such
      a fear of the LTTE in his home area, and, if so, whether he may safely
      and reasonably relocate to another part of Sri Lanka where  either  he
      will have no such  fear  or  he  will  be  offered  a  sufficiency  of
      protection by the state authorities.  The first issue was not  pressed
      before us with any vigour by Miss Richards and this  determination  is
      primarily concerned with the second issue which  we  have  identified.
      This determination gives the Tribunal's country guidance on the second
      issue before us.

2.    The appellant was born on 12 June 1982  at  Uddaippu  in  Puttalam  in
      western Sri Lanka which is currently under  the  control  of  the  Sri
      Lankan government. He lived there with his family who were  fishermen.
      On 12 July  2001  LTTE  members  came  and  demanded  that  he  should
      transport goods for them by boat to Vidathalthivu and he agreed to  do
      so. He was arrested by  the  Sri  Lankan  navy  off  the  coast  there
      together with his cousin-brother (a term which denotes a first cousin)
      and they were both detained, initially at Pesalai camp  for  one  week
      and thereafter at Thalladi camp  where  they  were  interrogated  and,
      under torture, told the authorities of two places where the  LTTE  hid
      such goods. He said they were isolated places and that only he and his
      cousin, Jegan, knew where they were. Whilst at Thalladi camp two  LTTE
      members were brought in and he said that  they  admitted  loading  the
      goods at one of the sites identified.  Two months after  their  arrest
      he and Jegan were released as the result of payment of a bribe and the
      intervention of PLOTE  (Peoples'  Liberation  Organisation  for  Tamil
      Eelam) a Tamil organisation opposed to the LTTE and supportive of  the
      government.  Immediately following their release they were  sought  by
      the LTTE who killed Jegan whilst  the  respondent  was  staying  at  a
      friend's house in hiding in Uddaippu.

3.    In December 2001 he was once more arrested on suspicion  of  being  an
      LTTE member and held at the police station there, from  which  he  was
      released on payment of a further bribe by his family conditionally  on
      reporting to sign on at the police station every week. He did  not  do
      so but stayed in hiding at a friend's house for  two  or  three  weeks
      after his release. During this time his family arranged for  an  agent
      to take him out of the country and he left  Sri  Lanka  by  boat  from
      Negombo on 7 January 2002.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  11
      April 2002 and claimed asylum.

4.     Following  an  interview,  the  Secretary  of   State   refused   the
      respondent's asylum application for the reasons set out  in  a  letter
      dated 26 October 2002. On 7 November 2002 he issued directions for his
      removal to Sri Lanka as an illegal entrant after refusal of his asylum
      application.  The appellant appealed against  that  decision  on  both
      asylum and human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 14  August
      2003 by Mr R.J. Oliver, an Adjudicator.  He found him credible in  the
      account which we have set out above but rejected his claimed  fear  of
      persecution by the Sri Lankan authorities by reason of the  change  in
      country conditions which had then come about. As we have noted  above,
      there is no challenge to that part of his decision which is wholly  in
      accordance with current Tribunal jurisprudence on such  issues,  where
      the  Tribunal  has  held  that  it  will  be   only   in   exceptional
      circumstances that an ethnic Tamil will succeed in showing a real risk
      on return from the  government  authorities  following  the  ceasefire
      which  came  into  effect  in   February   2002.    Such   exceptional
      circumstances would usually require there to be cogent  evidence  that
      the appellant is wanted by the Sri Lankan authorities.

4.    So far as the appellant's fear of the  LTTE  was  concerned,  however,
      the Adjudicator concluded that the appellant would  be  at  risk  from
      them. He deals with this, after reviewing the specific  and  objective
      evidence as to the behaviour of the LTTE, in the  following  terms  at
      paragraphs 41 and 42 of his determination:

            '41. Having noted all these information [sic]  this  reinforces
                 my findings that the appellant  faces  a  serious  risk  of
                 being targeted and persecuted and even made 'to  disappear'
                 by the LTTE for being a traitor. I have noted that they  do
                 have informants and what happened to his  cousin's  brother
                 could happen to the appellant. I believe  that  they  would
                 have long memories and it only be a matter of time for  the
                 appellant to be tracked down  [sic].  His identity would be
                 known, I also find  that  the  appellant  could  not  avail
                 himself of the opportunity and the obligation  of  internal
                 flight because the LTTE  now  have  "a  free  run"  of  the
                 island.


            42.  I have also considered whether  they  will  be  agents  of
                 persecution. I have to  consider  whether  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities can afford  effective and sufficient protection
                 for the appellant but it seems to me by the nature  of  the
                 ruthlessness which the LTTE   are  still  capable  of,  the
                 appellant would not  be treated as an average   Sri  Lankan
                 citizen from whom  he  could  receive  the  protection  for
                 ordinary crime. The LTTE have shown themselves  capable  of
                 terrorist activities, they still are  capable  of  carrying
                 arms and explosives and also have, as  I  pointed  out,  an
                 effective network of informants.   The appellant  therefore
                 is over and above average risk and can therefore not  count
                 on  any  sufficient  or  effective   from  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities. [sic]'

5.    For those reasons, the Adjudicator allowed the appellant's  appeal  on
      both asylum and human  rights  (Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
      Convention apparently) grounds.

6.    The Secretary of State now appeals  with  leave  to  us  against  that
      decision and it is appropriate we set out the  grounds  of  appeal  in
      full.

             'The Adjudicator erred in law by allowing the appeal on asylum
             grounds and under human rights Articles 2 and 3 in particular:




             (i)  He erred in law in finding that the respondent would  not
                 be able to seek protection from the Sri Lankan  authorities
                 as he failed to consider Hovath [2000] ImmAR 552  [sic]  in
                 deciding whether there  was  effective  protection  of  the
                 respondent. There is no assessment of whether  there  is  a
                 functioning judicial system or a system in place  that  the
                 respondent could avail himself of. The Secretary  of  State
                 submits that following Hovath there  is  a  sufficiency  of
                 protection for the respondent.


             (ii)  Furthermore, the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  the  Sri
                 Lankan authorities could not  protect  the  respondent,  is
                 unreasonable  and  amounts  to  an  error  in   law.    The
                 Adjudicator states "... It seems to me by the nature of the
                 ruthlessness which the  LTTE  are  still  capable  of,  the
                 appellant would not be treated as  an  average  Sri  Lankan
                 citizen from  whom  he  could  receive  the  protection  of
                 ordinary crime" (paragraph 42).  However,  the  Adjudicator
                 does  not  give  any  reasons  as   to   why   the   LTTE's
                 "ruthlessness" would stop the Sri Lankan  authorities  from
                 offering  the  respondent  protection.    The   Adjudicator
                 concluded that the respondent is not an "exceptional  case"
                 (paragraph  31)  and  is  not  wanted  by  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities, therefore the Secretary of State submits  that
                 the Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  offer  the  respondent
                 protection.


             (iii) The Adjudicator erred in  law  as  he  has  not  made  a
                 credibility finding of  the  respondent  [sic]  or  clearly
                 stated which parts of the evidence he accepts or rejects as
                 he is obliged to  do  following  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
                 Karanakaran  [2000]  ImmAR  271  25   January   2000.   The
                 Adjudicator has stated he accepts the respondent's evidence
                 (paragraph 36) but has given no reason why he believes  the
                 respondent despite the challenges to the credibility in the
                 refusal letter.'

7.    Although by reason of the date of the  determination  this  appeal  is
      governed by the provisions of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  it
      was not heard by the Adjudicator until  after  7  June  2003  and,  by
      reason of the provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002 (Commencement  Order No. 4) Order  2003  (SI  No.  754),  the
      provisions of Section 101(4) of that Act apply to the appeal from  the
      Adjudicator to the Tribunal which  is  accordingly  restricted  to  an
      appeal on a point of law only.  Following and applying the ratio of CA
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1165,
      there must be a material error of law on the part of  the  Adjudicator
      before the Tribunal will have any jurisdiction to interfere  with  his
      decision but if such an error is established the  Tribunal  must  then
      consider the appeal on the basis of the facts applicable at  the  date
      of the hearing before it.

8.    We have already noted that the third ground of appeal was not  pressed
      before us with any vigour by Miss Richards.  In our view she was right
      not to do so. The Adjudicator gives detailed consideration  to  issues
      of  credibility  and  the  effect  of  the  objective  evidence   from
      paragraphs 28 to 40 of his decision, and whilst it is correct that  he
      does not at any point  say  that  he  finds  the  appellant  generally
      credible, that is undoubtedly  the  irresistible  inference  from  the
      specific findings which he does  make;   we  are  satisfied  that  the
      determination must be construed on such a basis. Moreover, contrary to
      what is asserted at ground (iii), it seems to us that the  Adjudicator
      has given adequate reasons as  to  why  he  accepts  the  respondent's
      account of his personal history. We therefore approach this appeal  on
      the basis that we are bound by the Adjudicator's factual  findings  in
      relation to the respondent's personal  history. On that basis, it  was
      conceded by Miss Richards that there was no arguable error of  law  in
      the Adjudicator's conclusion that the respondent would be at  risk  in
      his home area where his return would be reasonably  likely  to  become
      quickly  known.   The  Adjudicator's  reasoning  in  this  respect  is
      contained at paragraph 41 of the determination prior to the  reference
      to internal flight. As a matter of construction, it seems to  us  that
      the words 'His identity would be known' which appear at the  beginning
      of the last sentence of that paragraph, are more properly referable to
      the  reasoning  which  precedes  that  phrase  as  having   particular
      reference to the situation in his home area.  It does not seem  to  us
      that the position in relation to the lack of opportunity  of  internal
      flight or relocation is, as  a  matter  of  law,  adequately  reasoned
      simply by reference to the LTTE now having 'a free run of the island'.
      Whether they avail themselves of such a facility for the  purposes  of
      pursuing those in whom they may retain an adverse  interest  in  their
      home area is a matter which must depend upon the  objective  evidence,
      and there is nothing to suggest  that  the  Adjudicator  has  properly
      directed  himself  to  any  objective   evidence   to   support   this
      proposition.

9.    So far as the question of  whether  there  is  adequate  reasoning  in
      relation to  the  provision  of  sufficiency  of  protection,  it  was
      specifically conceded by Mr Param-Jorthy in his submissions  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to take into account those matters which  ought
      properly to be considered by reference  to  the  ratio  in  Horvath  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 AC 459 as aided by
      the analysis which has, since the Adjudicator's decision,  been  given
      by the Court of Appeal  in  R  (Bagdanavicius  and  Bagdanaviciene)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  1605.   We
      are satisfied that those omissions on the part of the Adjudicator  are
      material errors of law and that it is therefore appropriate for us  to
      reconsider all issues relating to internal relocation as at  the  date
      of this hearing.

10.   To that end we  have  considered  the  report  and  oral  evidence  of
      Professor Anthony Good as well as the substantial volume of  objective
      evidence filed by both parties to which we have been referred  in  the
      course of the hearing.  We are grateful  to  both  advocates  for  the
      assistance  which  they  have  provided  in  their  written  and  oral
      submissions to us.

11.   So far as they are relevant to the issues  before  us,  the  objective
      material which we have considered  includes  the  following  principle
      sources:

      (a)   UNHCR Background Paper on Refugees and Asylum Seekers  from  Sri
           Lanka issued in April 2004;


      (b)   The Home Office CIPU Country Report of April 2004;


      (c)   US State Department Report for 2003 published in February 2004


      (d)   Information Bulletins 32 and 36 from the University Teachers for
           Human  Rights  (Jaffna)  of  2  May  2003  and   29   May   2004
           respectively;


      (e)   Human Rights Watch Report of 7 August 2003 concerning  political
           killings during the ceasefire;

      (f)   Amnesty International  Open Letter of 12 August 2003  concerning
           recent politically motivated  killings  and  abductions  in  Sri
           Lanka;
      (g)   Professor Good's general report on his visit between  2  and  15
           August 2003 published on 29 August 2003;

      (h)   A further  report  from  Professor  Good  dated  27  March  2004
           expanding on his own visit report by reference to what was  said
           in R (Oppilamani) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
           [2004] EWHC 348 (Admin) and a further report dated 21  September
           2004  prepared  specifically  in   relation   to   the   present
           respondent;


      (i)   The Asian Human Rights Commission Report of 4 February 2004;


      (j)   Various newspaper reports up to and including 23 September  2004
           as supplied by both parties.

12.   The Secretary of State's position was summarised by Miss  Richards  in
      her skeleton argument in  three  general  submissions.  Firstly,  that
      although  there  inevitably  have  been  (and  may  continue  to   be)
      fluctuations in the peace process, the Sri Lankan  authorities  remain
      committed to the process  and  to  the  eradication  of  human  rights
      abuses.

13.   Secondly, that whatever the precise number of killings  which  may  be
      properly attributed to the LTTE in Colombo, the various reports do not
      provide any foundation for a conclusion that the LTTE is carrying  out
       serious human rights abuses in Colombo on a wide scale.  The  targets
      of those killings  which had been reported appear to have been  mainly
      senior members of parties opposed to the  LTTE,  police  and  military
      informants and close aides of Colonel Karuna, a senior LTTE member.

14.   Thirdly, that given  this  background,  the  respondent  could  safely
      relocate to Colombo  or  to  any  other  government  controlled  areas
      outside the north and east of the  country  and  away  from  his  home
      region, where not only would  he  not  be  at  real  risk  of  adverse
      attention from the LTTE, but where there would  be  a  sufficiency  of
      protection available to him from the state authorities in any event.

15.   The broad thrust of Mr Param-Jorthy's submissions  is  that  there  is
      sufficient evidence both of intent and ability on the part of the LTTE
      to target their opponents to demonstrate that there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that they will seek to target the respondent in  government
      controlled areas of Sri Lanka outside his home area. He relies on  the
      summary killing of Jegan immediately after he and the respondent  were
      released from army detention in October 2001 as  illustrative  of  the
      degree to which the LTTE are intent on harming  the  respondent.   The
      fact that there have been some killings in  Colombo  and  other  areas
      outside the factual control of the LTTE is, he  submits,  illustrative
      of their ability to strike at will throughout Sri Lanka  since  travel
      restrictions have been substantially eased.  As to the ability of  the
      state to provide a sufficiency of  protection  to   its  citizens,  he
      submits that the evidence is that the police allow the LTTE  generally
      to act with impunity and that there is evidence that  the  state  will
      not actively pursue the perpetrators for fear of upsetting  the  peace
      process.    Whilst he concedes that the essential  machinery  for  the
      provision of a sufficiency of protection exists, it is his  case  that
      it is not applied.

16.   There  are  a  number  of  generalised  statements  in  the  objective
      material which go some way to support his  submissions.  For  example,
      the April 2004 UNHCR Background Paper contains the following  passages
      at paragraphs   2.11 and  2.12  as  to  the  possibility  of  internal
      relocation:

           '2.11 Since  the  ceasefire  agreement  came  into  force,  most
                 checkpoints between  the  government  and  LTTE  controlled
                 areas  have  been  removed.   The  checkpoints  that   were
                 approved after the MoU  [the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
                 which led to the ceasefire] between the government and  the
                 LTTE are listed in the ceasefire  agreement  and  generally
                 adhered to.  However, although it is occasionally  possible
                 for high ranking members  of  the  LTTE  to  seek  national
                 protection  when  fleeing  the  LTTE,  there  are  numerous
                 reports  of  suspicious  deaths  of  former  LTTE   cadres,
                 including persons  who  have  sought  national  protection,
                 occurring in government controlled areas.  In  cases  where
                 inter-Tamil fighting occurs, the government stand  has been
                 to not intervene  as  any  such  intervention  would  be  a
                 violation of the ceasefire.


           2.12  In general it is no longer possible to  use  the  internal
                 flight  option  for  Tamils  fleeing  the   LTTE   as   the
                 organisation is present in every part of  the  country  and
                 has a well developed information/ intelligence network.'

      The difficulty with that passage is that it is  not  sourced  and  its
      generalisations do not appear to be borne out  by  what  is  contained
      earlier in the paper.

17.   At paragraph 44, the paper records that in 2002  and  2003  'The  LTTE
      reportedly committed several unlawful killings' [our emphasis] and  at
      paragraph 46 records that  of  its  political  rivals,  the  EPDP  and
      EPRLF(V) have had thirty-two 'members or supporters killed or missing'
      since the ceasefire, PLOTE 'at least fifteen members or former members
      killed or injured' (of which at least five deaths and six injuries are
      accounted for in a single bombing incident in May 2003); and that TELO
      has 'at least four members killed or missing'.  All  these  are  rival
      Tamil political organisations who have been  generally  supportive  of
      the Sri Lankan government, but there is no breakdown as  to  how  many
      are claimed as killed, or injured or missing, or where these incidents
      are said to have occurred.

18.   This information appears to have been derived from  the  Human  Rights
      Watch paper of 7 August 2003 and the Amnesty International Open Letter
      of 12 August 2003. The former records twelve killings  of  current  or
      former prominent members of  the  four  Tamil  pro-government  parties
      referred to. Of these all but one were in the north and  east  of  Sri
      Lanka and the report refers to them as  being  politically  motivated.
      The Amnesty International  letter of 12 August 2003 refers to  twenty-
      two documented politically motivated killings but the only  two  cited
      specifically are amongst those referred to in the Human  Rights  Watch
      paper. The Amnesty International  Letter says:

             'Since the signing of the agreement there have  been  tens  of
             killings, abductions and other  human  rights  abuses  against
             civilians in Sri Lanka.'

      It is clear from the context that these are identified as  politically
      motivated acts against prominent members or  former  members  of  pro-
      government Tamil groups but it is not suggested that the total  number
      of killings exceeds twenty-two on this information. Although the  LTTE
      are claimed to be  responsible,  it  is  also  noted  that  they  have
      consistently denied responsibility.

19.   Dealing with the number of killings, Miss Richards helpfully  provided
      details of all those that occurred in Colombo or  its  environs  since
      the ceasefire (the earliest is in  fact  in  July  2002)  down  to  23
      September 2004, by reference  and  cross-reference  (since  many  were
      covered in more than one source) to all the objective evidence  before
      us, including Professor Good's report.   She said  that  she  believed
      this list to be exhaustive, and this was not  disputed  by  Mr  Param-
      Jorthy.  There were fourteen separate incidents  but  one  involved  a
      suicide bomber who killed four police  officers  as  well  as  herself
      (early July 2004) and another was the murder  of  eight  LTTE  members
      (late July 2004) so that there were in all twenty-five deaths  in  the
      Colombo area during this period  including  the  suicide  bomber.   Of
      these five were police officers: the four killed in the  suicide  bomb
      incident and a senior police intelligence officer shot in  his  police
      station on 6 July 2003 by  a  Tamil  double  agent;   nine  were  LTTE
      members (one on 27 April 2004 and the eight referred to above), all of
      whom were believed to be associates of Colonel Karuna and were related
      to the internal schism in the LTTE identified  with  him;   four  were
      current or former members of anti-LTTE Tamil parties who  had  a  high
      profile, either politically or because of their association  with  Sri
      Lankan military intelligence, and in  one  case  allegedly  also  with
      Colonel Karuna; a further four were former LTTE members, one  of  whom
      was from the intelligence section and in course of  seeking  to  leave
      the country (3 December 2002), two of whom had subsequently worked for
      the government Directorate of Military Intelligence and  the  last  of
      whom had become an outspoken opponent of the LTTE.  Of  the  remaining
      two, one was the subject of the first recorded incident in  July  2002
      when the  ceasefire  was  in  its  early  stages.   He  had  perceived
      connections with the EPDP and had  left  his  home  area  for  Colombo
      because he refused to comply with threats of extortion  by  the  LTTE.
      The other dates from September 2002, when the victim was a  Tamil  who
      had been settled in Australia and had refused to allow the  temple  in
      Australia, of which he was a trustee, to succumb to extortion  threats
      from the LTTE representatives there. He was killed when he came to Sri
      Lanka for a holiday.

20.   Based on this analysis, it was Miss Richards' submission that all  the
      Tamils  killed  were  either  high  profile  politicians  and   former
      politicians or current (in the case of those considered associates  of
      Colonel Karuna) or former LTTE members who  were  either  formerly  of
      some standing in the LTTE or had subsequently acted in such a  way  as
      the LTTE would consider them renegades and traitors.

21.   In order to put  the  scale  of  such  killings  in  perspective,  she
      pointed out that the total population  of  Sri  Lanka  was  some  17.5
      million of which 18% (approximately 3,150,000) are Tamils (CIPU Report
      paragraph 2).  In Colombo itself,  there  are  estimated  to  be  some
      400,000 Tamils originating from the north and east of  Sri  Lanka,  of
      whom some 250,000  have  been  resident  since  before  1983  and  the
      remainder have come during the  civil  strife,  principally  from  the
      Jaffna area.  There are additional concentrations of Tamils in greater
      Colombo as well as in Puttalam where the respondent comes  from  (CIPU
      Report paragraph 6.58).  As will be seen from  the  earlier  analysis,
      the total number of Tamils killed  in  or  around  Colombo  since  the
      ceasefire, excluding the suicide bomber, is nineteen, an insignificant
      number when placed against the 150,000 Tamils who have come to Colombo
      by reason of the conflict.

22.   Quite apart from the issue of  whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that
      someone of adverse interest to the LTTE in  their  home  area  may  be
      targeted if they relocate to Colombo or other areas outside north  and
      east Sri Lanka, there is the  further  question  of  whether,  in  any
      event, the Sri Lankan authorities provide a sufficiency of  protection
      to their citizens outside these areas. It is inherent  in  what  UNHCR
      says at paragraphs 2.11 and 2.12 of its paper that  it  questions  the
      existence of a sufficiency of protection but the basis of doing so  is
      by no means clear from the paper as a  whole.

23.   At paragraph 19, it confirms that there  is  a  60,000  strong  police
      force responsible for internal security 'in most areas of the country'
      which was formerly controlled by the Ministry of Interior but  is  now
      intended to be under a new separate Ministry of Internal Security.  At
      paragraphs 128 to 130  the  judicial  system  is  described  as  being
      independent and properly constituted with the initial criminal process
      commenced in magistrates courts, with provision for trial by  jury  of
      the more important  criminal cases in the High  Court.  At  paragraphs
      151 to 154 the paper says this:

           '151.  Before  the  ceasefire  agreement  civilians  deaths  and
                 injuries on the  Jaffna  Peninsula  were  reported  in  the
                 hundreds, but  casualty  figures  could  not  be  confirmed
                 because relief agencies and journalists  were  barred  from
                 the hardest hit  areas.  On  the  Peninsula,  and  also  in
                 eastern Sri Lanka, many conflict related  deaths  were  the
                 result of errant shells and gunshots.


           152.   Since the ceasefire agreement some  paramilitary  actors,
                 as  well  as  the  LTTE,  have  continued  the  traditional
                 political  killings  and  disappearance.  The  Sri   Lankan
                 Monitoring Mission (SLMM) issued a press statement  in  May
                 2003 stating that the continuing attacks  and  killings  of
                 members  of   political   parties   and   locally   elected
                 representatives pose a serious  threat  to  the  ceasefire.
                 SLMM  further  stated  that   various   political   parties
                 operating in the north and east have formally complained to
                 SLMM due to repeated threats and attacks on their  offices,
                 individual  members  and   their   families   and   elected
                 representatives.


           153.  Although LTTE was pointed out as a main perpetrator in the
                 majority, but not all of the attacks, police investigations
                 rarely led to  the   accusations  being  proven.  The  SLMM
                 stated that the police seem to  have  had  difficulties  in
                 arresting the perpetrators and that available witnesses  to
                 the crimes are too  afraid  to  come  forward  as  fear  of
                 repercussions seems to be  an  everyday  concern  for  some
                 people in the north and east.


           154.   In addition, in the autumn of 2003,  international  human
                 rights groups publicly appealed to  actors  in  Sri  Lanka,
                 including the police forces  and  the  LTTE,  after  having
                 received confirmation that the political killings continued
                 with impunity. UNHCR  field officers who continue to report
                 on  disappearances  and  killings  in  2003  confirm  these
                 findings. More than  forty  cases  of  suspected  political
                 killings after the ceasefire  have  been  reported  to  the
                 UNHCR field office.'

      What seems to us noteworthy about this passage is that the first three
      paragraphs are clearly concerned with the situation in north and  east
      Sri Lanka.  The reference in paragraph  154  is  again  to  the  Human
      Rights Watch and Amnesty International  documents previously  referred
      to.  It is again instructive to look at what these documents  actually
      say.

24.   Human Rights Watch says of the ceasefire:

             '... It has also given the LTTE  free  access  to  towns  like
             Batticaloa, Jaffna, and  Trincomalee,  previously  under  army
             control,  for  the  purpose  of  opening  political   offices.
             Although the pact prohibits LTTE cadres from carrying arms  in
             these areas, prohibition is not well  enforced.  According  to
             critics, the LTTE's new political offices have  become  useful
             points from which to coordinate surveillance, recruitment, and
             extortion and, when  necessary,  the  assault,  abduction  and
             assassination of rivals.'

25.   The fact that the reference is to the situation in north and east  Sri
      Lanka is underlined  in  the  passage  dealing  with  the  Sri  Lankan
      Monitoring Mission, which does not have  direct  investigative  powers
      comparable to those of the police  and  in  any  case  considers  them
      outside its remit, where it says:

             'The police remain primarily responsible  for  investigations,
             but they have often failed to undertake them. With the current
             ceasefire in place and  the  military  confined  to  barracks,
             police are once again the main security force  active  in  the
             north and east. But they are relative strangers to  the  areas
             they police and are vulnerable to attacks should   hostilities
             resume. The result is that  they  either  forge  relationships
             with the more powerful and locally influential LTTE, or try to
             stay out of the way. Police officers are well aware that  when
             the LTTE broke the  fifteen  month  ceasefire  in  1990,  LTTE
             forces overran police stations throughout the north and  east,
             abducting and killing hundreds of police officers.'

26.   It later cites specific examples to support this general statement  as
      to the position in the north and east  which  were  both,  of  course,
      formerly under the  control  of  the  LTTE  and  are  areas  of  Tamil
      predominance, but these  issues  relate  largely  to  the  operational
      effectiveness of the police and their ability to effect arrests rather
      than a failure to carry out investigations which the report refers  to
      as being carried out in most examples cited. These investigations  had
      also led to two arrest warrants being issued by the  local  magistrate
      in one of the cases cited.

27.   The Amnesty International  Open Letter makes it clear that in  respect
      of each of the specific examples it gives, the police are carrying out
      investigations but complains that there has been  a  failure  to  take
      measures 'to guarantee the safety of those who are most at risk' or to
      bring anyone to trial. The letter says that:

             'Amnesty International recognises the  difficulties  that  the
             SLMM  and  the  police  face  in  investigating  these  cases,
             particularly in regard to securing the testimony of witnesses'

      But it says in cases where witnesses who claim to be able to  identify
      those responsible are willing to give evidence: ' ... both the  police
      and  SLMM   should,  if  they  have  not  already  done  so,  initiate
      investigations'. It goes on to say that cooperation of witnesses  'can
      only be achieved in  the  majority  of  cases  by  creating  a  secure
      environment free from the fear of reprisals' and complains that :

             'The  SLMM  and  police  need  to  ensure  at   the   earliest
             opportunity the systematic protection of witnesses involved in
             these investigations in order to guarantee  their  safety  and
             facilitate the collection of  evidence.  In  addition,  police
             should provide protection to those who request it.  ...'

28.   In her opening  submissions,  Miss  Richards  helpfully  analysed  the
       objective evidence as to police responses in the case of the killings
       in Colombo which she had identified as we  have  recorded  above,  as
       well as their general response to the security situation there.

29.   In the case of the four police victims of the suicide bomber in  early
      July 2004, her intended victim had been a government minister  and  it
      was following police intervention that she  had  detonated  her  bomb,
      killing four  of  the  investigating  officers  in  the  process.  Her
      accomplice had been arrested and when brought  before  the  court  had
      volunteered a full confession, leading to her remand  in  custody.   A
      special police team was then deployed to trace the  LTTE  members  who
      had brought the women to Colombo and had also arrested a further  four
      suspects employed by the government and alleged to have been  involved
      in issuing forged identity cards. They were also remanded  in  custody
      by the court.

30.   The killing of the  police  intelligence  officer  in  June  2003  had
      resulted in the capture of the killer during his attempted flight from
      the scene.

31.   In the case of  the  LTTE  members  believed  to  be  associated  with
      Colonel Karuna (27 April 2004 and late July 2004  respectively)  there
      were police investigations but in the earlier  case  the  gunmen  were
      unidentified.  In the  latter  case,  when  eight  high  ranking  LTTE
      members had been attacked in  a  safe  house  managed  by  the  Karuna
      faction,  a  major  police  investigation  was  instituted  under  the
      direction of  a  magistrate  who  had  ordered  the  arrest  of  those
      suspected.

32.   Of the current or former members of anti-LTTE Tamil parties, all  were
      the subject of police investigations. In the case of 'PLOTE Mohan' (31
      July 2004), there are extensive reports of the  police  investigations
      by Colombo crime division in newspaper reports, including reports that
      at least one of those sought in connection with the investigation  had
      fled to an LTTE controlled area, and a special police  team  had  been
      dispatched to Batticaloa to pursue lines of enquiry.

33.   In the case of the four LTTE members, it is clear  that  there  was  a
      police investigation into the earliest recorded incident  (3  December
      2002) but the references to the second incident (26/27 April 2003) are
      sparse and do not refer to the police. Of the two incidents in  August
      2004, there is no direct reference  to  police  investigation  in  the
      first case in the newspaper reports, but in  the  second  case  it  is
      clear from reports that there are intensive  investigations  to  which
      two police teams were assigned (Sunday Observer 29 August 2004).  This
      report makes it clear that the Minister of Public  Security,  Law  and
      Order is directly  involved  in  what  are  referred  to  as  reprisal
      killings in Colombo and elsewhere following 'exposure of the army safe
      house since when names of informants have been revealed to the  enemy.
      The informants are now being hunted and killed  indiscriminately  ...'
      As to the last two killings in July and September  2002  respectively,
      there is only a single report in the first case which  is  very  brief
      and does not make any reference  to  police  investigations.   In  the
      second case, concerning a Tamil who had returned from Australia for  a
      holiday,  there  is  a  brief  contemporary  press  report  quoted  by
      Professor Good which makes it clear  that  there  are  ongoing  police
      investigations which had to  date  identified  that  the  killing  was
      concerned with the failure to pay protection money.

34.   In regard to general police  responses,  Miss  Richards  directed  our
      attention to a series of extracts from newspaper  reports.  The  first
      was from The Island dated 2 February 2004 recording the arrest by  the
      police of twelve Tamils suspected of being members  or  ex-members  of
      the LTTE in the course of investigations on an attack which had  taken
      place not long before on two policemen near a cinema  in  the  Colombo
      area.  From the same source  there  was  a  report  of  1  April  2004
      recording the arrest of four members of the Karuna faction of the LTTE
      with weapons following routine  checks  of  vehicle  movements.  Those
      arrested were to be produced in court. The Daily News of 28 April 2004
      records that the Inspector General of Police had requested the  public
      to  be  more  vigilant  and  provide  information  of  suspected  LTTE
      activities following reports of the Karuna  and  Prabhakaran  factions
      (the LTTE faction opposing Karuna) being in Colombo, which  also  made
      it clear that operationally  the  process  of  identifying  cadres  of
      either  faction  and  arresting  them  was  difficult  without  public
      cooperation. The Island on 23 May 2004 reported  that  special  police
      teams were on a massive hunt for Colonel Karuna's army in Colombo  and
      the fear that attacks between the two LTTE factions were spreading  in
      the south of  the  island.  It  recorded  that  special  police  anti-
      terrorist squads were on  the  alert  for  the  movement  of  the  two
      factions. The Daily News  of  2  August  2004  reported  that  in  the
      investigations into the killing of PLOTE Mohan (see above) the Colombo
      Crime Division had taken over  investigations  and  had  dispatched  a
      special police team to Batticoala to trace the mastermind  behind  the
      killing, a suspect whom they learned had left his lodgings in  Colombo
      immediately after the incident. It noted also  that  the  assassinated
      man was a close associate of Colonel Karuna.

35.   Finally, Miss Richards pointed out that the situation now  in  Colombo
      could be contrasted with that which had applied before  the  ceasefire
      where, in its section dealing with the position from 1994  until  that
      date, the CIPU Report made it clear that there  had  been  substantial
      deaths and injuries caused by penetration of suicide bombers into  the
      Colombo area, when it was clear that there had been an ability on  the
      part of the LTTE before the restrictions on travel were eased to  make
      effective attacks in the south when they wished to do so. By reference
      to paragraphs 4.14 to 4.32 of the report, there had, between  November
      1995 and September 2000, been a total of over  300  killed  and  2,400
      injured in ten recorded incidents in Colombo, as  well  as  the  major
      military assault on  the  Sri  Lankan  Air  Force  base  and  adjacent
      international airport outside Colombo  on  24  July  2001  when  eight
      military aircraft and six passenger planes were destroyed or  severely
      disabled.

36.   We turn now to Professor Good's written and oral evidence  before  us.
      Whilst all three written reports are concerned with general issues  in
      relation to the whole of the country, we have  considered  only  those
      parts of the report which are relevant to the issue of whether a Tamil
      with a localised fear of the LTTE in  his home  area  may  safely  and
      reasonably relocate to Colombo and whether there is a  sufficiency  of
      protection provided there by the Sri Lankan authorities. As to whether
      it is reasonable - that is not unduly harsh under the Robinson test  -
      to relocate there, the Tribunal has made  it  clear  in  many  earlier
      determinations that in general terms it is the considered view of  the
      Tribunal on the objective evidence, having particular  regard  to  the
      substantial  Tamil  population  in  Colombo  and  its  environs,  that
      relocation there for a Tamil is not in principle  unduly  harsh.  That
      was not a proposition which was in issue  before  us  insofar  as  the
      generality of Tamils from the  north  and  east  and  other  areas  of
      substantial LTTE influence are concerned.  The issues before us depend
      entirely on whether the localised fear of the  LTTE  can  arguably  be
      said to extend to Colombo and its environs on the  objective  evidence
      and, if so, whether the state will in any event provide a  sufficiency
      of protection to its citizens in  that  area  so   that  international
      surrogate protection is not arguably needed.

37.   The earliest in point of time of  Professor  Good's  reports  followed
      his fact finding visit to Sri Lanka between  2  and  15  August  2003,
      which was intended by  him to be in the public domain as he made clear
      in his second report prepared specifically to deal  with  issues  that
      had been raised by Charles J in Oppilamani in which the  first  report
      and its effect had been considered. The third report, of 21  September
      2004, was prepared specifically for the purposes of the appeal  before
      us.

38.   Professor Good holds the Chair of Social Anthropology in  Practice  at
      the University of Edinburgh where he was Head of Department of  Social
      Anthropology until 1999. He also holds  doctorates  in  chemistry  and
      social anthropology from the  universities  of  Edinburgh  and  Durham
      respectively and is a past committee  member  of  the  Association  of
      Social Anthropologists of the Commonwealth which  he  describes  as  a
      leading professional body of his  discipline.  His  knowledge  of  Sri
      Lanka is derived in part from holding the  position of senior lecturer
      in physical chemistry between 1970-72  at  the  (then)  University  of
      Ceylon, and he had also lived for some years in the Tamil  Nadu  State
      in south India and continues to make regular visits to both countries.
      He teaches, writes and researches on south Asian society, history  and
      culture with special reference to Tamils and was last in Sri Lanka for
      the purposes of preparation  of  his  first  report.  He  has  written
      numerous reports for use  in  asylum  and  human  rights  appeals  and
      publishes academically on general issues as to expert evidence.

39.   The only relevant section in the first report for the purpose of  this
      appeal is at paragraphs 10 to 15 dealing with the  security  situation
      in Colombo, partly by reference to his  personal  observations  (which
      are limited to a large reduction in  checkpoints  since  his  previous
      visit in 1996 although he refers to recent tightening of  security  in
      Colombo and increased numbers of temporary checkpoints) and  otherwise
      on the basis of three named informants, all of whom are Tamil lawyers:
      two are respectively the founder of and associated with the Forum  for
      Human Dignity, the former being an EPDP Parliamentary  candidate;  the
      third informant is also an MP for Jaffna District representing the All
      Ceylon Tamil Congress. On the basis of information provided to him  by
      those informants, he says this at  the  relevant  paragraphs  in  this
      section:

            '12.  A senior officer in the  police  department  said  a  few
                 months ago that the police believed several LTTE groups  to
                 be operating in Colombo. The Freedom of Movement consequent
                 upon the ceasefire has facilitated Colombo's penetration by
                 the LTTE. They extort money from Tamil  businesses  in  the
                 city, and there has been a recent series of killings by the
                 LTTE in Colombo and elsewhere for people whom they  see  as
                 enemies,  particularly  those  they   believe   have   been
                 informing on them. There are however  no  effective  police
                 investigations  into  political  murders  by  the  LTTE  at
                 present. The authorities do not wish to arrest LTTE members
                 committing political  assassinations  in  Colombo,  because
                 they are anxious to do  nothing  which  might  disrupt  the
                 peace process.


            13.   In recent weeks, however, the police and army  have  been
                 carrying out   numerous  roundups  in  Colombo,  especially
                 after the killing of a senior CID intelligence  officer  in
                 Mount  Lavinia  by  an  LTTE  operative  who  had  won  the
                 officer's  trust  by  working  for  him  as  an  ostensible
                 informant. In one round-up  alone  about  600  Tamils  were
                 detained. These round-ups were carried out  by  the  police
                 and army jointly, and those detained  were  released  after
                 questioning.  Raids and round-ups focussing on Tamil single
                 "lodges" in the city are weekly events at present, with the
                 result that  Tamils  are  not  safe  in  certain  areas  of
                 Colombo, such as Maradana, Grand Pass and Wellawatte. ...


            15.  There have been about one  hundred  murders  by  the  LTTE
                 since the  ceasefire,  including  about  fifty  murders  of
                 informants. The fact that so many killings have occurred in
                 Colombo and other government  controlled  areas,  indicates
                 that the dangers of those regarded as enemies by  the  LTTE
                 is not confined to LTTE controlled areas.'

40.   That report was before Charles J in Oppilamani  and  these  paragraphs
      are quoted in paragraphs 36 to 38 of his judgment. He is also referred
      to paragraphs 89 and 90 of the first  report  which  are  set  out  at
      paragraph  31  of  his  judgment  where  Professor  Good  repeats  his
      assertion as to it being government policy  that  even  in  government
      controlled areas a blind eye is  to  be  turned  to  LTTE  attacks  on
      political rivals and that  'the  government  will  go  on  failing  to
      provide adequate protection to Tamils opposing the LTTE, or  who  have
      fallen foul of the LTTE, because it is not motivated to do so.'

41.   Mrs Oppilamani, like the present respondent, claimed to be of  adverse
      interest to the LTTE and feared that she would not be safe  from  them
      in Colombo if returned there. In her case, the Secretary of State  had
      certified her claim  for  asylum  as  being  clearly  unfounded  under
      Section 94(2) of the 2002 Act and she sought judicial review  of  that
      decision.   Charles J dealt  with  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
      evidence on Professor Good in the following terms at paragraphs 43  to
      45 of his judgment:

            '43.  At the heart of the reasoning of the Secretary of  State,
                 and the submissions made on his behalf, is the  point  that
                 the  information  and  evidence  as  to  specific  attacks,
                 killings or persecution in the Colombo area  are  extremely
                 limited and that the  more  generalised  statements  in  Dr
                 Good's reports have to be read against that background.


            44.  The generalised statements if taken in isolation and  thus
                 without that background would, it seems to  me,  found  the
                 first stage of the  claimant's  position,  namely  that  it
                 cannot be said that no Adjudicator would  by  reference  to
                 those paragraphs find that there was  an  insufficiency  of
                 state protection.


            45.  However, it seems to me that when those passages are  read
                 against  the  source  of  the  information  contained   and
                 identified in Dr Good's report and the very limited  number
                 of  incidents  in  Colombo   that   can   be   pointed   to
                 specifically, namely (i) the two I have  identified  [which
                 were both derived from the Human  Rights  Watch  report  we
                 have considered above] and (ii) the  additional  unspecific
                 incident in the footnote  to  paragraph  12  of  Dr  Good's
                 report  [which  refers  to  examples  of  reports  on  LTTE
                 political killings in Colombo which could not be identified
                 by any source reference before Charles J and reports as  to
                 'thirty-six known political killings by the LTTE across the
                 country since the MOU came into effect'] (that counsel  for
                 the Secretary of State has not been able to track down),  I
                 have reached the conclusion that an application of the test
                 set out by Lords Clyde and  Hope  [in  Horvath],  which  is
                 based on a system, leads to the result that no  Adjudicator
                 could properly, on the basis of the  information  presently
                 before me, conclude that  there  was  an  insufficiency  of
                 state protection.'

42.   The second written report, produced to us by the Secretary  of  State,
      was one dated 27 March 2004 prepared for a specific claimant in  which
      Professor Good refers to what Charles J said in  Oppilamani.  In  that
      report he said that the first report was  explicitly  confined  almost
      entirely to the matters 'that I was told  (in which case the source is
      specified) or observed for myself during my visit'.  This report seeks
      to deal at paragraphs 13 to 40 with the issues raised by Charles J  on
      the basis of identifying specific examples of killings in Colombo, all
      of which are  included in the extensive survey made by  Miss  Richards
      to which we have referred in some  detail  above.  On  that  basis  he
      effectively repeats the views which he had previously expressed in the
      first  report  which  we  have  already  set  out.    Whilst  properly
      acknowledging that it would be improper for him to express any view as
      to whether or not the legal test for sufficiency of protection is  met
      in any particular case, he maintains his  views  previously  expressed
      and adds:

            '28. What is beyond doubt is that the ceasefire and lifting  of
                 the ban have increased  the  LTTE's  freedom  of  manoeuvre
                 significantly. The greater the progress in any future peace
                 talks,  the  greater  would  be  the  single   'legitimacy'
                 accorded to the LTTE and its activities,  and  the  greater
                 its ability to strengthen its presence in Colombo.


            29.  Taking into account all the above evidence,  it  is  clear
                 that opportunities for the LTTE to intimidate, abduct,  and
                 even kill those it perceives as enemies  or  traitors  have
                 been significantly enhanced by the ceasefire, in Colombo as
                 well as in areas in the north  and  east  ostensibly  under
                 government control.


            30.   If the court accepts that [the subject  of  the  specific
                 report] does have reason to fear the  LTTE  (and  I  repeat
                 that I do not know  the  circumstances  of  his  case)  the
                 objective evidence summarised above indicates that he would
                 be at risk in Colombo as well as elsewhere in Sri Lanka. It
                 is clear that the government can offer him no protection at
                 all in LTTE controlled areas, and that even in Colombo  the
                 LTTE has targeted and executed a number of persons.'

43.   The third report was, as we have noted, prepared specifically for  the
      appeal before us.  It was the view of Miss  Richards,  with  which  we
      concur, that paragraphs 75 to 98 of that report, which  deal  with  Dr
      Good's views as to risks for Tamils from the government   authorities,
      are irrelevant  to  the  issues  with  which  we  are  concerned.   At
      paragraphs 16 to 37 of the  report,  Professor  Good  deals  with  the
      question  of risk from the LTTE, including risk in Colombo.   In  that
      section we hope we do no injustice to Professor Good by saying that it
      largely repeats the views which we have set out in the  extracts  from
      the earlier reports above, adding further examples but none  which  do
      not appear in the  comprehensive  analysis  by  Miss  Richards  as  to
      killings in Colombo since the ceasefire. The core of his argument  is,
      however, perhaps contained at paragraph 35  of  the  report  where  he
      says:

             '... In my opinion, however, any debate over  just   how  many
             killings the LTTE has  carried out in Colombo is largely a red
             herring. The fact that there have been any at all  shows  they
             have the capacity and willingness out carry them out, and  the
             question then becomes whether there is anything in appellants'
             backgrounds to differentiate them as particular targets.'
44.   He then continues, after quoting from the  UNHCR  paper  to  which  we
      have already referred, as follows as paragraph 37:

             'In sum,  the  LTTE  has  always  taken  very  strong  action,
             including assassination against those it regards as  traitors.
             This  applies  above  all  to  those  suspected  of  revealing
             information to the authorities, and even more  forcibly,  now,
             to those belonging to the Karuna faction. Any such risk  would
             of course be most acute in LTTE-controlled territory,  in  the
             Vanni and Jaffna Peninsula, and in east  coast  regions  where
             both  factions  are  present,  but  as  the   above   evidence
             demonstrates, those seen as informers, traitors and deserters,
             are at risk in Colombo too should  the  LTTE  wish  to  target
             them. What is true of Colombo is also true, in my opinion,  of
             all other parts of Sri Lanka, and in this  connection  I  draw
             attention again to paragraph 2.12 of the  UNHCR's  April  2004
             Assessment, quoted above [it is set out by us earlier in  this
             determination at paragraph 16], which  appears  to  me  wholly
             consistent with  the  available  evidence  and  with  which  I
             agree.'

45.   He then deals with the question of risk to informants  from  the  LTTE
      and expresses the following views at paragraph 39 of his report:

             'I am, with respect, in broad agreement with the Adjudicator's
             assessment  of  the  LTTE   at   paragraphs   39-42   of   the
             determination.  [Paragraphs 41 and 42 are set out at paragraph
             4 of this determination and paragraphs 39 and 40 set  out  the
             Adjudicator's analysis of the objective  evidence  as  to  the
             behaviour of the LTTE which we have not thought  it  necessary
             to  reproduce.]  His   analysis  accorded  with  the  evidence
             available at  the  time,  and  is  confirmed  by  more  recent
             evidence, as explained above. In  particular  the  LTTE  takes
             very great interest in anyone who has  been  detained  by  the
             security forces, particularly those  held  for  long  periods.
             This is  mainly  because  it  assumes  they  would  have  been
             tortured to obtain information, but they may have been used as
             masked informers to pick out LTTE members at checkpoints,  and
             that they may have been released on condition that they act as
             informers in the future. I think it is certain  that,  at  the
             very least, the LTTE would indeed have wished  to  interrogate
             [the respondent] about his own very lengthy detention [we note
             it was for some two months only], all the more so in  view  of
             the  detention of two of  their  members  under  circumstances
             which pointed to him as a likely source of information.'

46.   Finally, he deals with the issue of whether the state  is  capable  of
      affording protection to persons like the respondent, not by  reference
      to the legal meaning of 'sufficiency of  protection'  but  'simply  to
      comment on the ability and  willingness  of  the  security  forces  to
      protect persons targeted by the LTTE'.  Apart from making reference to
      the UNHCR paper and to paragraph 211  of  that  paper  which  we  have
      already set out, he says this at paragraph 42:

             'The suicide bombing apparently  aimed  at  Douglas  Devananda
             [this is the incident in early  July  2004  when  four  police
             officers were killed following arousal  of  suspicion  of  the
             intentions of the suicide bomber]; the mass  murder  of  eight
             Karuna supporters in Colombo [this is the incident of  8  July
             2004 already noted]; the  assassination  of  the  intelligence
             source known as PLOTE Mohan [the  incident  of  31  July  2004
             already noted]; and the killing of  the  EPDP  leader  K  Bala
             Nadarajah [the incident of 23 September 2004],  all  of  which
             have occurred in the past few months, confirm how much freedom
             the LTTE has to operate outside the law  in  Colombo  ...  The
             Karuna supporters were indeed placed  in  a  supposedly  'safe
             house and one of the dead was (according to the  LTTE,  though
             the  government  denies  this)  a   'minder'   from   military
             intelligence.  Clearly  the  authorities  could  not   provide
             sufficiency of protection in this instance, even when they had
             specifically set out to do so.  [This appears  to  be  derived
             from the article in the Daily News of 26 July  2004  which  is
             the only  objective  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  this
             respect. That referred to the safe house being  one  'supposed
             to be managed by  the  Karuna  faction'  and  the  information
             provided by the police was that those  killed  were  from  the
             Karuna faction. The only reference to  a  Sri  Lanka  military
             intelligence operative being among those killed comes from the
             Tamil net website said to be quoting sources in Batticoloa and
             therefore  clearly reflecting opposition LTTE views,  but  the
             suggestion is reported as being categorically  denied  by  the
             Director of Military Intelligence, so that it is difficult  to
             see  on  what  basis  Professor  Good   concludes   that   the
             authorities had 'explicitly set out' to provide protection  to
             those who were killed when general reports make it clear  that
             the police are, as previously  noted,  seriously   seeking  to
             trace and arrest members of both LTTE warring factions.]'

47.   The remaining relevant section of the report at paragraphs  44  to  74
      was his response to the question  of what was  the  general  objective
      situation in Sri Lanka with his prognosis of  the  ceasefire  and  the
      peace process talks. Insofar as this is concerned with his opinions as
      to what may happen in the future, this is not a matter with  which  we
      are directly concerned.  The task of the Tribunal is to  consider  the
      situation of the respondent on the basis of his hypothetical return to
      Sri Lanka at the date of this hearing.  Professor Good deals initially
      in this section with the stalling  in  the  peace  process  which  has
      resulted from the LTTE proposal for interim  self-governing  authority
      published on 1 November 2003 and which led to the  well-known  initial
      political crisis in the  Sri  Lankan  government  when  the  president
      dismissed  three  ministers  and  prorogued  parliament,  subsequently
      calling a general election which took place on 2 April, 2004.  Despite
      the volatile nature of the elections, particularly on the part of  the
      LTTE in their  areas  of  control,  the  elections  were  successfully
      concluded in the greater part of Sri Lanka  although  the  outcome  is
      that no  party  has  achieved  an  overall  majority.  The  government
      opposition in fact commands a small majority  of  the  votes  provided
      that the alliance of parties supporting it holds, but made it clear in
      June 2004 that it would not seek  to  topple  the  government  at  the
      present time. Nevertheless Professor Good expressed the view that 'the
      political situation is thus  highly  uncertain  and  unpredictable  at
      present' (paragraph 54) and that  the  internal  schism  in  the  LTTE
      between the northern and eastern wings (Colonel  Karuna  is  from  the
      eastern wing) remains unsettled. Professor Good records  some  details
      about the factional inter-fighting and says at  paragraph  63  of  his
      report that following three killings of  Karuna  supporters  in  early
      August 2004, Sri Lankan security forces detained two LTTE members near
      Batticaloa, 'something they have previously been loath to do for  fear
      of disturbing the ceasefire'.  He notes that on 17  June  2004  police
      found a suicide bomber's kit  in  north  Colombo,  which  he  says  is
      unlikely to have lain undiscovered since  previous  campaigns  by  the
      LTTE ante-dating the ceasefire, and that :

             'The discovery resulted in a decision to beef up  security  by
             sending hundreds of extra police and  army  personnel  to  key
             points around Colombo.  On 21 June 2004 the LTTE  renewed  its
             allegation that Karuna was being aided by the  army,  although
             it is still officially denied ...'

48.   Professor Good then reviews the various incidents  which  are  already
      detailed in Miss Richards' analysis. He then  records  his  view  that
      this whole sequence of events marks a  significant  worsening  of  the
      situation, and a very significant escalation of the level of  violence
      in Colombo of which:

             'One  consequence  has,  naturally,  been  a  stepping  up  of
             security in Colombo. On 28 July 2004, news  agencies  reported
             that the government "has decided to  strengthen  the  security
             measures to prevent  smuggled  weapons  to  enter  the  city".
             Following a meeting between police and the heads  of  security
             forces, a spokesman said "We discussed the matter and  decided
             to put some special measures to prevent smuggling  of  weapons
             into the city. The efforts are being  made  that  the  general
             public don't suffer because of the security checks."'

49.   We then heard the oral evidence of Professor Good.  In examination-in-
      chief he agreed that Miss Richards' analysis  of  the  level  of  LTTE
      violence in the Colombo area prior to the ceasefire was  accurate  and
      that these were attacks against  the  state,  but  there  had  been  a
      drastic change insofar as the LTTE was not carrying out  such  attacks
      now but seeking to  eliminate  or  neutralise  those  it  regarded  as
      traitors within the Tamil community. Apart from the  attempted  attack
      on the government minister by the suicide bomber,  the  other  actions
      were intra-Tamil and normally by the different method of shooting.  He
      adhered to his view that the actual  number  of  killings  was  a  red
      herring  as  previously  expressed.  Although  Colombo  was  the  only
      sizeable conurbation in Sri Lanka, it still functioned on the basis of
        inter-personal relationships rather than the situation of  anonymity
      which would apply in, say, London because Sri Lanka was a face to face
      society where you knew your neighbours and what they were doing. There
      was much social  interaction  in  Sri  Lankan  society  which  led  to
      substantial knowledge of one's neighbours  and  daily  associates.  By
      informer, he refers to someone who provided the state or the LTTE with
      valuable information.  That was what the respondent had done. The LTTE
        generally targeted those they  regarded  as  traitors  although  the
      meaning of that term might vary. Certain categories, such  as  members
      of rival political Tamil groups, members of  the  Karuna  faction  and
      those regarded as giving information leading to  adverse  results  for
      the  LTTE  were  regarded  with  particular  adversity.  It  was   his
      impression that the LTTE were interested in finding  out  from  anyone
      detained for a long time what information  they  had  divulged.  There
      would be routine questioning at least on release, but in the  case  of
      the respondent it appeared that the result of  information  given  was
      that two cadres were arrested and  this  would  suggest  more  than  a
      routine interest, although the  witness  was  unable  to  provide  any
      citations to support this it was   his  impression  from  seeing  many
      similar accounts. Although this had occurred some three years ago, the
      LTTE had a long memory and in his view it was  unlikely  that  someone
      who had given  information  leading  to  arrest  of  cadres  would  be
      forgotten, but this again was a matter of impression and  the  witness
      could cite no specific example.

50.   It was his view that the views expressed by the UNHCR should be  taken
      very seriously because of their presence in the country. In  his  view
      the objective evidence supported that the LTTE had  political  offices
      in parts of Sri Lanka and other parts where  they  were  in  de  facto
      control, but they were also able to target people  in  Colombo.  There
      was no question of their being present in the same way throughout  Sri
      Lanka but in his view it was clear they could get to any part  of  the
      country which they wished.  As to whether  the  state  could  offer  a
      sufficiency of protection to the respondent in  Colombo,  the  witness
      was in some difficulty because that was  a legal term  which  required
      legal interpretation, but, if the question was considered in  relation
      to protection from a lay point of view, he considered it was a  matter
      of will on the part of the LTTE. It was clear  the  authorities  could
      not  prevent attacks on the Karuna faction supporters in Colombia  but
      he did not wish to give any view as to whether this amounted to a lack
      of sufficiency of protection  in  the  legal  sense.  He  did  take  a
      pessimistic view of the situation in Sri Lanka because  there  was  no
      obvious route to an enduring peaceful solution, partly because,  given
      the nature of the LTTE, there was no sign of acceptance of a pluralist
      democratic process involving the participation of other Tamil  groups,
      and partly because of the division of the  major  Sinhalese  political
      groups where  any  federalist  solution  would  require  a  two-thirds
      majority to ratify it.  Until the two major Singhalese parties  agree,
      there was no mechanism to achieve a federalist solution.

51.   In cross-examination, when asked about his assertion at  paragraph  35
      of his latest report that the question of numbers  attack  in  Colombo
      was something of a red herring, he agreed that the principal issue was
      the background of the individual  applicant.   Whilst  the  number  of
      killings which had taken place was relevant to the  ease  or  lack  of
      ease with which the LTTE could operate, he accepted that it  was  also
      relevant to the question of the will of the LTTE  to  carry  out  such
      attacks. He agreed that the respondent had never been a member of  the
      LTTE or any other political grouping and that the respondent's  action
      had been limited to giving  assistance  to  the  LTTE,  which  he  had
      accepted had brought many young Tamils under suspicion on the part  of
      the  authorities,  leading  to  his  detention  and  the   giving   of
      information in detention.  Asked why, if the respondent's position was
      similar to that of hundreds or thousands of other  Tamils  during  the
      period prior to the ceasefire, there  was  no  record  of  pursuit  of
      Tamils in a similar position in Colombo, Professor Good said  that  he
      could not put himself in the minds of the LTTE but did draw  attention
      to  the  fact  that  what  was  in  his  view  distinctive  about  the
      respondent's position was that two LTTE members had been arrested  and
      that Jegan, detained and released with him, had been shot by the  LTTE
      shortly after his release.  Pressed on the basis that such a story was
      fairly common and that there was no record of people in  a  comparable
      position being targeted by the LTTE, he  responded  that  he  was  not
      persuaded that such examples were absent although he pointed to  none.
      He accepted that those in Miss Richards' analysis who  had been  shown
      to have a systematic organisational link with the Sri Lankan  security
      services were in a different category  from  the  respondent,  but  he
      assumed that in referring to informers they would be  dealing  with  a
      range  of  circumstances  from  high   level   activities   to   those
      occasionally giving  such  information  to  the  security  forces.  He
      maintained that it was impossible to tell from the reports into  which
      category those identified in  the  analysis  fell.   Pressed  further,
      however, by reference to the  specific  recorded  killings  and  their
      analysis, Professor Good finally conceded that none  in  the  specific
      examples bore resemblance to the factual account of the respondent who
      fell into none of the identified categories.

52.   Questioned as to the claim that there would  be  no  effective  police
      investigation into LTTE killings  and  other  crimes,  Professor  Good
      agreed that this observation  was  dependent  upon  what  one  of  his
      informants had said to him. He  accepted  there  had  been  occasional
      arrest of LTTE  members throughout the period  of  the  ceasefire  and
      that where, at paragraph 72 of his report, he quoted a BBC reporter as
      referring to 'a low level guerrilla war' or 'proxy war', that  was  in
      relation to what was happening on the east coast of Sri Lanka and  had
      no reference to the situation in Colombo.   He accepted  that  in  the
      international conference held in June 2003 very  substantial  monetary
      aid had been promised to Sri Lanka, dependent on the  continuation  of
      the peace process, and said he thought that was the  reason  why  both
      parties to the former conflict have stated that they did not  wish  to
      return to all out war.  It was his view that one of  the  reasons  for
      the insistence of the LTTE in  its  proposals  for  an  interim  self-
      governing authority, published in November 2003, was that it  hoped to
      share directly in such funding and because that  would  constitute  an
      international recognition of its authority in its  own  areas,  taking
      into account that  internationally  it  still  remained  a  proscribed
      organisation.  He accepted that in the week  before  the  hearing  the
      President had given assurances to those in Colombo and the south  that
      the government was   committed to providing protection to  the  public
      and that the government was sincere in such declarations  but  to  his
      mind the issue was how far it could effectively do so.

53.   We are indebted to both counsel for their closing  submissions,  based
      upon their written skeleton arguments, which  we  have  noted  in  our
      record of proceedings.  Those submissions, together with the  totality
      of the evidence before us, have  been  fully  considered  by  us.  The
      nature of the submissions has already been sufficiently indicated  for
      it to be unnecessary for us to rehearse them further, but we  do  draw
      on them as appropriate  in  reaching  our  conclusions  and  findings.
      Similarly, in our consideration of the objective evidence we have  not
      found it necessary to deal specifically with all  sources  because  we
      consider that the three sources from which we have extensively quoted,
      the UNHCR, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty  International,  effectively
      cover the areas dealt with n the other reports before us.

54.   The accepted facts specific to the respondent have  been  set  out  at
      paragraphs 2 and 3 above and we have already made it  clear  that  the
      Tribunal has in broad terms considered for some years that Tamils from
      the north and east of Sri Lanka, under the direct control of the LTTE,
      and from those areas where the  degree of control has fluctuated,  can
      in general terms safely relocate to Colombo to avoid localised fear of
      the LTTE.  Prior to the ceasefire in February 2002,  movement  between
      LTTE  and  army  controlled  areas  was  subject  to  strict  controls
      although, as has been seen from the numbers killed and injured in LTTE
      attacks, principally by way of suicide bombing, in  the  Colombo  area
      prior to  the  ceasefire,  it  has  never  been  possible  to  prevent
      penetration of Tamil cadres into government controlled areas. Although
      both the government and the LTTE  maintain  controls  at  the  borders
      between those parts of Sri Lanka  which  remain  under  the  de  facto
      control of the LTTE and the remainder of the country,  it is the  case
      that travel restrictions have been  greatly  and  progressively  eased
      since the ceasefire, with a reduction in the  numbers  of  checkpoints
      other than at  those  borders.  The  LTTE  is  no  longer  an  illegal
      organisation in Sri Lanka and has been permitted to open up offices in
      certain of the towns of predominantly  Tamil  ethnicity  which  remain
      under government control.

55.   Prior to the ceasefire it was, as  we  say,  generally  accepted  that
      Tamils who feared persecution in the north could  safely  relocate  to
      Colombo and this is evidenced by the very substantial numbers who  did
      so, greatly increasing the existing Tamil population in Colombo as  we
      have recorded above.  It is  the  post-ceasefire  situation  which  is
      reflected in paragraphs 211 and 212  of  the  UNHCR  Background  Paper
      extensively relied on by the respondent.  If  anything,  it  puts  the
      position higher even than that  promoted  by  Professor  Good  in  its
      conclusion at paragraph 212 that 'in general it is no longer  possible
      to use the internal flight option for Tamils fleeing the LTTE.'

56.   Whatever may be the position of Tamils having a localised fear of  the
      LTTE as a result of their ability to have increased influence  in  the
      Tamil dominated areas in the northern part of the country which remain
      under government control, it seems to us quite clear that the evidence
      which we have considered does not support that broad proposition.

57.   As we have indicated,  the  issues  for  our  decision  are  two-fold.
      Firstly, whether as a matter of fact on the totality of the  evidence,
      there is a real risk that the LTTE would pose generally  a  threat  to
      Tamils in Colombo who are at  potential  risk  in  their  home  areas.
      Secondly, if so, whether that risk is one  in  respect  of  which  the
      state in any event provides a  sufficiency  of  protection  so  as  to
      negate any need for surrogate international protection.

58.   Whilst these questions are, of course, intertwined, we look  first  at
      whether there is a potential risk from the LTTE in  Colombo  for  such
      Tamils.

59.   We accept that it is physically possible for LTTE  members  to  travel
      to Colombo although, in times when they have provoked  public  concern
      by their actions there, they would face heightened security  measures,
      albeit not on the scale of the former  cordon  and  search  operations
      regularly carried out prior to  the  ceasefire.  Nevertheless,  it  is
      clear that they do not choose to do so on an indiscriminate  basis  in
      order to find all those against whom they may harbour some  suspicion.
      There is simply no evidence to support such a  proposition.  What  the
      careful analysis made by Miss Richards clearly  demonstrates  is  that
      those who are reasonably likely to be targeted  have  a  high  profile
      which makes  them  particularly  likely  to  be  the  object  of  LTTE
      reprisals.  The analysis demonstrates that prominent present  or  past
      supporters of Tamil political parties which  have  aligned  themselves
      with the government against the  LTTE,  LTTE  defectors  (particularly
      those who  have then aligned  themselves  with  the  Sri  Lankan  army
      military  intelligence  units)  and,  more  recently,  those   closely
      associated with the internal LTTE  schism  as  supporters  of  Colonel
      Karuna, are at potential risk of being  targeted.  As  Professor  Good
      finally conceded, the respondent does  not  fall  into  any  of  those
      categories.  The only examples outside those categories of Tamils  who
      have been killed in Colombo and its environs, both  occurred  in  2002
      and the available evidence about them is very limited:  in  the  first
      case it appears that the person concerned  was  known  locally  to  be
      friendly with the EPDP and to have  refused  to  submit  to  extortion
      threats before leaving for Colombo so that there is again, even on the
      little  information  available,  some  political  overtone  and   open
      defiance of the LTTE in his home area;  in the case of the Tamil  from
      Australia, the reports  suggest  that  he  had  fallen  foul  of  LTTE
      organisations in Australia whose financing operations he  had  opposed
      and it seems reasonably likely that he was identified as a  result  of
      information being passed that he had come to Sri Lanka for a  holiday.
      This appears to be a very fact specific example in  the  early  period
      after the ceasefire.

60.   We are, of course, aware from the numerous Sri  Lankan  appeals  which
      we have heard over the years that the respondent's  account  of  being
      suspected of having divulged information or  assistance  to  the  army
      whilst in detention is by no means uncommon. Similar  suspicion  must,
      as a matter of commonsense, apply to many of  those  Tamils  who  have
      sought refuge in Colombo, but there is no evidence that people in such
      a category have been targeted by the LTTE there at any time since  the
      ceasefire.

61.   On a  factual  basis  alone,  therefore,  it  seems  to  us  that  the
      generalisation by the UNHCR at paragraph 212 of its  background  paper
      is  unsustainable  on  the  available  evidence  and  no   more   than
      speculation on its part in the absence of some specific  and  defining
      characteristic which would arguably put an individual claimant at real
      risk as, for example, by falling into one of the  categories  of  high
      level activists or opponents identified above. The numbers referred to
      in the generalisations both in their paper and that  of  Human  Rights
      Watch and the open letter of Amnesty International do not  fairly  and
      objectively reflect  the  specific  circumstances  in  Colombo  as  Ms
      Richards' analysis has demonstrated. A similar position applies to the
      general comments of Professor Good in his reports which must  be  read
      as quite substantially modified by what he has said in the  course  of
      his oral evidence. In particular,  we  cannot  accept  his  view  that
      numbers are 'a red herring' - the very limited numbers  are  a  factor
      which must be taken into account in assessing the evidence as  to  the
      level of the LTTE's activities in  Colombo  and  its  environs.  As  a
      matter of fact, it is clear on looking at the totality of the evidence
      that its  attacks  are  limited  to  high  profile  targets.  That  it
      voluntarily so limits its targets  may  arguably  be  because  of  the
      deterrent effect of the criminal  law  system  and  the  police  force
      available to enforce it. The LTTE is a highly structured  organisation
      and it is not reasonably likely that its  operatives  act  other  than
      under strict control on specific missions. That is the clear inference
      from an analysis of the identified killings which have take  place  in
      Colombo.

62.   Even in the case of those at potential risk, however, it  would  still
      be necessary for them to show to  the  lower  standard  applicable  in
      asylum and human rights appeals that the Sri Lankan  state  would  not
      provide them a sufficiency of protection against such a risk.

63.   That brings  us  to  the  area  where  Professor  Good  very  properly
      acknowledged that the provision of a sufficiency of  protection  by  a
      home state depends  upon  the  application  of  the  legal  principles
      involved in that  concept.

64.   Those principles have been recently and helpfully set  out  once  more
      in Bagdanavicius in the judgment of Auld LJ at paragraph 55  which  we
      quote insofar as relevant to the issues before us:

             'Asylum claims ...


             4)   Sufficiency  of  state  protection,  whether  from  state
                 agents or non-state actors, means a willingness and ability
                 on the part of the receiving state to provide  through  its
                 legal system a reasonable level  of  protection  from  ill-
                 treatment of which the claimant  for  asylum  has  a  well-
                 founded fear; Osman, Horvath, Dhima.


             5)  The effectiveness of the system provided is to  be  judged
                 normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent
                 the form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just
                 punishment  of  it  after  the  event;  Horvath,  Banomova,
                 McPherson and Kinuthia.


             6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in
                 the receiving state, a claimant  may  still  have  a  well-
                 founded fear  of  persecution  if  he  can  show  that  the
                 authorities know or ought to know circumstances  particular
                 to his case giving rise to  his fear, but are  unlikely  to
                 provide   the   additional   protection   his    particular
                 circumstances reasonably require;  Osman.


             Article 3 claims ...


             10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3 depends
                 on the circumstances of each case, including the  magnitude
                 of the risk, the nature and severity of  the  ill-treatment
                 risked, and whether the risk emanates from a  state  agency
                 or non-state actor; Horvath.


             11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases  of  ill-treatment
                 which, but for state protection, would engage Article 3,  a
                 risk of such ill-treatment will be more readily established
                 in state agency cases than in non-state actor cases - there
                 is a spectrum of circumstances giving rise  to  such  risks
                 banning the two categories, ranging from breach of  a  duty
                 by the state of a negative duty not to  inflict  Article  3
                 ill-treatment to a  breach  of  a  duty  to  take  positive
                 protective action against such  ill-treatment by  non-state
                 actors;  Svazas.


             12) An assessment of the threshold of risk applicable  in  the
                 circumstances to engage Article 3 necessarily  involves  an
                 assessment of the sufficiency of state protection  to  meet
                 the threat of which there is such a risk -  one  cannot  be
                 considered without the other whether or not the exercise is
                 regarded as 'holistic' or to be conducted  in  two  stages;
                 Dhima, Krepel, Svazas.


             13) Sufficiency of  state  protection  is  not  necessarily  a
                 guarantee of protection from Article  3  ill-treatment  any
                 more than it is a guarantee of protection from an otherwise
                 well-founded fear of persecution in asylum cases - nor,  if
                 and to the extent that  there  is  any  difference,  is  it
                 eradication or removal of risk of exposure to Article 3 ill-
                 treatment; Dhima, McPherson, Krepel.


             14) Where the risk falls to be judged by  the  sufficiency  of
                 state protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according
                 to whether it would eradicate the real risk of the relevant
                 harm, but according to whether it is a reasonable provision
                 in the circumstances;  Osman.


             15)  Notwithstanding  such  systemic  sufficiency   of   state
                 protection in the receiving state, a claimant may still  be
                 able to establish an Article 3 claim if he  can  show  that
                 the authorities there know  or  ought  to  know  particular
                 circumstances likely to expose him to risk of Article 3 ill-
                 treatment;  Osman.


             16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country  is
                 or is not a party to the ECHR, but  in determining  whether
                 it would be contrary to Article 3 to  remove  a  person  to
                 that country, our courts should decide the factual issue as
                 to risk as if ECHR standards apply there  -  and  the  same
                 applies to the certification process under  Section  115(1)
                 and/or (2) of the 2002 Act.'

65.   The clear objective evidence is that the Sri Lankan state provides  an
      appropriate criminal  law  system  which  is  enforceable  through  an
      independent judicial system, and  supported  by  a  nationwide  police
      force  charged  with  the  enforcement   of   criminal   law   without
      discrimination between Sri Lankan citizens.  In those circumstances it
      was properly conceded by Mr Param-Jorthy that the  systemic  means  of
      providing a sufficiency of protection exist in Sri Lanka in government
      controlled areas and, for the purposes of this appeal, in  Colombo  in
      particular.

66.   It was his submission that although the  means  existed  there  was  a
      lack of willingness on the part of the state  authorities  to  enforce
      them and it has been suggested by commentators  that  the  reason  for
      such unwillingness is that the state as a matter of policy has decided
      that it will not take steps against Tamils carrying out acts in breach
      of the criminal law in government controlled areas in case this should
      disturb or jeopardise the peace process.

67.   In the specific cases which have been the subject of analysis by  Miss
      Richards in her submissions to us, it is abundantly clear that in  the
      normal course the police do carry out serious investigations into such
      activities which have, in certain cases which we have set out  in  the
      body of this determination, resulted  in  arrests  and  committal  for
      trial. In his evidence, Professor Good accepted, as we  have  recorded
      above, that the government was clearly sincere in wishing to provide a
      sufficiency of protection to the generality of its citizens. We  agree
      and, on the basis of the objective evidence, are satisfied  that  this
      is clearly so, at  least  in  the  Colombo  area  with  which  we  are
      concerned. All the objective evidence makes it clear that the task  of
      the police in bringing the perpetrators of these actions to justice is
      directly hampered by the unwillingness of witnesses to come forward to
      testify.  It is  endemic  to  any  fair  system  of  criminal  justice
      anywhere in the world that the prosecution must prove its case  either
      by confessions voluntarily  made  or  by  the  credible  testimony  of
      witnesses or other compelling circumstantial evidence.   The  fact  of
      operational  difficulties  in  prosecuting  cases  to   a   successful
      conclusion is not of itself indicative of a lack of willingness on the
      part of the authorities to utilise the system which  is  in  force  in
      their country. Moreover, successful criminal prosecutions take time to
      progress through the criminal justice system and it is only some  two-
      and-a-quarter years since the first recorded such killing  in  Colombo
      in July 2002 and all but three of such recorded killings have occurred
      within the last eighteen months.

68.    In  our  judgment,  the  objective  evidence  does  not  support  the
      suggestion of some  commentators  that  it  is  deliberate  government
      policy not to take appropriate action in  investigating  the  killings
      which have taken place. That would be effectively  to  find  that  the
      clear intensive investigations which have been carried out are a  mere
      charade and to ignore the cases where prompt and immediate action  has
      enabled the police to arrest and charge the perpetrators.

69.   The alternative argument put forward on behalf of  the  respondent  is
      that the authorities cannot effectively provide such protection but it
      is difficult to see what is the difference  between  that  proposition
      and a requirement that sufficiency of protection  must  guarantee  the
      safety of each individual citizen from the risk which he fears.   That
      approach seems to us to be endemic in the  position  taken  by  UNHCR,
      Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International,  as  well  as  Professor
      Good. It misconceives  what  is  meant  in  our  refugee  law  by  the
      provision of a sufficiency of protection by the state concerned, as is
      apparent from the summary from Bagdanavicius which we set  out  above.
      In Horvath, the formulation of Stewart Smith LJ in the Court of Appeal
      was cited with approval by Lord Clyde in the following passage at page
      511:

             'It seems to me that  the  formulation  presented  by  Stewart
             Smith LJ in the Court of Appeal may well  serve  as  a  useful
             description of what is intended, where he said ... :


                 "In my judgment there must be in force in  the  country  in
                 question a criminal law which makes the violent attacks  by
                 the persecutors punishable by sentences  commensurate  with
                 the gravity of the crimes.  The victims as a class must not
                 be exempt from the protection of the law. There must  be  a
                 reasonable willingness by  the  law  enforcement  agencies,
                 that is to say the police and courts, to detect,  prosecute
                 and punish offenders."


             And in relation to the matter of unwillingness, he pointed out
             that  inefficiency  and  incompetence  are  not  the  same  as
             unwillingness, that there may be  various  sound  reasons  why
             criminals  may  not  be  brought  to  justice,  and  that  the
             corruption, sympathy or weakness of some  individuals  in  the
             system of justice does not mean that the state is unwilling to
             afford protection. "It will require cogent evidence  that  the
             state which is able to afford protection is  unwilling  to  do
             so, especially in the case of a  democracy."  The  formulation
             does not claim to be exhaustive or comprehensive, but it seems
             to me to give helpful guidance.'

70.   In terms of Strasbourg jurisprudence, it is important also to bear  in
      mind what was said in Osman v United Kingdom  [1998] 29 EHRR 245 as to
      the need to take into account  operational  responsibilities  and  the
      constraints  on  the  provision  of  police  protection  so  that  the
      obligation to protect must not be  so  interpreted  as  to  impose  an
      impossible or disproportionate burden upon the authorities.   Contrary
      to the practicality of the approach of the European  Court  in  Osman,
      Amnesty International is preaching a counsel of perfection far  beyond
      what is necessary in law to provide a sufficiency of state  protection
      in the passage quoted at paragraph 27 above. That is not,  of  course,
      to say that in appropriate cases specific steps to provide  protection
      may not be warranted but, simply to apply it as a blanket requirement,
      as is suggested in the passage referred to, puts the duty on the State
      at too high a level having regard to the  relevant  case-law  and  the
      principles which it establishes.

71.   As we have already observed, those whom the LTTE has on the  objective
      evidence targeted in Colombo since the ceasefire have  all  been  high
      profile opposition  activists,  or  those  whom  they  would  see  are
      renegades or traitors to the LTTE.  Whether it could  be  successfully
      argued that even those of so high a profile would not be provided with
      a sufficiency of protection in Colombo in the Horvath  sense,  may  be
      doubted, but what seems to us quite clear on the  background  evidence
      is that there is no arguable basis for  saying  that  the  Sri  Lankan
      state does not provide a sufficiency of protection to  the  generality
      of Tamils having a localised fear of the LTTE in their home  area  who
      do not reach a similar high profile.

72.   Having therefore had the  opportunity  of  considering  more  detailed
      evidence than we suspect was available to Charles J in Oppilamani,  we
      reach the same conclusion as he did and is recorded at paragraph 45 of
      his judgment (see paragraph 41 above).

73.   We cannot, of course,  say  that  the  safety  of  the  respondent  is
      guaranteed if he is now returned to Sri Lanka, but there is simply  no
      objective evidence to support a claim  that  ethnic  Tamils  with  his
      characteristics are in  fact  currently  at  risk  from  the  LTTE  in
      Colombo, or that, if they are, it is a risk in respect  of  which  the
      Sri Lankan state does not provide a sufficiency of protection applying
      the ratio in Horvath.

74.   In the result, removal of the respondent to Sri Lanka will not  be  in
      breach of the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  either  the  1950
      European Convention or the 1951 Refugee Convention because,  accepting
      the factual findings of the Adjudicator as to  his  past  history  and
      characteristics, he may safely and reasonably relocate from  his  home
      area of Puttalam to Colombo.

75.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is accordingly allowed.






                                  J. BARNES
                               VICE PRESIDENT












-----------------------
      1


