
H-AF-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|by video link with Leeds   |        |AY (Article 8 - Family life |
|On: 5 May 2004             |        |- Proportionality) Ivory    |
|Prepared On: 7 June 2004   |        |Coast [2004] UKIAT 00205    |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.........23rd July 2004........                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|HH Judge N Huskinson  (Vice President)                            |
|Dr A W Chaudhry                                                   |
|Mr G H Getlevog                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Giovannelli (Counsel - instructed by Johar &
                     Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Halliday (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast  born  on  29  December
    1977.   He  appeals  to  the  Tribunal,  with  permission,   from   the
    Determination of Miss Manjit Kaur Obhi, Adjudicator, promulgated on  14
    May 2003 whereby she dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
    and human rights grounds against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum to the Appellant and against his decision  to  issue  directions
    for the removal of the Appellant to the Ivory Coast.

2.    The Appellant's account of events in the Ivory Coast, on the basis of
    which he claimed asylum, need not be set out for the  purpose  of  this
    Determination.  This is because the Adjudicator  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant.  There  is  no  appeal  against  the  Adjudicator's  adverse
    credibility findings.  The only point upon which the Appellant has been
    granted permission to appeal, and the only point developed in  argument
    before the Tribunal, relates to  the  Adjudicator's  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.    Before  the  Adjudicator  there  was  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's family life that the Appellant was a single man but  had  a
    partner  to  whom  he  was  engaged  to  be  married,  namely  Miss   (
                       ) who is a citizen of Cameroon.  The Adjudicator was
    informed that Miss Mongo was an asylum seeker.   At  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the Adjudicator (24 April 2003) the Appellant and Miss (
                ) were engaged to be married - the prospective date of  the
    wedding being 31 May 2003.  They were expecting their  first  child  in
    August or September 2003.  The Adjudicator dealt  with  the  Article  8
    claim in paragraph 42 of the Determination in brief form.  She reminded
    herself of the decision in Mahmood [2001] 1 WLR 840 and stated:

         "I note that the Appellant is engaged to  be  married  to  another
         asylum seeker.  The  relationship  and  any  family  life  arising
         therefore have been formed in  the  knowledge  of  the  respective
         immigration situations of each party.  In light of the information
         available to me in this appeal, I do not find the existence  of  a
         private or family life."

4.    It may be noted at the outset that on behalf  of  the  Respondent  Mr
    Halliday accepted that the Adjudicator's analysis of the Article 8 case
    was flawed.  Mr Halliday contended that the Adjudicator had reached the
    correct  ultimate  result,  but  he  did  not  seek  to   support   the
    Adjudicator's finding that there was  no  private  or  family  life  in
    existence.  Mr Halliday's argument was to the effect that, although the
    Appellant enjoyed a family life  with  his  fianc�e,  any  interference
    would be proportionate.

5.    It follows from the foregoing that  this  case  before  the  Tribunal
    turns entirely upon matters arising under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.    Certain procedural matters should be noted at this stage.   The  case
    was heard by video link with Leeds.  On the morning of the hearing this
    case was called on as the first  case  in  the  list.   Mr  Giovannelli
    informed the Tribunal that a bundle  of  documents  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant was in the course of being faxed to the Tribunal.  It had not
    arrived when the case was called on.  The bundle had not been served in
    accordance with the  Rules.   The  bundle  contained  unsigned  witness
    statements from the Appellant and from Miss (                   )  (now
    Mrs (             )) and various other documents  including  a  medical
    report (considered further below).  No application had been made  under
    Rule 21 of the 2003 Rules for  permission  to  adduce  this  additional
    evidence.  The Tribunal put the case back and took the second  case  in
    the list.  Having concluded that case, the fax from Mr Giovannelli  had
    arrived.  There was then argument as to  whether  the  Tribunal  should
    receive this late bundle which had been submitted in  contravention  of
    the Rules.  Mr Halliday argued that the  Tribunal  should  not  receive
    this late material and  in  particular  should  not  receive  the  late
    medical report.  This medical report is dated as long ago as  7  August
    2003.  It was also noted that the statements from the Appellant and his
    wife were unsigned.

7.    No criticism is intended of Mr Giovannelli personally.   However  the
    procedure adopted on behalf of the Appellant by those  instructing  him
    is wholly unsatisfactory.  It  emerged  that  this  medical  report  of
    August 2003 had been sent to the  Respondent  (apparently  a  different
    department of the Respondent) in about December 2003 in support  of  an
    application on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  his  case  should  be
    reconsidered as engaging particularly compassionate  circumstances  and
    that as a matter of discretion he should be  allowed  to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Tribunal reserved the question of whether it would
    admit in evidence and take  into  consideration  the  contents  of  the
    bundle, but looked at the contents de bene esse  and  full  submissions
    were made in relation to the documents.  The  Tribunal  has  ultimately
    concluded that in order to avoid injustice to the Appellant (who is not
    personally at fault for the  procedural  irregularities)  the  Tribunal
    should admit the contents of the bundle in evidence and take them  into
    consideration.  The Tribunal in particular has in mind that the medical
    report was sent to the Respondent in December 2003 (albeit it seems  to
    a different department  rather  than  to  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officers Unit) - thus this is not a case where a medical  report  which
    has never previously been disclosed in any shape or form is produced on
    the morning of the hearing.  The Tribunal also is prepared to take into
    consideration the witness statements of the Appellant and  his  wife  -
    although we bear in mind that these are unsigned and this  must  affect
    the weight  given  to  the  documents  insofar  as  there  is  anything
    controversial therein.  As regards the other documents  in  the  bundle
    these are uncontroversial documents being a marriage certificate and  a
    birth certificate and letters regarding the  second  pregnancy  of  the
    Appellant's wife.

8.    Leaving aside for the moment the medical report, the  facts  emerging
    from the statements and other documents in the Appellant's  bundle  can
    be summarised as follows:

    (i)       On    31    May    2003    the    Appellant     married     (
           ) who is a citizen of Cameroon.


    (ii)   Their son (                                       ) was born  on
         6 September 2003.  The son is in  good  health.   The  Appellant's
         wife is also now in good health although suffered  from  postnatal
         depression after the birth, in respect of  which  the  Appellant's
         support was important to her.


    (iii)  The Appellant met his wife in  June  2002  and  they  started  a
         relationship  in  August  2002  and  started  living  together  in
         November 2002 and have lived together ever since then.


    (iv)   The Appellant's wife is now again pregnant.   The  Tribunal  was
         not informed of the expected date of birth, but the pregnancy  was
         confirmed by a letter dated 25 February 2004.


    (v)    In paragraph 4 of his unsigned statement the Appellant states:


             "I do not know what citizenship my  son  has.   If  I  was  to
             return to Ivory Coast now I could  not  return  with  my  wife
             because she is a citizen of  Cameroon  and  has  no  right  to
             reside in the Ivory Coast.  I would therefore be split up from
             my wife.  I would probably have  to  leave  my  son  with  her
             because I have no accommodation in the Ivory Coast and nowhere
             to take and bring up a young child.  I  would  also  lose  the
             chance of seeing our new baby.  To split me up from my  family
             would be devastating for me."


    (vi)   In her unsigned statement the Appellant's wife states  that  she
         cannot live without her husband.  She says she cannot go  back  to
         the Ivory Coast because she would have no rights  to  live  there.
         She says she cannot return to Cameroon as she has  nowhere  to  go
         there and her home was burnt down.  She says that her family  (her
         mother, two brothers and three sisters) are in the United  Kingdom
         and have also claimed asylum but she does not know the  status  of
         their claim.  She has a difficult relationship with  them  because
         they disapprove of her marriage.  She only sees one member of  her
         family  namely  her  younger  sister  -  and  she  only  sees  her
         occasionally.  She confirms she is  pregnant  again.   She  states
         that if her husband was taken away from her  she  is  worried  she
         would not be able to cope with two small children after the  birth
         of the baby.  She states that they are a family and love and  need
         each other.

9.    The Appellant's wife's status regarding an  asylum  claim  should  be
    noted at this stage.  In her  statement  she  says  she  is  an  asylum
    seeker.  However the Tribunal was informed by Mr Halliday (and this was
    accepted by Mr Giovannelli) that what had happened in relation  to  the
    wife's asylum claim was this.  Her claim was refused by letter  in  May
    2002 based upon a full asylum interview.  An appeal was lodged  to  the
    Adjudicator and the case came before the Adjudicator in September 2002,
    when the Appellant's wife did not attend but her  representatives  did.
    It seems that  her  representatives  were  without  instructions.   The
    Adjudicator dealt with the case on the basis that the appeal  had  been
    abandoned.  There has been no  further  attempt  to  appeal  from  this
    decision.  It may be noted that in her unsigned witness  statement  the
    Appellant's wife does not say that she has  some  pending  appeal.   Mr
    Giovannelli, while accepting the foregoing as  factually  accurate  and
    accepting that at present the position is that the wife's  asylum  case
    is over, indicated that the wife's advisors were seeking to raise again
    her case.

10.   As regards the medical  report  this  is  dated  7  August  2003  and
    prepared  by  Miriam  Ann  Wohl  MB,  Ch.B.,  J.C.C.C.,  M.S.T.A.T.  of
    Leicester Sports Medicine Clinic.  The report sets out the  Appellant's
    account of events in the Ivory Coast, being the events rejected as  not
    credible by the Adjudicator.   The  report  examines  certain  physical
    aspects of the Appellant's condition, including scarring.   As  regards
    mental health matters the report states that examination revealed  that
    the Appellant clearly suffered  from  post  traumatic  stress  disorder
    following his experiences in prison.  The  report  sets  out  the  core
    diagnostic criteria for PTSD and states that the Appellant exhibits the
    core diagnostic criteria which, if left untreated, can run a  life-long
    remitting-relapsing course.  The report continues:

         "The fact that his symptoms are at present in abeyance,  does  not
         mean that he is fully  recovered.   It  is  well  recognised  that
         additional stress can precipitate recurrence of symptoms  of  PTSD
         and this would be extremely likely, were he forced  to  return  to
         the Ivory Coast, as it is well recognised that acute  distress  is
         likely to  reoccur  on  exposure  to  trauma  located  events  and
         locations.  His symptoms of PTSD are  subsiding  and  it  [is]  my
         opinion that the reason why he has made such a  good  recovery  is
         because he has had a stable environment and meaningful activities.
          It would be psychologically deleterious for him to be returned to
         his homeland, where he is certain his life  would  be  in  danger.
         There is no doubt that his mental health would suffer, whether  or
         not his fears are justified."

      At the end of the report there is set out a  passage  describing  the
    current consensus of medical opinion about PTSD.

11.   It has already been noted that there  was  no  challenge  before  the
    Tribunal to the Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings  or  to  the
    findings  on  asylum  or  Article  3  (risk  on  return).   Further  Mr
    Giovannelli did not seek to raise  any  self-standing  Article  8  case
    based upon the Appellant's claimed mental health condition - thus there
    is no Article 8 case as contemplated in Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840 (and
    see now [2004] UKHL 27) or in Djali [2003] EWCA Civ 1371.  However  the
    mental health matters as revealed in the report were relied upon by  Mr
    Giovannelli as being relevant on the question of proportionality so far
    as concerns the Article 8 case  based  upon  interference  with  family
    life.

12.   Mr Giovannelli argued that if the Appellant  were  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom then there were three  theoretically  possible  ways  in
    which the Appellant might become reunited with his wife and children so
    that family life could continue.  Mr Giovannelli argued that in respect
    of  each  of  these  separate  possibilities  there   were   apparently
    insuperable problems for the Appellant and his  wife  and  children  in
    becoming reunited.  However it is first necessary to identify the three
    possibilities, which are that the Appellant is  removed  to  the  Ivory
    Coast and:

    (i)    The Appellant makes an out-of-country application  as  a  spouse
         from the Ivory Coast to join his wife in the United Kingdom.


    (ii)   The Appellant's wife (and children) return to Cameroon  and  the
         Appellant makes an application in the Ivory Coast to join them  in
         Cameroon.


    (iii)  The Appellant's wife applies for permission for herself and  the
         children to join the Appellant in the Ivory Coast.

13.   As regards the prospect for the Appellant of making an out-of-country
    application to join his wife in the United Kingdom, Mr Giovannelli drew
    attention to the fact that his wife did not have sufficient  status  to
    support such an application under the Immigration Rules.  It would be a
    long time before the Appellant's wife  did  have  such  a  status  (and
    indeed she may never have such  a  status  bearing  in  mind  what  has
    happened to her own asylum application).  Mr Giovannelli  also  queried
    whether there were any facilities for making such an application in the
    Ivory Coast.

14.   Regarding the possibility of  the  Appellant  joining  his  wife  and
    children in Cameroon, Mr Giovannelli pointed  out  that  there  was  no
    evidence as to the ability of the Appellant as a citizen of  the  Ivory
    Coast to obtain admission to Cameroon.  He also drew attention  to  the
    fact that the Appellant's wife was fearful of returning to the Cameroon
    (because she had sought asylum) and she had nowhere to go there and she
    says in her statement that her house was burnt down.  Her family is  in
    the United Kingdom.

15.   As regards the possibility of the  Appellant's  wife  (and  children)
    returning to the Ivory Coast with the Appellant or soon thereafter,  Mr
    Giovannelli pointed out that she is not a citizen of  the  Ivory  Coast
    and she may be unable to obtain permission to enter  the  Ivory  Coast.
    He argued she may have to return to Cameroon to make an application  to
    enter the Ivory Coast.  He stated it was unknown as to whether  it  was
    possible for the Appellant's wife to make any necessary application  at
    the Cameroon Embassy in the United Kingdom.

16.   In support of the foregoing arguments Mr  Giovannelli  added  certain
    general points, namely that the Appellant's wife has  one  young  child
    and  is  again  pregnant.   He  also  relied  upon  the  mental  health
    difficulties of the Appellant as disclosed in the medical report  which
    indicates that the Appellant would  have  difficulty  in  supporting  a
    family life in the Ivory Coast or in Cameroon - thus the Appellant  may
    well be unable to provide for his wife and children.  He drew attention
    to Dr Wohl's conclusion that the Appellant's mental health would suffer
    "whether or not his fears are justified" on return to the Ivory  Coast.
    He also drew attention to the general comments regarding PTSD  included
    at the end of Dr Wohl's report which shows that she was  alive  to  the
    possibility of exaggeration of symptoms or the  intentional  production
    of symptoms.  He argued that this lent weight to the diagnosis.

17.   As regards the significance of there  being  no  evidence  whatsoever
    before the Tribunal as to what if any difficulties the Appellant  would
    have in seeking  entry  into  Cameroon  or  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    children  would  have  in  seeking  entry  into  the  Ivory  Coast,  Mr
    Giovannelli  argued  that  the  absence  of  any  such   evidence   was
    detrimental to the Respondent's case rather  than  to  the  Appellant's
    case.  He argued that it was merely  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to
    prove  that  his  removal  to  the  Ivory  Coast  would  constitute  an
    interference with his Article 8.1 rights (namely family life) and  that
    the  burden  was  then  on  the  Respondent  to  prove  that  any  such
    interference was proportionate.  If there was an absence of information
    as to the ability of the Appellant or his wife to obtain entry into the
    other's country, then this uncertainty meant that  the  Respondent  had
    failed to prove that the interference  was  proportionate  -  this  was
    because  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  prove  how   extensive   the
    interference would be.  In the absence of any  evidence  regarding  the
    ability of the one to obtain entry to  the  other's  country  the  only
    proper basis on which to proceed was that there  would  be  substantial
    problems (if not an impossibility) of obtaining such  right  of  entry.
    Mr Giovannelli argued that it would be a reversal of the normal  burden
    of  proof  to  say  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  prove   what
    difficulties he or his wife would have  in  obtaining  entry  into  the
    other's country.  He referred to MacDonald at paragraph 8.60.

18.   The Tribunal is unable to accept  Mr  Giovannelli's  arguments.   Our
    reasons for so concluding are substantially those advanced in  argument
    by Mr Halliday and are as follows.

19.   Having regard to the matters  in  paragraph  9  above  regarding  the
    status in the United Kingdom of  the  Appellant's  wife,  the  Tribunal
    concludes that it must proceed on the basis that the  Appellant's  wife
    has made an asylum appeal which has been treated as abandoned and which
    is at an end.  The Tribunal cannot speculate as to the  possibility  of
    the  Appellant's  wife  reactivating  her   claim.    Accordingly   the
    Appellant's wife is not a refugee and she has not established any well-
    founded fear of return to Cameroon.  It also follows that she does  not
    have status to support an out-of-country application by  the  Appellant
    to join her in the United Kingdom and there is  no  realistic  prospect
    that  she  will  ever  obtain  such  status.   Accordingly   there   is
    effectively no prospect that family life between the Appellant and  his
    wife can be restored through the route described in possibility (i)  in
    paragraph 12           above, namely by the Appellant making an out-of-
    country application to rejoin his wife in the United Kingdom.

20.   So far as concerns the medical report from Dr Wohl  the  Tribunal  is
    only able to give limited weight to this  document.   This  is  because
    PTSD is diagnosed on the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences  in  the  Ivory  Coast  being  true  -  in  particular  his
    experiences in prison.  However the Adjudicator rejected  this  account
    as not being credible and there is  no  appeal  against  this  finding.
    Accordingly the Tribunal does not find persuasive Dr Wohl's  conclusion
    that acute distress is likely to reoccur "on exposure to trauma located
    events and locations".  However the Tribunal places some weight on  the
    report and notes that Dr Wohl states there is no doubt the  Appellant's
    mental health would suffer "whether or not his  fears  are  justified".
    The Tribunal also notes that no treatment  is  proposed  in  Dr  Wohl's
    report apart from the Appellant being allowed to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Nowhere in the report is it stated that the Appellant  is  at
    real risk of suicide nor that he would be unable to  cope  in  his  own
    country.  The Tribunal notes that the Appellant has been able  to  cope
    in the United Kingdom.  Mr Giovannelli quite rightly did  not  seek  to
    advance any self-standing Article  8  (or  Article  3)  case  upon  the
    Appellant's mental health.  Clearly such a  claim  could  not  succeed.
    The Tribunal  takes  into  consideration  the  evidence  regarding  the
    Appellant's  mental  health  in   support   of   the   arguments   upon
    proportionality, but we find that the report is of little assistance to
    the Appellant.

21.   It is of significance that there is no evidence of  any  kind  before
    the Tribunal as to what if any difficulties there would be for (a)  the
    Appellant obtaining the right to enter Cameroon and live with his  wife
    and children there, or (b) the Appellant's wife and children  obtaining
    the right to enter the Ivory Coast and live with the  Appellant  there.
    The Tribunal is unable to accept Mr  Giovannelli's  argument  that  the
    burden is on the Respondent to adduce evidence about this and that,  in
    the absence of such evidence, it  should  be  assumed  in  effect  that
    neither the Appellant nor his wife would be able to obtain  entry  into
    the  other's  country.   There  has  been  ample  opportunity  for  the
    Appellant to investigate these rights of entry and to  adduce  evidence
    relating to the particular facts of his and his wife's case as to their
    respective abilities to obtain entry into the other's country.  In  the
    absence of any evidence whatever on this point the  Tribunal  concludes
    that the Appellant has failed to establish, even to the lower  standard
    of proof, that the removal of the Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would constitute any interference with his family life  with  his  wife
    and children.  This is because the Appellant has failed to produce  any
    evidence at all that there would be any difficulties of any kind in his
    wife and children returning with him to the  Ivory  Coast  or  in  him,
    having been returned to the Ivory Coast, joining his wife and  children
    in Cameroon.  Accordingly the  question  of  proportionality  does  not
    arise at all because the Appellant has failed  to  establish  that  his
    removal will interfere with his Article 8 rights.

22.   If however the foregoing were wrong and the Appellant's removal would
    of itself constitute some interference with  his  Article  8.1  rights,
    then the question of proportionality arises.  The Tribunal is guided by
    [2004] UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia)*  especially  at  paragraph  28  and  by
    Razgar  [2004]  UKHL27,  especially  at   paragraph   20.    In   these
    circumstances also, however, the Tribunal concludes that the burden  is
    on the Appellant to establish any particular difficulties  for  himself
    and his wife in each returning to the other's  country.   The  Tribunal
    rejects the contention that, once it is established that there will  be
    some interference with a Claimant's Article 8.1 rights, then it must be
    assumed that every potential course of action for that Claimant in  re-
    establishing  family  life  would  necessarily  meet  with  insuperable
    difficulties unless such difficulties are expressly  disproved  by  the
    Respondent.  The Respondent has a burden upon him  to  prove  that  the
    removal  would  be  proportionate,  but  the  Respondent  provisionally
    discharges that burden of proof by relying upon the substantial  weight
    to be accorded to a firm and fair immigration policy.   If  a  Claimant
    wishes to contend that the facts of his particular case mean  that  his
    removal from the United Kingdom will cause for him particularly  severe
    difficulties then it is for him to establish on evidence  the  prospect
    that these difficulties  may  in  fact  emerge.   It  is  not  for  the
    Respondent to disprove every  possible  difficulty.   Accordingly  upon
    this analysis (i.e. supposing  that  the  question  of  proportionality
    falls to be considered, contrary to paragraph 21  above)  the  Tribunal
    concludes that the Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant to the
    Ivory Coast is a decision within the range of reasonable responses open
    to the Respondent.  The Tribunal is not satisfied (and on the  evidence
    before it it cannot be satisfied) that there would be  any  significant
    difficulties either for the Appellant to join his wife and children  in
    the Cameroon and enjoy family life there or for  the  Appellant's  wife
    and children to join the Appellant in the  Ivory  Coast  and  to  enjoy
    family life there.  The Tribunal has  not  overlooked  the  Appellant's
    mental condition but is not  satisfied  that,  even  taking  this  into
    account,   the   Appellant's   removal   would   give   rise   to   any
    disproportionate interference  with  his  family  life  or  indeed  his
    private life.  As regards a return to the Cameroon for the  Appellant's
    wife, she has not established any well-founded fear of  persecution  or
    Article 3 infringing treatment there.  The fact  that  the  Appellant's
    wife has many (if not all) of her members of her family in  the  United
    Kingdom is not a matter of any significant weight bearing in  mind  her
    own evidence that she is substantially estranged from them.  So far  as
    concerns a return to the Ivory Coast, the  Adjudicator  has  found  the
    Appellant has no well-founded fear of ill-treatment there.

23.   In the  result  therefore  the  Tribunal  dismisses  the  Appellant's
    appeal.




                                                        HH JUDGE N HUSKINSON

                                 Vice President
