
Heard at Field House
On 20 May 2004

HJ (Removal - Public Good - Immigration Rules) Jamaica [2004] UKIAT 00162

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                                16 June 2004


                                   Before:

                         Mr Andrew Jordan (Chairman)
                               Mr P. Rogers JP
                                  Mr Sandal


Between


                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr P. Jorro, counsel
For the respondent:    Mr J. McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  who  appeals  to  the  Tribunal
      against the decision of the Secretary of State made on 7 July 1998  to
      make a deportation order against him pursuant to  section  3(5)(b)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971.


   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 July 1992,  aged  24,
      and was granted six months leave to enter as a visitor for the express
      purpose of visiting one of his mother's cousins.   He  had  spent  his
      childhood and the first six years of adulthood in Jamaica.  During his
      period in Jamaica, he had fathered two children,  one  of  whom  lived
      with the child's mother and the other with his own mother.

   3. The appellant did not leave the United Kingdom at  the  expiration  of
      the grant.  On 23 March 1993, at a time  when  the  appellant  had  no
      right to remain in the United Kingdom, he applied for leave to  remain
      following his marriage to a British citizen,  Yvonne  Stephenson.   He
      was granted leave to remain until 23 March 1994 under the  Immigration
      Rules.  At the expiration of the initial twelve months grant,  he  was
      given indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse.

   4. The appellant was arrested on 13 February 1995 for the  offences  that
      subsequently  resulted  in  his  conviction,  on  14  July  1995,   at
      Snaresbrook Crown Court, on three counts of supplying cocaine, a Class
      A drug, and being concerned in offering to supply cocaine, a  Class  A
      drug.  At that time he was unemployed.  He was sentenced to five years
      imprisonment concurrent on each count.  His Honour Judge Howarth, when
      sentencing the appellant, said:


      "As you now know, those who sell crack cocaine on the  street  receive
      substantial prison sentences.  You were selling crack cocaine in  what
      I have described as a crack cocaine exchange;  a  place  where  people
      came to buy and sell crack cocaine.
      "You pleaded guilty to three offences of supplying  crack  cocaine  on
      two separate consecutive days.  The reason why you sold crack  cocaine
      was because you hoped to make some money out of it."


   5. The sentencing judge took into account the fact that the appellant was
      a man of good character, had pleaded guilty and had expressed  genuine
      regret.  His application for leave to appeal against the sentence  was
      refused by the Court of Appeal on 12 December  1995,  suggesting  that
      the judge's approach to sentencing was proper.


   6. The appellant was released on 29 September  1997  on  parole  licence,
      having served one half of his  sentence.   Immediately  prior  to  his
      release, on 15 September 1997, he was notified  of  his  liability  to
      deportation in the light of his conviction.  By this time  Immigration
      Officers had visited his wife who had stated that  she  was  estranged
      from her husband.  About  seven  months  later,  in  April  1998,  the
      appellant committed offences of criminal damage and assault for  which
      he  was  subsequently  sentenced,  in  October  1998,  to  two  months
      imprisonment.  That conviction caused him  to  be  in  breach  of  his
      parole licence for which he was sentenced  to  a  further  six  months
      imprisonment  to  run  consecutively,  a   total   of   eight   months
      imprisonment in all.  In the course of 1998, his wife divorced him.

   7. On 7 July 1998, a few months before his second set of convictions, the
      Secretary of State made a decision to  deport  the  appellant  on  the
      basis that his deportation was conducive  to  the  public  good.   The
      decision was supported by a Refusal letter of 19 January 1998 and gave
      rise to a right of appeal directly to the Tribunal which the appellant
      duly exercised by notice on 16 July 1998.

   8. At  that  time,  almost  nothing  could  be  said  in  favour  of  the
      appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom:

           a) He had breached the terms of his original leave to enter.
           b) He had committed a serious offence involving the abuse  of  a
              Class A drug.
           c) He had breached the terms of his parole licence.
           d) He had committed a second offence, albeit of a  less  serious
              nature.
           e) The divorce from his wife had swept away the very reason  why
              he had been granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
           f) He had far stronger reasons to return to Jamaica than he  had
              to remain in the United Kingdom.   Not  least  were  the  two
              children he had there, one of whom was being cared for by his
              mother.

   9. Shortly before his conviction in October 1998, the appellant commenced
      living with Miss Nourrice, whom he had met during the  subsistence  of
      his marriage to Miss Stephenson.  In January 1999, a daughter was born
      of this relationship.

  10. It was not until 23 September 2003 that the Secretary of State  issued
      the explanatory statement that was a necessary  step  required  before
      the appeal could be heard.  Having been listed before the Tribunal  on
      29 March 2004, the appeal before us was heard on 20 May 2004.

  11. In reaching his conclusion, the Secretary of State considered his  own
      guidance set out in DP2 - 93.  From 2 October 2000, (the  introduction
      of the ECHR into English domestic law), the Secretary of State was not
      permitted to make a deportation order if the appellant's removal would
      result in a violation of his human rights.  Subject to that, paragraph
      364 of HC 395, the Immigration Rules, set out  the  requirements  that
      the Secretary of State  was  required  to  take  into  account  before
      deciding to make a deportation order:


364. In considering whether deportation is the right course on  the  merits,
the  public  interest   will   be   balanced   against   any   compassionate
circumstances of the case. While each case will be considered in  the  light
of the particular circumstances, the aim is an  exercise  of  the  power  of
deportation which is consistent and fair as between one person and  another,
although one case will rarely be identical  with  another  in  all  material
respects. Deportation will normally be the proper course where a person  has
failed to comply with  or  has  contravened  a  condition  or  has  remained
without authority. Before a decision to deport is reached the  Secretary  of
State will take into account all relevant factors known to him including:
(i) age;
(ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;
(iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
(iv) personal history, including character, conduct and employment record;
(v) domestic circumstances;
(vi) previous criminal record and the nature of any  offence  of  which  the
person has been convicted;
(vii) compassionate circumstances;
(viii) any representations received on the person's behalf.

  12. The papers before the Secretary of State included a  report  from  the
      appellant's probation officer, Mrs  Selina  Knight,  dated  19  August
      1998.  The report indicates that the appellant suffers from  a  Sickle
      Cell condition as well as a recently diagnosed genetic  illness.   The
      report continues:


      "Probation records indicate that [the appellant] had  some  difficulty
      coming to terms with his period  imprisonment  because  he  considered
      that it was not his fault that he committed  the  offences.   By  that
      time he had a debt that he was unable to repay and the offence was the
      only solution to his problem.  During supervision he has explored  the
      offences, their consequences to others and the effect  they  may  have
      had on his own life.  He does not present a high risk to the community
      of re-offending, nor as a dangerous person.  However,  his  depression
      may indicate that  there  is  underlying  anger,  but  given  all  the
      problems  he  has  been  experiencing  since  his  release,  and   the
      uncertainty of his current immigration status, the depression  may  be
      as a reaction to them."


  13. The material decision was made on 7 July 1998.  This was probably  the
      lowest point of the appellant's life.  The Tribunal is  able  to  take
      into account post-decision material insofar as it sheds light  on  the
      decision of the Secretary of State.  The fact, for  example,  that  he
      has not re-offended can properly be taken into  account  in  assessing
      the risk of re-offending.


  14. In a skeleton argument submitted on the  appellant's  behalf  for  the
      purposes  of  this  appeal,  it  is  not  surprising  that  particular
      attention is paid to the fact that more than five  years  has  elapsed
      since the decision made by the Secretary of State and the provision of
      an explanatory statement in September 2003.  During those five  years,
      it is apparent that the appellant has not re-offended, has commenced a
      relationship and has had a daughter.  It is argued that the  lapse  of
      five years is  inconsistent  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  stated
      position that it would be conducive to the public good to deport  him.
      Furthermore, it is said that the Secretary of State "has acquiesced in
      the appellant demonstrating over those five years that his deportation
      is not necessary for any other possible purpose than  the  seriousness
      of the drugs offence for which he was sentenced in 1995".

  15. Mr Jorro submits that although five  years  imprisonment  indicates  a
      serious offence, it is not of a  level  of  seriousness  that  renders
      deportation conducive to the public good by reason of the  seriousness
      of the offence alone.  In support of his submissions, he referred to a
      number  of  decisions  of  the  Tribunal  in  which  appellants   have
      successfully argued that deportation was not the right course.

  16. In Morgan (15616), (Mr JRA Fox, chairman), the decision to remove  was
      made in February 1997 following a conviction  in  April  1995  of  two
      counts of being knowingly concerned  in  supplying  crack  cocaine  in
      October 1994 to undercover police officers.  Morgan was sentenced to 4
      years imprisonment.  He was unemployed when  arrested.   He  lived  in
      rented accommodation with his wife and one child.  He pleaded guilty.

  17. In Rodney, (00 TH 00750) (Mr  JA  O'Brien  Quinn  QC,  chairman),  the
      Secretary of State  made  a  decision  in  October  1997  following  a
      conviction in December 1994 on four counts of  supplying  cocaine  for
      which he received two terms of 3 years imprisonment and two terms of 4
      years  imprisonment  to  run  concurrently.   His  recommendation  for
      deportation was subsequently quashed.  He was released  after  serving
      approximately half of his sentence on 28 March 1996.  He had married a
      British citizen in 1993 and lived together with the children  of  that
      marriage and two children of a previous relationship.  His application
      for leave to remain as a spouse of a British citizen was refused.   He
      was unemployed when the Secretary of State made his decision  and  had
      only a limited work record.  When the Tribunal considered his  appeal,
      he had commenced business with his partner and had three employees  in
      a restaurant.  He had lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  almost  ten
      years.  The Tribunal concluded that the Secretary of State had  failed
      to discharge the burden upon him that the deportation of the appellant
      was conducive to the public good.


  18. Although we were referred to the decision of the Tribunal  chaired  by
      HH Judge Cotran in Linton (22550),  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
      judgment contains any adequate reasoning that led to the appeal  being
      allowed.

  19. Finally, we were referred to the Tribunal's decision  in  Kwaku  (00TH
      01651) (Mr D. K. Allen, chairman) in which  a  citizen  of  Ghana  was
      apprehended in March 1996 with attempted importation of  cocaine  with
      an estimated street value of over �50,000.  He  was  convicted  on  22
      July 1996 and sentenced to five years imprisonment.  He  was  released
      having served approximately half of his sentence.  He was regarded  as
      someone unlikely to re-offend.  The Tribunal considered  the  decision
      quite finely balanced but found the appellant's deportation would  not
      be conducive to the public good by reason of  the  effect  this  would
      have on the break-up of his relationship  with  his  partner  and  the
      impact  this  would  have  upon  the  welfare  of  the  child   of   a
      relationship.

  20. In each of these cases, the Tribunal decided  that  the  Secretary  of
      State had failed to establish that deportation was  conducive  to  the
      public good.  In other words, these were cases in which the mere  fact
      of conviction for offences relating to the importation of cocaine  was
      not sufficient in itself to merit deportation.  Mr Jorro, who appeared
      on behalf  of  the  appellant,  did  not  rely  upon  these  cases  as
      establishing that the fact that the appellant was sentenced to 5 years
      imprisonment for drug-related offences establishes that deportation is
      not be deemed conducive to the  public  good.   He  relied  upon  them
      simply as establishing the deportation was not automatic.

  21. Mr Jorro relied upon the appellant's good conduct  since  his  release
      from the second term of imprisonment.  In that time, he submitted  the
      appellant had established a stable relationship which had resulted  in
      the birth of a daughter.  His partner works whilst the appellant looks
      after their daughter.  Since April  1998,  some  six  years  ago,  the
      appellant has not misbehaved.

  22. We accept that this is not the  case  where  the  seriousness  of  the
      offence is so great as to merit  automatic  deportation.   We  do  not
      consider that the cases set out above  do  more  than  establish  this
      principle.

  23. For the reason we have set out above, when the Secretary of State came
      to make his decision on 7 July 1998, it seems  to  us  that,  at  that
      stage, it was conducive to the public good to  deport  the  appellant.
      The fact that it was then conducive to the public good to  deport  him
      cannot be changed, retrospectively as it were.  It  remains  the  fact
      that the  appellant  should  properly  have  been  deported  in  1998.
      Furthermore, in July 1998, the Secretary of State could not reasonably
      have  assumed  that  the  appellant  would  commit  further  offences.
      Instead, we think that  he  was  obliged,  in  the  absence  of  other
      material, to assume the  appellant  would  not  re-offend  in  future.
      Subsequent events have done no  more  than  establish  as  fact  those
      matters  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  have  presumed.   The
      assumption  of  future  good  behaviour  would  not,  therefore,  have
      rendered his deportation non-conducive.

  24. Mr McGirr, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,  accepted
      that the failure to provide an explanatory  statement  until  December
      2003 was an error on the part of the Secretary of State and was an act
      of maladministration.  He was only able to explain that  restructuring
      on the part of  the  Home  Office  had  resulted  in  the  file  being
      misplaced.   He  readily  accepted  that  this  was  not  an  adequate
      justification for the delay.  Nevertheless, the delay acted to benefit
      the appellant because it provided him with an opportunity to establish
      as fact that which in 1998 could only be conjecture.  But  it  did  no
      more.

  25. Mr McGirr also submitted that the appellant  has  been  aware  of  his
      immigration status throughout the entire period since the decision  to
      deport him was made.  He  had  been  served  with  the  notice  of  an
      intention to deport him whilst he was still in custody for  the  first
      set of offences and, amongst the papers, is an acknowledgement that he
      had been so served.  At all times, he was well aware of his  uncertain
      immigration status.  He was subsequently involved in another  incident
      which resulted in a further term of imprisonment.

  26. There are a number of principles that appear to us to emerge from this
      material:
           a) The appellant has never had any reasonable expectation  since
              15 September 1997, when he was notified of his  liability  to
              deportation in the light of his conviction, that his right to
              remain would not be terminated.  His immigration  status  was
              most fragile.
           b) Nothing has been done by the Secretary of State to  give  the
              appellant a reasonable expectation that
              i. his leave to remain would not be terminated;
             ii. his future good conduct in the United Kingdom would  result
                 in the suspension of the deportation process.
           c) There is no principle in law or in  equity  that  establishes
              that an error on the part of the Home Office in processing  a
              claim should result in an appellant benefiting from the  Home
              Office's default by the grant of leave  to  remain  that  the
              appellant would not otherwise have merited.
           d) There is no estoppel that operates to prevent  the  Secretary
              of State from now relying on the  factors  on  which  he  was
              properly able to rely in July 1998.
           e) There is no principle that the Home Office should be punished
              for its delay by the grant of an adverse decision.
           f) The appellant has not been prejudiced by the delay in that he
              has merely had the  advantage  of  remaining  in  the  United
              Kingdom  for  a  longer  period  than  might  otherwise  have
              happened.
           g) The relationship with the appellant's  girlfriend  (including
              the birth of their child) has taken  place  during  a  period
              when the appellant knew his was liable to deportation.
           h) It must be a private matter for the couple to decide  whether
              they wish to continue that relationship in Jamaica, a country
              with which  the  appellant  still  has  links  including  the
              presence of two children by previous relationships as well as
              other family or, at least, his mother.


  27.  The grounds of appeal and  skeleton  argument,  clearly  anticipating
      arguments such as those expressed in the preceding paragraph, seek  to
      criticise the Secretary of State  for  the  delay  and  argue,  albeit
      obliquely, that the factors that were "conducive" in  July  1998  have
      since been negatived to a point where the Secretary of  State  can  no
      longer rely upon them.


  28. It is argued that the Secretary  of  State  can  hardly  rely  on  the
      appellant's deportation being conducive to the public  good  where  he
      himself has delayed in advancing the public good to a point where  his
      present departure would serve no good.  We would agree that, where the
      Secretary of State has unequivocally acted contrary to  his  professed
      claim that it is for the public good for an appellant to be  deported,
      the decision to pursue the process may be Wednesbury unreasonable.  In
      the present case, however, the Secretary of State  has  made  no  such
      assertions expressly or by implication.  In our judgment, to lose  the
      file as a result of a departmental re-organisation cannot be construed
      as an implied recognition of the appellant's right to remain.

  29. Even more tortuously, the appellant argues that the Secretary of State
      has "acquiesced in the appellant demonstrating over those 5 years that
      his deportation is not necessary..."  We do not see  any  role  for  a
      principle of acquiescence in the context of deportation or, indeed, in
      immigration control generally.  It implies that the Secretary of State
      knew that the appellant was developing his life in the United  Kingdom
      and that he then stood by and let it  happen  in  circumstances  where
      common justice should not permit the Secretary of  State  to  benefit.
      It is rather as if the appellant were to  have  committed  himself  to
      obligations under  a  long-term  contract  (perhaps  a  mortgage),  in
      reliance on Home Office inactivity, such that it would be  inequitable
      to require the appellant to lose out on the contract by requiring  him
      to leave.  In  neither  case  can  we  see  a  justification  for  any
      principle of acquiescence.   Put  shortly,  if  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State was correct at the time  it  was  made,  it  cannot
      cease to be correct through his subsequent  inactivity,  even  to  the
      point of acquiescence.

  30. For these reasons, we are satisfied that, when the Secretary of  State
      came to make his decision in July 1998, the  appellant's  removal  was
      conducive to the public good, his decision  was  lawful  and  was  the
      result of a correct evaluation of the Rules, his own  policy  and  the
      applicable law.  We are unable to identify any principle that deprives
      the Secretary of State of the right to maintain his decision  of  July
      1998.

 Decision:  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Andrew Jordan
Vice President
8 June 2004
