
H-KM-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 4 October 2004          |        |                            |
|                   MM (FMA- Low level - Risk - Evidence) Iran     |
|[2004] UKIAT 00313                                                |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|16 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey - Vice President                                    |
|Miss B Mensah - Vice President                                    |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For  the  Appellant:            Mr   N   Klear   of   Simmons   Solicitors,
                 Borehamwood, Hertfordshire
For the Respondent:    Mr G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals with permission against the
    Determination of an Adjudicator,  Mrs  M  M  Shanahan,  promulgated  16
    February 2004, wherein she dismissed an appeal against the decision  of
    the Respondent, who had refused leave to enter  and  asylum  and  human
    rights claims.

2.    The Vice President who granted permission noted the grounds as:

       "(a) the Adjudicator had erred in his  assessment  of  the  evidence
           regarding the lack of adverse interest in the Claimant shown  by
           the Iranian authorities following his departure from Iran;


        (b) she erred in her assessment of the objective evidence regarding
           the adverse interest shown by the Iranian authorities in persons
           associated with the Free Movement of Azerbaijan;


        (c) she erred in her assessment of the Article 3 claim"


3.     The  Vice  President  considered,  in  light  of  the  Adjudicator's
    acceptance of the Appellant's evidence, as recorded at paragraph 31  of
    her Determination, those grounds raised arguable points  of  law  which
    merited further consideration.

4.    We noted that this appeal  had  been  heard  by  the  Adjudicator  in
    February 2004 and therefore was  based  on  the  2002  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act.

5.    At the outset we were provided  with  a  bundle  from  the  Appellant
    consisting of some  147  pages.   This  included  additional  material,
    beyond that which was submitted to  the  Adjudicator.   Mr  Klear  also
    submitted to us copy of the Determination in Kiali [2002]  UKIAT  01328
    (persecution - refugees - political writer  -  Iran  -  CG).   Mr  Elks
    submitted to us a Determination he considered relevant WN [2004]  UKIAT
    00213 (Surendran, credibility, new evidence - DRC).

The Adjudicator's Determination

6.    Before the Adjudicator Mr Klear had  represented  the  Appellant  but
    there was no appearance from the Home Office.   The  Adjudicator  found
    that the Appellant's claim was as now follows.   He was an  Iranian  of
    Azeri ethnicity.  A friend of his, J S, was involved  in  the  "Freedom
    Movement of Azerbaijan" (FMA).  That friend had asked the Appellant  to
    look after two small boxes of leaflets about the  movement,  which  the
    Appellant agreed to do.  The day after he  received  the  boxes,  which
    appeared to be 1 March 2001, the police came to the Appellant's  house.
    The Appellant saw them  from  upstairs  and,  fearing  arrest,  escaped
    through the back of his house.  He fled to another town and stayed with
    a friend.  Approximately two days later he made his way to the  Turkish
    border and ultimately, after five months in Turkey, travelled  to  this
    country.  He states that he had a brother who had been involved in  the
    Mojaheddin and in 1991, as a result of this,  the  Appellant  had  been
    detained, when the police came searching for the brother.  His  brother
    was ultimately imprisoned for one  year  but,  following  his  release,
    travelled to Australia, where he obtained refugee status.

7.    The Appellant feared that if he were returned he would  be  arrested,
    detained and tortured, because of his possession of the leaflets and  a
    political opinion that would be imputed to him.

8.    Before the Adjudicator was objective material from the United  States
    Department of State Report, the October  2003  CIPU  Report  and  other
    material in the Appellant's bundle.  The Adjudicator noted that  Azeris
    are the largest minority group in Iran comprising between 25 and 33% of
    the population.  They are Sh'ia  Muslims  "and  in  most  respects  are
    similar  to  the  rest  of  the  population".   The  one  factor  which
    differentiates them is their language, which is Azeri Turkish.  In  the
    main they live in the north-western provinces of Iran and  areas  known
    as East and West Azerbaijan.  Many also live in Tehran and in scattered
    communities  in  between  the  western  provinces  and   Tehran.    She
    summarised that Azeris were not targeted because of their ethnicity but
    would be if they were  involved  in  anti-government  activities.   She
    noted also from the reports that Azeris had no legal or illegal parties
    or organisations and, since the 1980s, they had not been  subjected  to
    much repression  or  discrimination.   However  some  complaints  about
    discrimination in relation to Persian culture, and the removal  of  the
    Azeri language from official use, did occur.

9.    She noted some of the material did indicate there was a  movement  by
    Azeris to re-establish their culture and that this movement appeared to
    be led by  Dr  Mahmoudali  Chehregani.   It  was  also  noted  that  Dr
    Chehregani had been arrested and tortured and  released  several  times
    over the past five years.  The objective evidence also disclosed  that,
    according to Azeri groups, there  were  a  number  of  Azeri  political
    prisoners jailed for advocating their cultural and language rights  and
    several had been charged with "revolting against the Islamic state."

10.   The Adjudicator found,  after  hearing  evidence  and  assessing  the
    objective information, that the Appellant had not embellished his  case
    and, in fact, the only  possible  discrepancy  involved  the  Appellant
    actually reducing the seriousness of his account to the extent that  he
    stated he was simply looking after the two boxes of  leaflets  for  his
    friend.

11.   At paragraph 31 she went on to find:

       "Having reviewed the evidence and  the  Appellant's  explanations  I
       find that he has provided a credible account in that  he  agreed  to
       look after two boxes of leaflets but the police came to his home and
       he escaped.  It is likely that his wife was interrogated  about  him
       but was then released.   However  there  is  no  evidence  that  any
       further interest has been shown by the authorities.   There  are  no
       warrants or summonses outstanding for him and there is  no  evidence
       of any further visits to his wife or family.  His involvement was at
       the very lowest level in a movement which  even  today  it  has  not
       caused any persecution of  Azeris,  other  than  Mohammed  Chehrangi
       (sic), and an  Azeri  group  report  of  an  unspecified  number  of
       political prisoners.  This Appellant is not in the same category; he
       is not a person of any prominence, he has not been involved  in  any
       political activities or groups and his arrest in 1991 was because he
       interfered  with  his  brother's  arrest  and  not  because  of  any
       political issues."


12.   She went on to assess  the  risks  in  the  following  paragraph  and
    concluded that the Appellant would return as  a  failed  asylum  seeker
    and, at  most,  would  face  prosecution  for  illegal  exit.  However,
    following the Determination in Mohommadzadeh [2002] UKIAT  05660,  that
    would not amount to persecution.  She therefore  dismissed  the  appeal
    both on asylum and human rights grounds.

The Appellant's Case

13.   Mr Klear submitted that as credibility had  been  accepted  the  sole
    issues before the Tribunal were the assessment of the reality  of  risk
    to this Appellant on return and whether there would be  sufficiency  of
    protection available to him.  He adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  upon
    which permission was granted.  He submitted that it was  necessary  for
    us to consider the objective evidence at the outset and  then  conclude
    whether the Determination of the Adjudicator was perverse on the  basis
    of that objective evidence.

Appellant's Objective Evidence

14.   We were  firstly  referred  to  a  Radio  Free  Europe/Radio  Liberty
    "Newsline" article of 29 April 2003  "Azerbaijan  Looks  South".   This
    article  refers  to  the  ethnic  identity  of  Azeris   being   vastly
    underestimated and that  it  is  a  powerful  force  quite  capable  of
    superseding the integration  and  assimilation  of  Azeris  within  the
    Iranian state.  "This argument  also  holds  that  the  internal-reform
    effort under way in Iran is fuelling a cultural  and  ethnic  awakening
    among ethnic Azeris."  Problems relating to the Azeri language and  its
    acceptance in Iran are then set out.

15.   We were then  referred  to  objective  information  contained  in  an
    earlier Determination of the Tribunal  Rasti  [2002]  UKIAT  02598,  at
    paragraph 5 where reference is made to a United  States  Department  of
    State Report of February 2000 and a comment is made:

       "The government is paranoid about oppositional activities abroad  so
       much so that several Iranian dissidents who have  fled  abroad  been
       tracked down and killed by Iranian Government agents."


16.   We were next taken to the CIPU Report of October 2003,  at  paragraph
    6.112, under the section "Ethnic Minority  Groups".   This  states  the
    largest ethnic minority group in Iran are the  Azeris.   At  paragraphs
    6.126-6.128 there is a sub-section  on  Azeris.   We  have  noted  this
    section.  It states:

       "6.126.  Iranian  Azeris  are  not  targeted  as  a  group  and  not
       persecuted unless they are  involved  in  some  general  opposition-
       related activities.  The Azerbaijanis, also known as the Azeris, are
       the largest minority in Iran composing between one quarter  and  one
       third of Iran's population estimates vary because the Iranian census
       does not count Azeris specifically.  They are Shi'a Muslims  and  in
       most respects similar to the rest of the  Iranian  population.  Many
       prominent Iranian Shi'i clerics have been and are Azeris.   The  one
       factor that  differentiates  them  from  the  rest  of  the  Iranian
       population is that their native language  is  Azeri  Turkish.   They
       live in the north-western provinces of East and West  Azerbaijan  as
       well as  in  Tehran  and  scattered  communities  in  between  these
       provinces and Tehran.


       6.127.  For a brief period after the revolution, the Azeri  language
       press flourished.  Also,  with  Soviet  encouragement  and  support,
       Azeri nationalism and the desire  for  autonomy  began  to  resurge.
       However, the Iranian Government considered this  nationalism  to  be
       the result of Soviet interference in Iranian affairs  and  began  to
       repress this resurgent nationalism in the early 1980s.  After  1981,
       there were few reports of disturbances and by 1984, only one of  the
       many Azeri language publications remained.  The Azeris,  as  of  the
       late 1982, have participated in the Iran government  at  a  national
       level as much as any other group, including ethnic Iranians,  up  to
       the highest levels of government.


       6.128.  The Azeris have no illegal or  legal  political  parties  or
       organizations.  As has been the case since the mid-1980s, the Azeris
       have not had to deal with much repression  or  discrimination.   The
       Iranian government prefers to emphasize  the  cultural  similarities
       between the Persian speaking majority of Iran and the  Azeris.   The
       only repression or discrimination that occurred since the revolution
       has been immediately after the revolution in order  to  repress  the
       stirring Azeri nationalism and demands for autonomy.   Nevertheless,
       there have been complaints about discrimination  against  Azeris  by
       the Iranian regime, particularly  against  Turkic  speaking  Azeris.
       One commentator writes of the dominance  of  a  policy  of  'Persian
       chauvinism' leading to  the  removal  of  the  Azeri  language  from
       official use in  all  areas  such  as  schools,  courts,  government
       structures and the army as well as the prohibition of some forms  of
       Azeri cultural expression."


17.   Mr Klear submitted that these three paragraphs indicated that persons
    such as the Appellant would therefore be of  interest  to  the  Iranian
    authorities on return as a person promoting the  advancement  of  Azeri
    cultural expression.

18.   We were next referred to the United States Department of State Report
    on Iran (2002 report released 31/03/2003).  At section 5 of that report
    (pages 83 and 84 of the bundle) it stated:

       "In general the government did not  discriminate  on  the  basis  of
       race,  disability,  language   or   social   status;   however,   it
       discriminated on the basis of religion and sex.  In some  instances,
       it discriminated on the basis of language, such as with  the  Kurds,
       Azeris and Ahwazi Arabs."


19.   There was also a reference under the section  "National/Racial/Ethnic
    Minorities" to the Azeris where it is stated:

       "Azeris  are  well  integrated  into  Government  and  society,  but
       complained of ethnic and linguistic discrimination.  The  Government
       traditionally viewed Azeri nationalism as threatening,  particularly
       since the dissolution of the Soviet Union and  the  creation  of  an
       independent Azerbaijan.  Mohammed Chehregani, an  advocate  for  the
       cultural rights of Azeris, has been arrested,  imprisoned,  tortured
       and released several times over the past five years.   According  to
       Azeri groups, Chehregani's December 1999 arrest was made to  prevent
       his registration as a candidate for the February 2000  parliamentary
       elections.  They also claimed that there  were  a  number  of  Azeri
       political prisoners jailed  for  advocating  cultural  and  language
       rights for Iranian Azerbaijanis.  The government has charged several
       of them with 'revolting against the Islamic state'."


20.   Mr Klear took us to a report prepared by Dr Chehragani and issued  by
    the Centre  for  Strategic  and  International  Studies  (USA)  titled,
    "Azerbaijani Turks of Iran: Will They Lead a Revolution Again?"  by  Dr
    Chehragani 8  August  2002.   At  the  outset  of  that  report,  in  a
    commentary, it states that Dr Chehragani is the leader of the  National
    Movement of South Azerbaijan (GAMOH).  He ran in the 1995 parliamentary
    elections in Iran and received nearly 600,000 votes in  Tebriz.   Since
    then he had been jailed three times and tortured.  It  states  that  he
    left  Iran  eight  months  earlier  than  the  article  to  inform  the
    international community  of  developments  inside  Iran.   The  article
    records an interview with him.  From this interview Mr Klear  asked  us
    to note several points.  These included a  statement  that  Azerbaijani
    Turks were the majority ethnic group in Iran  comprising  approximately
    50 million people of which 20 million  live  in  south  Azerbaijan,  10
    million in Tehran (making up 70%  of  the  population)  and  4  million
    elsewhere.  It states that Dr Chehragani was released from imprisonment
    after Amnesty International condemnation  and  a  letter  from  the  UN
    Secretary General Kofi Annan finally secured his being let out of jail.
     He stated that GAMOH had become very strong over the past seven  years
    and that once a year they had a gathering at Babak Castle (this being a
    liberty symbol for south Azerbaijan) about 1.2 million people showed up
    at that festival.  It was also stated that they had established over  a
    thousand committees  and  towns  and  villages  and  cities  and  those
    committees had raised  the  cultural  needs  of  the  Azerbaijani  Turk
    population.  The report  also  interestingly  notes  that  the  supreme
    leader Khameini is himself an Azeri.

21.   Other reports from Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty were  produced  to
    us including "Azeri - Iranian celebration brings risk" (12 July  2004).
    This refers to thousands of people gathering at  the  Babak  Castle  in
    late June early July for their annual commemoration and  that  security
    forces reported arrests of 80 ethnic Azeris for "spreading secessionist
    propaganda during the celebration.  Of  the  more  than  100  who  were
    arrested some were released but many more did not return home from  the
    camp out ceremonies.  It also states that there were some 40,000-60,000
    police, plain clothed and security agents, in the area at the  time  of
    the festival.

22.    A further  article  from  Radio  Free  Europe/Radio  Liberty  "Azeri
    irredentists claim massive repression in Iran" (28  July  2003).   This
    states that the "National Liberation Movement of  Southern  Azerbaijan"
    claims that its activists  are  the  subject  of  "massive  arrest  and
    repression".  This report is from the Baku office of  the  Congress  of
    Azerbaijanis.

23.   Mr Klear stated this comprised the objective  evidence  that  he  was
    able to find in relation to risks to Azeris.  He submitted  that  given
    the positive credibility findings of the Adjudicator, when coupled with
    the objective evidence which showed targeted political activities exist
    against Azeris, it was evident that the Adjudicator had  erred  in  her
    conclusions.  In  this  situation,  he  submitted,  that   the  Iranian
    authorities would have a file on the appellant, which would be awaiting
    him on his return.  Therefore he was likely to be questioned on  return
    and subjected to detention and serious maltreatment.

24.    He  agreed  that  the  Adjudicator  had  correctly  summarised   the
    Appellant's position as only looking after two boxes of  pamphlets  and
    that there was no  indication  of  any  warrants,  summonses  or  other
    outstanding demands, upon the Appellant, by  the  Iranian  authorities.
    He submitted that, as the question of whether  there  were  outstanding
    summonses or warrants had  not  been  put  to  the  Appellant,  it  was
    incorrect of the Adjudicator to bring  this  into  her  considerations.
    The only evidence the Appellant had produced was  in  relation  to  his
    wife being detained and questioned, and that the boxes of pamphlets had
    been taken away by the Iranian authorities.  He agreed that  the  other
    evidence from his wife indicated that  she  had  moved  away  from  the
    family home and now lived with her  father.   However  he  produced  no
    evidence that she or other  family  members  had  been  interviewed  or
    detained subsequent to his wife's two day detention.

25.   We asked whether he was submitting that the Appellant would  be  seen
    as an activist.  He submitted that this  would  be  the  case,  as  the
    Appellant had been found to have the leaflets in support of  the  Azeri
    cause in his home, and that given the resurgence in 2004 of interest in
    suppressing Azeri interests in Iran, there was therefore a real risk to
    this Appellant on return.

The Respondent's Submissions

26.   Mr Elks submitted to us that we should note that this was  an  appeal
    that should be considered by us under the 2002 Asylum  and  Immigration
    Act and that we should only interfere with the decision if there was  a
    clear error of law made by the Adjudicator.   He  referred  us  to  the
    recent Determination of the Court of Appeal in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165,
    paragraphs 24-28.

27.   He submitted that there was no perversity shown in the  Determination
    of the Adjudicator and she had reached a decision that was open to her,
    after  careful  regard  to  the  authorities  and  the  subjective  and
    objective material before her.   He  submitted  that  the  findings  of
    paragraph 31 of the  Determination  were  significant  and  that  these
    showed that the Adjudicator had found lack of further interest  in  the
    Appellant, with the only interest being a  two  day  detention  of  his
    wife.  There had been no follow-up with any other family members  since
    that time and, in his submission, it was reasonable to  conclude  that,
    if there had been further interest even though his wife  had  moved  to
    stay with her father, the authorities could readily have pursued her or
    other members of  the  family  including  the  Appellant's  brother  or
    father.

28.   In particular he claimed that the Appellant had not provided evidence
    of any summonses being delivered to his family, as  might  be  expected
    and noted from the CIPU Report (paragraph 5.35).

29.   In this situation, he submitted that, there was a lack of  continuing
    interest in this Appellant and therefore there would not be a real risk
    on his return.  We noted that while the leaflets had  been  taken  from
    the Appellant's home the Appellant's wife had  been  released  after  a
    period of two days  and  there  was  no  evidence  to  state  that  the
    authorities believed the leaflets were actually  incriminating  to  the
    Appellant.  Beyond this, even if it were assumed they did implicate the
    Appellant, no further interest had been taken after the release of  his
    wife.

30.   He submitted that the Adjudicator had been correct  in  finding  that
    the Appellant was not an activist and his involvement was only  at  the
    very lowest level.  There was thus no apparent  error  of  law  in  the
    Determination.

31.   If, it were assumed that there was an error of law, which he did  not
    concede, then, even taking into account the  new  evidence,  there  was
    insufficient material for us to conclude this Appellant would be  at  a
    real risk on return.  He referred us to the objective material set  out
    above,  in  particular  the  material  from  Radio  Free  Europe.    He
    questioned how reliable this material was,  as  its  sources  were  not
    quoted.  He agreed that there may be an ethnic awakening of Azeris  but
    the objective evidence did not indicate that actions taken against this
    Appellant rose to the level of persecution, the only  exceptions  being
    in very high profile situations, such as Dr Chehragani.

32.    Beyond  this  the  objective  evidence  showed  that  there  was  no
    generalised discrimination, except towards the Azeri  language.   Other
    than this, integration of Azeris, as a major ethnic group, was  clearly
    shown by the objective  evidence.   Indeed  many  Azeris  were  at  the
    highest levels of government (CIPU Report 6.143).

33.   In reply Mr Klear submitted that we must note  the  low  standard  of
    proof required and that credibility had been accepted in this case.  He
    submitted that, because summonses had not been provided or referred  to
    by the Appellant, did not mean  that  they  were  not  outstanding  and
    awaiting the Appellant on return.  In particular he  noted  that,  this
    issue had not been put to the  Appellant  for  comment.   He  submitted
    therefore this evidence could  not  be  relied  on  in  dismissing  the
    Appellant's case.

34.   We reserved our Determination.

The Issues

35.   We found the first issue before us to be whether the Adjudicator  had
    made an error or law in  her  assessment?  To  do  this  we  needed  to
    establish whether there was  sufficient  error  or  perversity  in  her
    Determination to the extent that it was unsustainable.

36.   If an error of law was found, on the basis of the additional evidence
    provided, was this Appellant at a real risk of persecution  or  serious
    maltreatment that could invoke a breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR  on
    return to Iran?

Decision

37.   At the outset we consider that the  conclusions  of  the  Adjudicator
    that this Appellant was a person of  very  low  profile  and  that  his
    involvement with the FMA has been at a very low level are valid on  the
    evidence.  The conclusions of the Adjudicator therefore, that there was
    no real risk to him, we consider are sustainable and no  perversity  is
    apparent from the submissions and evidence now put to us.

38.   We note that the Adjudicator did rely on  the  Appellant  failing  to
    produced evidence of any further follow-up after his wife's  detention,
    including the  fact  that  no  evidence  of  summonses  or  outstanding
    warrants have been submitted by the Appellant.  In this regard we  note
    that it is for the Appellant to make his own case.  He has not provided
    any evidence in this regard.  It would be pure speculation  to  suggest
    that summonses may be waiting for him on return.   In  this  situation,
    even though this issue may not have been put to  him,  we  do  consider
    that it is a relevant matter that the Adjudicator was entitled to  take
    into account considering that if there were such summonses then it  was
    logical and highly likely that the Appellant would have made  reference
    to them.

39.   We are therefore satisfied that there is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    Determination and for this reason the appeal must be dismissed.  Beyond
    that, if we are wrong in that conclusion, from  an  assessment  of  the
    objective information, set out above, we consider that  there  is  less
    than a real risk of the Appellant being persecuted or that there  would
    be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR on his return.  Any risk to him is
    of a remote or highly speculative nature.  This  Appellant  is  clearly
    not an Azeri activist, as is mentioned in the  objective  material  (in
    particular the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty articles).  He therefore
    has a totally different profile to Dr Chehragani who  has  been  making
    substantive assertions of Azeri separatism, on a sustained basis,  over
    a lengthy period of time.  This Appellant's activities have been  of  a
    very minor nature only and this,  coupled  with  the  lack  of  further
    follow-up  after  the  short  detention  of  his  wife,  confirms   our
    conclusions that he is not at a real risk.

40.   This appeal is therefore dismissed.



                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
