
Heard at Field House              AO (Age Dispute - Asylum Interview -
Procedure) Lebanon [2004] UKIAT 00040

On 28 January 2004

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                               08 March 2004

                                   Before:

                              Mr Andrew Jordan
                               Mr K. Drabu, VP
                               Mr N. Kumar, JP


Between



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr A. Salfiti, solicitor of Messrs Salfiti &
Co
For the respondent:    Mr D.N. Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a Palestinian who comes  from  the  Burj  Al  Shemali
      Palestinian refugee camp near  Tyre  in  the  south  of  Lebanon.   He
      appeals against the determination of an  adjudicator,  Mr  T.   Jones,
      dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
      to refuse both his asylum and his human rights claims.


   2. The appellant is a single man born on 22 December 1984 and is 19 years
      old.  He entered the  United  Kingdom  on  8  November  2002  avoiding
      immigration controls and claimed asylum  on  11  November  2002.   The
      Secretary of State refused  his  claim  and  made  a  decision  on  18
      December 2000 giving  directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom to Lebanon, thereby giving rise to a  right  of  appeal  under
      section 69 (5) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  appellant
      duly appealed.


   3. The appellant  claimed  that  all  the  members  of  his  family  were
      associated with Fatah.  In March 2002, Fatah organised a demonstration
      in the camp which was attacked by members  of  Hamas.   The  appellant
      claims he opened fire causing an immediate escalation of the violence.
       This resulted in the Lebanese authorities  forbidding  demonstrations
      outside  the  camp.   The  appellant  claimed   he   challenged   this
      prohibition and this resulted in his becoming a wanted man in the eyes
      of the Lebanese authorities.   In  addition,  his  opposition  to  the
      activities of Hamas and  the  Islamic  groups  opposed  to  Fatah  has
      resulted in his being targeted by them.  As a result, he claims he had
      no alternative but to flee.


   4. As the adjudicator points out in paragraph 13  of  the  determination,
      there were a number of discrepancies in the  appellant's  account.  In
      paragraph 14 of  the  determination  the  adjudicator  analysed  these
      discrepancies and concluded that they undermined the central parts  of
      the appellant's claim.  Accordingly, the adjudicator was not satisfied
      that the appellant had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason or was at risk of a violation of his  human  rights.
      He dismissed the appeal.


   5. The appellant appealed to the Tribunal.  In the grounds  of  appeal  a
      challenge is made to  the  adjudicator's  handling  of  the  interview
      record.  The appellant has consistently claimed that he was born on 22
      December 1984.  He was interviewed on 13 December 2002, 9 days  before
      he would say he reached his  eighteenth  birthday.  The  Secretary  of
      State, however, disputed the appellant's age and claimed that  he  was
      older.  The issue is set out in paragraph 12  of  the  Refusal  letter
      dated 16 December 2002 in which the Secretary of State said:


           "When you made your application for  asylum,  you  claimed  that
           your date of birth is  22  December  1984.   However,  you  have
           failed to produce  any  evidence  to  substantiate  this  claim.
           Although you claim to be a minor your physical appearance before
           the ASU Officer suggested that you were over 18.  In the absence
           of any evidence to the contrary the Secretary of State does  not
           accept that you are a minor  and  is  satisfied  you  should  be
           treated as an adult in accordance with paragraph 349 of  HC  395
           (as amended)."


   6. In paragraph 14 of the determination the adjudicator  found  that  the
      Immigration Officers acted in good faith in conducting  the  interview
      in the genuine belief that the appellant was over the age of  18.   He
      said:


           "Certainly given the physical appearance of the appellant before
           me, I might have subscribed to a similar view.  In  the  absence
           of being able to ascertain his age precisely, I am  prepared  to
           give the appellant the benefit of the doubt and subscribe to the
           date of birth he gives before me."


   7.  It was for the appellant to satisfy the Secretary of  State  and  the
      adjudicator on the lower standard as to  his  age.   We  have  avoided
      making any assessment of his age in the course of the  hearing  before
      the Tribunal.  At the hearing before the adjudicator, no  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer appeared.  The  adjudicator  was  deprived  of  the
      opportunity of hearing cross-examination on this issue,  assuming  (as
      we do) that it remained a live issue.  We  do  not  know  whether  any
      evidence was advanced by the appellant in support of his claim to be a
      minor at the date of his interview but  it  was  always  part  of  the
      appellant's case that he was born on 22  December  1984.   We  do  not
      consider that the adjudicator can  be  criticised  for  accepting  the
      appellant's contention that he was not yet 18 when the interview  took
      place. If, as he claims, he was born on 22  December  1984  he  was  a
      month short of  his  majority  when  he  completed  the  Statement  of
      Evidence Form that was submitted to the Home Office  and  was  9  days
      short of his majority when he was interviewed at the Home Office.  The
      adjudicator's finding that the interviewer acted in  good  faith  when
      conducting the interview and making an assessment of his  age  is  not
      challenged in the grounds of appeal.


   8.  The  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that  the  adjudicator  should  have
      disregarded the contents of the interview because,  according  to  the
      adjudicator's own findings, the appellant was a minor at the time  the
      interview took place.  Paragraph 352 of HC 395 provides:


           "352. A child will not be interviewed about the substance of his
           claim to refugee status if it is possible to obtain  by  written
           inquiries or from other sources sufficient information  properly
           to determine the claim.   When  an  interview  is  necessary  it
           should be conducted in  the  presence  of  a  parent,  guardian,
           representative or another adult who for  the  time  being  takes
           responsibility for the child and is not an Immigration  Officer,
           an officer of the Secretary of State or a police  officer.   The
           interviewer should have particular  regard  to  the  possibility
           that a child will feel inhibited or alarmed.  The  child  should
           be allowed to express himself in his own  way  and  at  his  own
           speed.  If he appears tired or distressed, the interview  should
           be stopped."


   9. It is apparent from the foregoing that, in most circumstances, a child
      should not be interviewed.   Indeed,  if  the  child  is  represented,
      written inquiries will almost always  provide  sufficient  information
      properly to determine the claim, provided the information supplied  is
      comprehensive.  However, the paragraph also envisages circumstances in
      which a child may be interviewed and the safeguards that are  then  to
      be adopted.  Paragraph 352 makes no provision for a case in which  the
      age of the claimant is in dispute.


  10. It is not for the Secretary of State to determine the claimant's  age,
      although in disputed cases he will have to form an opinion of it.  The
      onus is upon the claimant to establish that he is a  minor  if  he  is
      asserting it.  The final decision, however, rests with the adjudicator
      as part of his fact-finding duties.  It follows that the Secretary  of
      State in an application in which age is in issue will not finally know
      whether the claimant is a minor until, in a case which is  subject  to
      appeal, the adjudicator so finds.  This does not, of  course,  prevent
      the Secretary of State from forming his own opinion as to age, whether
      or not supported by expert evidence, and thereby making a decision  as
      to whether an interview should be conducted.  In the present  case  it
      was  apparent  from  the  appellant's  appearance,  as  found  by  the
      adjudicator, that the Secretary of State acted in good faith in making
      an assessment that the  appellant  was  not  a  minor.  In  our  view,
      therefore, the Secretary of State cannot be criticised for  conducting
      the interview.


  11. When the matter came before  the  adjudicator,  it  was  clearly  good
      practice on his part to make a finding  as  to  the  appellant's  age.
      There may be circumstances where it is not necessary but in many cases
      a finding as to the appellant's age will be  important  in  making  an
      assessment of the appellant's overall level  of  understanding.   This
      may well go to issues of credibility.  It may well have a  bearing  on
      any claim in human rights.  It does not seem  to  us  to  be  normally
      appropriate to deal with  age  as  a  preliminary  issue  unless  that
      finding effectively determines the appeal.  Rather, the  issue  as  to
      the appellant's age will usually be one of the several issues that the
      adjudicator is required to resolve.  Since the ultimate decision  will
      come as a result of hearing all of the evidence and  submissions  made
      upon it, the appellant's age may only finally  be  determined  at  the
      conclusion of the hearing and not during the course of it.   If  there
      has  been  an  interview,  as  occurred  in  the  present  case,   the
      adjudicator will  have  heard  evidence  about  the  contents  of  the
      interview whether or not he later decides that an interview should not
      have taken place because the appellant is a minor.


  12. There is no rule of law in immigration cases  that  excludes  evidence
      obtained in an interview of a minor which should not have taken  place
      or which might legitimately have taken place but was not conducted  in
      accordance with  paragraph  352  because,  for  example,  it  was  not
      conducted in the presence of the child's representative.  Although the
      1999 Act makes provision for Codes of  Practice  in  relation  to  the
      conduct of inquiries, we were not referred to any specific  provisions
      of a Code of Practice that governed this matter.


  13. The Tribunal takes the view that the rules of the evidence in relation
      to appeals before an adjudicator are necessarily widely drawn.  In the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000, Rule 37 permits
      the appellate authority to receive oral, documentary or other evidence
      of any fact which appears to that authority  to  be  relevant  to  the
      appeal, even though that evidence would be inadmissible in a court  of
      law. Rule 48 (1) of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
      Rules 2003 provides a similarly wide discretion:


           "48  (1)  An  adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal  may  allow   oral,
           documentary or other evidence to be  given  of  any  fact  which
           appears to be relevant to an appeal or an application for  bail,
           even if that evidence would be inadmissible in a court of law."


  14.  The safeguard inherent in these provisions is that the adjudicator is
      free to operate his judgment as to the weight that he attaches to  the
      evidence provided to him.   Thus,  for  example,  an  adjudicator  may
      decide to attach very little weight to the  contents  of  a  telephone
      conversation with a person who was told  by  some  other  unidentified
      third person of facts material to  the  claim.   If  that  example  is
      extreme, it is the almost invariable task of an adjudicator to make an
      assessment of the weight that can be  attached  to  a  witness  giving
      evidence before him by considering his age, education, experience  and
      understanding.   This  consideration  will  rarely  be  voiced  in   a
      determination,   far   less   capable   of   scientific    evaluation.
      Consequently,  there  need  be  no  difference  in  the  adjudicator's
      approach to the evidence given by this appellant at a time when he was
      17 years 11 months old and the time a few  weeks  later  when  he  had
      attained  his  majority.   Very  different  considerations  would,  of
      course, apply had the evidence been given at a time when he  was  much
      younger.


  15. There are circumstances in which  the  Tribunal  discern  a  role  for
      exclusionary evidence, such  as  pursuant  to  Rule  48(5)  where  the
      adjudicator and the Tribunal are required by law not to  consider  any
      evidence which is not filed in accordance with time limits set out  in
      the Rules or directions given to the parties  under  Rule  38,  unless
      satisfied that there are good reasons to do so.  Notwithstanding this,
      such exclusionary provisions are subject to the  overriding  objective
      in Rule 4 to secure the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals
      and applications in the interests of the  parties  and  in  the  wider
      public interest.  That said, we see no  justification  for  a  general
      principle that excludes the record of an interview  conducted  with  a
      minor if the adjudicator or the Tribunal receives no credible evidence
      that it was conducted unfairly and it is an  accurate  record  of  the
      claim of  the  person  interviewed,  commensurate  with  his  age  and
      understanding.


  16. It must also be borne in mind that an interview conducted with a minor
      may advance the claim, rather  than  detract  from  it.   The  present
      appeal is a case in point.  There  is  no  dispute  that  a  minor  is
      capable of providing, and ought to provide,  a  SEF  setting  out  his
      claim, albeit the statement is  provided  in  a  confidential  setting
      where the minor is unlikely to experience  anxiety.   In  the  instant
      appeal, however, the nature of the claim was not the  claim  that  the
      appellant, as an adult, was subsequently to advance.  For example,  in
      paragraph 13 (iii), it appears that the appellant said in  his  asylum
      interview record and in his evidence that the Lebanese authorities did
      not arrest him.  In contrast, in  his  SEF,  the  appellant  expressly
      stated that he was arrested.  See paragraph 8 at A23 of the  statement
      annexed to the SEF.  This discrepancy is repeated in paragraph  14  of
      the determination. Consequently, although Mr Salfiti sought to exclude
      the contents of  the  interview  record,  it  is  our  view  that  the
      interview supports the claim that the appellant  advanced  before  the
      adjudicator.  Whilst it could not, of course, remove the  discrepancy,
      it cannot but have neutralised (to some extent at least)  its  effect.
      Had the appellant advanced for the first time at the hearing  a  claim
      that was substantially different from that set out in his application,
      we venture to  suggest  that  an  adjudicator  might  justifiably  had
      treated this as undermining his overall credibility.  In  the  present
      appeal, the interview afforded the appellant with an opportunity  less
      than a month after the  completion  of  his  SEF  to  put  the  record
      straight.


  17. There can, of course, be no room for cherry-picking of  the  evidence.
      A party is not entitled to rely on those parts of the  evidence  which
      support his claim whilst claiming  to  reject  those  parts  which  no
      longer accord with the claim. In the  instant  case,  Mr  Salfiti  was
      unable to draw to our attention any answers  given  in  the  interview
      that the adjudicator relied upon in making  any  adverse  findings  on
      credibility.  Indeed, as far as we  can  tell,  the  interview  record
      encapsulates the case  advanced  before  the  adjudicator  and  might,
      therefore, be relied  upon  in  supporting  the  submission  that  the
      appellant had been consistent.  If, as  the  appellant  contends,  the
      evidence of the interview record should, as a matter of law, have been
      excluded, the appellant would have been  unable  to  have  placed  any
      reliance upon its contents, for good or for ill.  In other  words,  an
      exclusionary principle in this case would have acted to the  detriment
      of the appellant and in violation of the overriding principle.


  18. The adjudicator dealt with the evidence set out in  the  interview  in
      these terms in paragraph 14 of the determination:


           "His solicitor has rightly pointed out that at the time  of  the
           interview the appellant would have been just under  the  age  of
           18.  There are no  representations  before  me  to  exclude  the
           interview and I have sought  to  take  fully  into  account  the
           question of the appellant's age.  I have looked at the  flow  of
           the interview, it does seem to flow without  any  problems,  the
           appellant at the end was given an opportunity to  make  comments
           and he did so... His solicitor has asked me to take into account
           his age at interview and that I have  sought  to  do,  and  have
           taken fully into account the guidelines given at  paragraph  196
           of the UNHCR guidelines, and the UNHCR guidelines generally,  in
           determining the appeal."


  19.  In our judgment, this is precisely the approach that the  adjudicator
      ought to have taken.  Had there been adverse findings capable of being
      drawn from the contents of the interview,  it  is  apparent  that  the
      adjudicator would then only have  reached  an  adverse  finding  after
      taking into account the age of  the  appellant  at  the  time  of  the
      interview.  As it is, there was nothing brought to  our  attention  in
      the interview that the adjudicator relied upon in his determination as
      undermining the appellant's account.  Contrast this with the  contents
      of the SEF, about which no criticism  was  or  could  be  made,  which
      contained discrepancies upon which the adjudicator  was  justified  on
      relying in drawing adverse conclusions.  In these circumstances,  even
      if the interview evidence should have been excluded (which we reject),
      there would have been no  material  difference  to  the  adjudicator's
      ultimate conclusion.


  20.  For these reasons, we consider that the grounds of appeal are without
      merit.   In  paragraph  1  of  the  grounds  it  is  argued  that  the
      adjudicator was wrong  in  law  in  accepting  the  interview  record,
      irrespective of the  fact  that  he  was  not  asked  to  exclude  its
      contents.  That argument is not sustainable.  In paragraph  2  of  the
      grounds, it is suggested that the express finding by  the  adjudicator
      that the interviewer acted in good faith was irrelevant.  In our view,
      it was open to the adjudicator to make  a  positive  finding  of  good
      faith.  Furthermore, it was as well to decide the issue one way or the
      other because, had he made a finding that the interviewer had acted in
      bad  faith  or  oppressively,  these   would   have   been   important
      considerations in his assessment of the weight to be attached  to  the
      interview record. Indeed, it is at least arguable that  bad  faith  on
      the part of  the  interviewing  officer  might  be  one  of  the  rare
      occasions which justified the exclusion of  the  evidence  altogether.
      The remaining grounds of appeal rely on the adjudicator's admission of
      the interview record into evidence as a flaw of such  significance  as
      to render the  adjudicator's  ultimate  conclusion  unsafe.   For  the
      reasons we have given, we do not consider the admission was wrong but,
      even if it had been, there is no material before us that  suggests  it
      had an adverse effect upon the adjudicator's ultimate conclusion.


  21. We do not propose to go into the merits of  the  appeal  itself.   The
      adjudicator's approach to the evidence was proper.  He  gave  adequate
      and intelligible reasons on which  he  based  a  conclusion  that  the
      Tribunal finds is  sustainable.   Mr  Salfiti  sought  to  argue  that
      Palestinians returned to the Lebanon are at  risk  of  death  and  the
      violation of their Article 2 rights upon  which  he  also  attached  a
      claim that Palestinians are subjected to discrimination  in  violation
      of Article 14.   We  do  not  consider  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood on  the  facts  as  found  by  the  adjudicator  that  this
      appellant will be killed on return to the Lebanon.   It  follows  that
      there is no Article 14 claimed based on discrimination that is capable
      of attaching to a claim under either Articles 2  or  3  of  the  ECHR.
      Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.




   Decision:  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
Date: 4 February 2004

