
 AP (Roma) Croatia [2004] UKIAT 00269

                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing:  16 September 2004
                                             Date Signed:  16 September 2004

                            Date Determination Notified: 24th September 2004




                                   Before:




                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)

                               Mrs R M Bray JP


                                Mr D C Walker




Between

            Appellant

                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Ms M Glass, instructed by Messrs Pearson & Winston
For the Respondent:   Ms T Hart, Presenting Officer.


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Croatia, appeals, with permission,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A G  O'Malley,  dismissing  his
     appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 9 May 2002  to  refuse
     leave to enter and  refuse  asylum.  By  reason  of  the  date  of  the
     Respondent's decision, the "error of law" limitation on appeals to  the
     Tribunal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  does
     not apply.

  2. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. He was  born  on  4
     January 1982 in Baranja in Eastern  Slavonia  and  he  and  his  entire
     family are of Roma origin.  He is a  member  of  the  Serbian  Orthodox
     Church.  In 1992 his father fought for the Serbs  against  the  Croats.
     The war ended in 1995.  In 1998, when  the  Croatian  authorities  took
     power in Eastern Slavonia, Croatian returnees came back.  The Appellant
     suffered humiliation and harassment in school.  In 1998  he  was  badly
     beaten up by his Croat schoolmates.  When  the  United  Nations  forces
     departed from Croatia, the situation deteriorated further.  He and  his
     family were exposed to threats by Croat police because of his  father's
     involvement in the war.  They were repeatedly warned either to leave or
     they would be killed.  The harassment continued from the spring of 1998
     until 17 July 1999 when he and his family left Croatia.  In that period
     the threats were not carried out.  Members  of  his  family,  including
     uncles and cousins have been granted refugee status  in  the  UK.   His
     parents, who voluntarily returned to Serbia because of the  illness  of
     his grandmother, are now in  the  Irish  Republic  and  seeking  asylum
     there. The Appellant also made an Article 8 claim  in  respect  of  his
     marriage on 19 April 2001, one month before he made his application for
     asylum, to Sanja Todorovic.

  3. The Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant was  a  credible  witness,
     albeit that his claim was lacking in detail. He gave an account of  the
     difficulties experienced by him at school, however he is now  an  adult
     and no longer at school. The Adjudicator accepted that Roma continue to
     be discriminated against in  Croatia  by  some  members  of  the  local
     population. This did not however amount to persecution and in any event
     the objective evidence showed that the government of  Croatia  did  not
     support discrimination against the Roma and would provide a sufficiency
     of protection for him if it were needed. With regard to article  8  the
     Adjudicator concluded that return would be in pursuance of a legitimate
     objective and proportionate. There was no insuperable obstacle  to  the
     Appellant returning to Croatia and  making  an  application  under  the
     Immigration Rules to join his spouse in the United Kingdom rather  than
     queue jumping, as described by the Court of Appeal in Mahmood.

  4. The grounds  of  appeal  argue  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  put
     sufficient weight on the evidence of the  threats  to  the  Appellant's
     family from the local Croat population and police and erred in  relying
     upon the US State Department report to  show  that  there  would  be  a
     sufficiency of protection, when there was other evidence suggesting the
     contrary.

  5. At the outset of the proceedings before us, Ms Glass indicated that she
     did not wish to proceed with an application to extend  the  grounds  of
     appeal to cover a challenge to the Adjudicator's decision in respect of
     Article 8.  She did however raise one preliminary matter. It  was  that
     the Appellant had been served with the removal directions  to  Hungary.
     However, an examination of  our  case  file  showed  that  the  removal
     directions had been set to Croatia.  It also showed  that  the  refusal
     letter dealt with the situation in Croatia. Ms Hart said that there was
     nothing on the  Home  Office  file  concerning  removal  directions  to
     Hungary and everything on it suggested that the removal directions  had
     been set and served in relation to Croatia.  We  examined  the  removal
     directions to Hungary, produced by Ms Glass, with  those  on  the  case
     file to Croatia.  It is plain that the same  basic  document  has  been
     used in both but either the word Hungary has been deleted and  replaced
     with Croatia, or vice versa, on one of them. We are  satisfied  on  the
     evidence before us that in this  appeal  the  removal  directions  were
     properly set to Croatia and duly served on the Appellant. If there  has
     been any error, it has been corrected. In any event,  this  is  not  an
     appeal against removal directions but against refusal of leave to enter
     after refusal  of  asylum.  There  is  therefore  nothing  of  material
     significance in this preliminary point.

  6. The situation in Croatia has been  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  a
     number of cases over the last two years, following the changes  brought
     about by the new government in that country and its desire that Croatia
     should become a member of the European Union. It has accepted  that  it
     must meet amongst other things the human rights conditions necessary to
     achieve that aim and is engaged in a process to bring this about. In SK
     [2002] UKIAT 05613*, the lead  and  compendium  determination  in  five
     selected test cases, the  Tribunal,  chaired  by  its  then  President,
     Collins J, considered detailed submissions and comprehensive  objective
     material concerning Croatia. Its declared aim, endorsed by the Court of
     Appeal, was to provide authoritative general guidance  on  the  current
     situation in Croatia and the issues most frequently raised in  Croatian
     appeals. The determination was promulgated  on  3  December  2002.  The
     Tribunal assessed the evidence relating to the  common  complaints  and
     reached the following conclusions in paragraph 40.
           "The material before us does not persuade us on the low standard
           required that there is a real risk  that  in  general  Serbs  if
           returned to Croatia will suffer persecution or a breach  of  any
           Article of the European Convention on Human Rights. We recognise
           that the situation is far from pleasant and the deprivation  and
           misery that will be faced. That  stems  from  the  war  and  the
           destruction caused by it. But that by itself  cannot  mean  that
           surrogate protection is needed or that there will be a breach of
           human  rights.  We  regard  the  steps  taken  by  the  Croatian
           government, despite the difficulties  at  local  level  and  the
           obstacles that still undoubtedly exist, as sufficient to provide
           the  necessary  protection.  It  follows  that  we  accept   the
           submissions made by Mr Wilken, set out in detail in his skeleton
           argument and more particularly in Annex 2 to  it.   Even  though
           there  is   discrimination   coupled   with   the   difficulties
           particularly of housing, employment and convalidation  to  which
           we have referred, we are satisfied that the threshold of Article
           3, in particular of degrading treatment, has not  been  crossed.
           Equally, although we recognise that the Article 8  threshold  is
           lower, we are not persuaded that it has been crossed.  But  even
           if it has we are satisfied that removal is justified by a proper
           control of immigration."

  7. SK was reviewed by the Tribunal  in  the  light  of  further  objective
     evidence in DK (Return -   Ethnic Serb -  Upheld  SK  -  Accommodation)
     Croatia CG [2003] UKIAT 00153. As its title suggests, the  Tribunal  on
     this occasion upheld the views reached in SK.  Both  these  cases  were
     further reviewed by the Tribunal and upheld,  again  in  the  light  of
     further objective material and developments in  Croatia,  in  DM  (HDZ)
     Croatia CG [2004] UKIAT 00024   and  BD  (Application  of  SK  and  DK)
     Croatia CG [2004] UKIAT 00032.

  8. Whilst we accept, as Ms Glass observed,  that  all  these  cases  dealt
     specifically with the risk on return for ethnic Serbs rather than Roma,
     we consider they are nevertheless relevant and material in this  appeal
     because of the detailed consideration given to a  very  wide  range  of
     objective material concerning the sufficiency of  protection  available
     from the present Croatian government generally to  those  who  for  one
     reason or another (including some who had fought in the civil  war  for
     the Serbs) might fall foul of local Croat populations, local  officials
     and local police. The conclusion by the Tribunal in  the  four  country
     guidance cases that the  government  of  Croatia,  being  committed  to
     seeking membership of the  European  Union,  offers  a  sufficiency  of
     protection for members  of  minorities  who  might  face  risk  and  is
     actively addressing their specific concerns, is relevant  and  material
     in this appeal. It is also noteworthy that the Tribunal in SK addressed
     the question of sufficiency of protection not only in  the  context  of
     Horvath [2000] Imm AR 205 CA, subsequently affirmed  in  the  House  of
     Lords, but also having regard to the guidance of the Court of Appeal in
     Svazas  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  74,  extending  the  Horvath  principles  to
     situations where rogue  agents  of  the  state  are  involved  in  ill-
     treatment, as was in part the situation in the appeal before us, as  Ms
     Glass has pointed out.

  9. We therefore  adopt  the  general  reasoning  and  conclusions  of  the
     Tribunal in the above cases, and have applied them in  our  assessment,
     along with the guidance in Horvath and Svazas. Nevertheless  we  accept
     that none of these cases dealt specifically with the position  of  Roma
     in Croatia and we would therefore need to assess the further  objective
     evidence produced to us to see whether those general conclusions  apply
     in this appeal. We note it was envisaged in  SK  that  there  could  be
     exceptional situations, and that each case would have to be  considered
     on its merits.  This we have done.

 10. Ms Glass first challenged the Adjudicator's findings of fact.  She said
     he was wrong to say that the claim is entirely lacking in  detail.  She
     submitted that there was considerable detail given  if  one  took  into
     account  both  the  asylum  interview  and  the   Appellant's   written
     statement, as well as his oral evidence. We consider  that  this  is  a
     matter of semantics and of no material relevance. The reality  is  that
     the Appellant's evidence was rather generalised in nature and  did  not
     offer  specific  detail  of  the  general  assertions.    However   the
     Adjudicator's overall  conclusion  on  credibility  is  clear.  At  the
     beginning of paragraph 17, he said effectively that the Appellant was a
     credible witness notwithstanding the lack  of  detail.  Indeed,  it  is
     plain, reading the determination  as  a  whole,  that  the  Adjudicator
     assessed the Appellant's claim at its strongest and took  into  account
     all the relevant elements of it. This includes the Appellant's evidence
     that his father fought  during  the  conflict  for  the  Serbs,  as  is
     recorded in paragraph 9 of the determination. We can  see  no  material
     error in the Adjudicator's findings of fact relating to  the  Appellant
     personally.

 11. Ms Glass then referred us to various passages in the objective evidence
     before us.  The objective evidence relied upon by her is  contained  in
     the three substantial bundles submitted on behalf of the Appellant. The
     specific passages to which she referred are contained in  her  list  of
     essential reading.

 12. One specific incident is referred to  by  a  variety  of  sources.   It
     relates to a serious physical attack on a 36  year  old  Romani,  Semso
     Secic, in April 1999, which involved hospitalisation  for  6  days.  Mr
     Secic claim that he did not receive  adequate  medical  assistance  and
     that  the  police  failed  to  take  sufficient  steps  to  bring   the
     perpetrators of the  crime  to  justice.  In  April  2001  he  filed  a
     complaint with the Croatian  Constitutional  Court  claiming  that  the
     failure of the Croatian  authorities  to  investigate  the  attack  and
     initiate criminal proceedings against its perpetrators  amounted  to  a
     violation of his constitutional rights.  As of March 2004  no  decision
     had been reached on the complaint.  Moreover in January  2001  his  son
     was  verbally  and  physically  attacked  and  also  filed  a  criminal
     complaint against unknown perpetrators and again the police  failed  to
     launch a thorough investigation into the  assault.   In  November  2002
     both father and son, with the  support  of  the  European  Roma  Rights
     Centre, filed an application to the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights
     claiming that the Croatian authorities had  violated  Article  3.   The
     case is still pending.

 13. Not surprisingly the material before us from the ERRC deals extensively
     with this incident and  also  bases  a  number  of  general  assertions
     concerning discrimination  in  society  and  in  the  criminal  justice
     system, and lack of protection for Roma, upon  this  and  a  relatively
     limited number of  other  specific  examples.   The  Croatian  Helsinki
     Committee report also speaks of Roma "often falling  victim  to  racial
     intolerance and violent attacks".  According to  police  reports,  five
     attacks qualifying as criminal plus two misdemeanours were committed at
     the expense of the Roma people.  The Committee concluded  that  judging
     by the everyday situation in Croatia there was no doubt that in reality
     the number of attacks against Roma was much greater than that  recorded
     in the police data. To put this into context, several reports  estimate
     that the current Roma population  in  Croatia  is  between  30,000  and
     40,000 overall. Amnesty International also makes  similar  observations
     and has expressed concern at the failure of the Croatian authorities to
     thoroughly  and  effectively  investigate   violent   attacks   against
     returnees and members of  the  Romani  communities  and  to  bring  the
     perpetrators of these abuses to justice.

 14. The US State Department report  for  2003  confirms  that  the  general
     protections set out in the Constitution are extended to  all  citizens,
     including Roma. Nevertheless violence, harassment,  and  discrimination
     against Roma continued.  They faced many obstacles, including language,
     lack  of  education   high   unemployment   and   widespread   societal
     discrimination.  However in  October  2003  the  government  adopted  a
     national programme for Roma that was developed  during  the  year  with
     significant  input  from  both  international  and  local  NGOs.   This
     programme identified the educational,  health,  social  and  employment
     measures that if taken would help the Roma to integrate better into the
     social and political life.  However the report noted  that  doubts  had
     been expressed from some quarters, including Roma  representatives,  as
     to whether the government was properly committed  to  this,  given  the
     actions of some local authorities to introduce segregated schooling for
     Roma.

 15. The OSCE report of April 2004  also  deals  with  this  initiative  and
     adopts a relatively positive approach to the government's  actions  and
     intentions towards the Roma. It states
           "In October 2003, the government adopted a National Programme on
           Roma that covers key areas where Roma  face  obstacles  to  full
           integration in Croatian society such as educational,  employment
           and social programmes.  It proposes specific measures  by  which
           these problems should be remedied, including legislative  reform
           and concrete actions to be undertaken by relevant State  bodies.
           While certain measures are already  ongoing,  implementation  of
           the bulk of the programme is not scheduled to begin until 2004."

 16. Our assessment of the  objective  material  overall  shows  that  there
     continues to be strong societal  discrimination  towards  the  Roma  as
     indeed there is towards the Serb minority  population  also.   It  also
     shows that the government of Croatia in its drive towards membership of
     the European Union is taking active steps to address  the  difficulties
     that exist.  It does not condone  racial  discrimination.   There  have
     been some prosecutions, albeit that  the  Roma  organisations  consider
     that more severe measures should be taken and that what is  being  done
     is  not  enough.   However  prosecution  in  alleged  racial   attacks,
     especially when the perpetrators are unknown, is notoriously difficult,
     as we have found in the UK on several high-profile occasions  recently.
     The lack of a successful prosecution cannot in itself be taken to  mean
     that there is in practice no sufficiency of protection. Moreover  there
     are avenues of complaint available against shortcomings  by  police  or
     officials,  as  Mr  Secic  has  demonstrated  by  his  appeal  to   the
     Constitutional Court.

 17. Ms Glass has argued that Roma are in a worse position than the  Serbian
     minority because they have always been discriminated against  and  this
     was made worse by their support for the Serbs during the  war.   We  do
     not consider on the evidence before us that the position  of  the  Roma
     minority in Croatia is  materially  worse  than  that  of  the  Serbian
     minority as described in SK. There has been a long history of antipathy
     between the Croats and the Serbs  resulting  in  periodic  bloodletting
     over the years, most recently  in  the  war  during  the  early  1990s.
     Clearly in the late 1990s  feelings  ran  strong  on  both  sides  when
     memories of the dreadful experiences during the  conflict  were  fresh.
     The evidence suggests, as identified in SK, that passions  have  cooled
     somewhat and that Croatian society is moving on and seeking  acceptance
     within the wider European Community.  We maintain that  the  assessment
     by the Tribunal in SK  and  in  the  other  cases  described  above  in
     relation to the Serb minority, reflect also the position in relation to
     the Roma. We consider that there is in general, and  within  the  terms
     described in Horvath and Svazas, a sufficiency of protection  available
     to the Roma as well as to the Serbs.

 18. With regard to  the  specific  circumstances  of  this  Appellant,  his
     account shows that although the family received a number of threats  in
     the period up to 1999, none of these threats were carried out.  It  may
     well be that some local policemen were  involved  in  the  threats  and
     harassment, but in the changed circumstances since 1999,  the  risk  of
     conduct of sufficient severity to cross the high threshold required  to
     constitute persecution or in breach of Article 3 does not now amount to
     a real risk. Moreover if there were such  a  risk,  there  would  be  a
     sufficiency of protection available to the Appellant. He is  no  longer
     at school and the experiences he had whilst at school in Croatia up  to
     1999 will not therefore be relevant to the current  assessment  of  his
     risk on return. He is now a young adult. Ms  Glass  suggested  that  he
     would be  at additional risk because his father fought  for  the  Serbs
     during the war.  We do not agree.  The Appellant was  not  a  combatant
     himself and he will not  be  returning  with  his  father  who,  having
     voluntarily left the UK for Serbia, has now gone  to  claim  asylum  to
     Ireland.  We do not consider that there is anything in the  Appellant's
     evidence of his father's military involvement that would cause even his
     father any current real risk on return,  let  alone  the  Appellant  by
     association.

 19. Thus we conclude that the Adjudicator's assessment of the specific risk
     on return to this Appellant both in respect of asylum  and  Article  3,
     and the availability of a sufficiency of protection, is on the facts of
     this appeal fully  in  line  with  the  country  jurisprudence  of  the
     Tribunal and the objective evidence and,  notwithstanding  the  matters
     raised by Ms Glass, reveals no arguable error.

 20. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, this appeal is dismissed.



                                                             Spencer Batiste
                                                            (Vice President)

                                        Approved for electronic transmission

