

|Heard at Field House       |SN & HM (Divorced women - risk on     |
|                           |return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283|
|                           |                                      |
|On 19 April 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|25 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mr J Freeman (Vice-President)                                     |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice-President)                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|and 3 dependants                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|and 2 dependants                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




Representation
For the appellant SN:        Mr F Khan of Counsel
                             Instructed by Goldkorn Mathias Gentle
For the claimant HM:         Mr A Bukhari, Solicitor
                             of A Z Solicitors
For the Secretary of State:  Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting
                             Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



     1. These appeals have been heard together with a view to  giving  some
        general country guidance  on  the  position  of  women  subject  to
        domestic violence in Pakistan.  So far as our decision  deals  with
        the general position of women in Pakistan, and the proper  approach
        to be taken to asylum and human rights appeals in that context,  it
        is expected that all Adjudicators and other  Tribunal  panels  will
        follow the guidance set out here.

     2. Both Counsel for the claimants below, SN and HM,  made  submissions
        first, by agreement, although HM's case is  a  Secretary  of  State
        appeal.  Both claimants are citizens of Pakistan.   The  facts  and
        the history of the appeal in each will be set out  below,  followed
        by  submissions  and  consideration  of  relevant  authorities  and
        objective evidence.  The Tribunal reserved its  determinations  for
        postal delivery.

        Facts and history of appeal of Mrs SN

     3. SN appeals with leave against the determination of  an  Adjudicator
        (Mrs D M Thomas) dismissing her appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
        State's  refusal  to  recognise  her  as  a  refugee  or  to  grant
        humanitarian or discretionary protection.

     4.  Leave  to  appeal  was  granted  under  Article  3   alone.    The
        Adjudicator's findings under the Geneva Convention on the Status of
        Refugees and Stateless Persons 1951 were comprehensive  and  sound.
        Permission to appeal was based solely on the  acceptance  that  the
        husband had abused SN over  a  period  of  time,  the  abuse  being
        condoned by his family.  The family were said to be influential  in
        Pakistan  and  the  Tribunal  considered  it  arguable   that   the
        Adjudicator might not have considered appropriately the dangers  to
        which a woman in her position (a divorced spouse) would be  exposed
        on return.

     5. When granting leave, the Tribunal stated in terms:  "Evidence  will
        have to be  given  as  to  what  sort  of  influence  or  political
        importance this family has.  Also evidence will have to be given as
        to the actual availability of a place to go for women who have been
        treated in the way this claimant has."

     6. No effort was made to tender any new evidence for  the  hearing  on
        either of these points.  The Tribunal has therefore dealt with  the
        matter on the basis of the bundle before the  Adjudicator  and  the
        single copy of the Tribunal bundle filed for us.   We  are  however
        concerned that experienced immigration solicitors  should  fail  to
        deal with such an obvious direction, and fail to file the  required
        three copies of the documents upon which they seek to rely  at  the
        hearing.

     7. Fortunately, SN was present at the hearing and  was  able  to  give
        instructions to her Counsel, which on several points  was  contrary
        to his  immediately  preceding  submissions.   Mr  Khan  sought  to
        distance himself from documents filed before the Adjudicator (First
        Information Reports, arrest warrants,  and  legal  correspondence),
        but in answer to questions from us, he  accepted  that  those  were
        SN's own documents upon  which  she  had  relied  throughout.   The
        Tribunal has treated all the documents before it as  genuine.   The
        facts which emerge, so far as  they  can  be  ascertained  on  this
        unsatisfactory basis, are these.

     8. SN is 30 years old, from Lahore.  She claimed her  husband  was  in
        politics, working with Nawaz Sharif  and  the  PML.   He  organised
        meetings and rallies.  He had a membership card and she thought  he
        might have been a  member.   His  parents  lived  in  Pakistan,  in
        Islamabad.  Her husband is wanted for murder; he was involved in  a
        gun fighting incident.  A case was brought against  him  after  the
        shooting incident in October or November 1999, to which there  were
        witnesses, and the police and army  used  to  call  at  the  house,
        threaten them, beat up the family, tear   SN's  clothes,  and  beat
        her one-year-old son.  Her husband was on the run.

     9. SN fled briefly to Islamabad, and then returned  to  Lahore,  where
        the problems continued.  She fled again  to  Shedhra  village,  and
        after a couple of weeks, returned to  Lahore,  where  the  problems
        resumed.  The police were no help at all, and told her to leave her
        husband.   They   made   suggestive   remarks   and   touched   her
        inappropriately.  She stayed living in her house  in  Lahore.   Her
        husband called her to join  him  in  Islamabad,  and  together  the
        family fled to the United Kingdom, arriving in  September  2000  on
        illegal documents.  Her husband sold a lot of land  and  a  market,
        which he owned.

    10. The couple had been married for some time.  Their daughter  is  now
        about twelve years old.  The marriage has not been a happy one  and
        SN's husband  beat  her  regularly.   His  family  took  his  side.
        Nevertheless, she came to the United Kingdom with her  husband  and
        they lived together in the United Kingdom from September 2000 until
        December 2001 when the final rupture occurred.   She  left  him  in
        January 2002 and met another man in February or  March  2002,  with
        whom  she  now  lives.   They  are  not  married  and  this  second
        relationship has no issue.

    11. SN's marital  position  is  confusing.   The  documents  which  she
        produced reveal the following chronology:

        1999

         . On 5 January 1999, SN's husband pronounced what appears to have
           been a single talaq, confirmed in writing, stating, "From today
           on I do not have any relationship with her."  The relationship
           resumed, and on 18 April 1999, he again confirmed in writing the
           pronunciation of a single talaq, stating, "From today on I do
           not accept her as my wife."  On 19 July 1999, there is written
           confirmation of a triple talaq.  It is not at all clear on what
           basis the parties were regarded as married after that date.  On
           17 August 1999, there is again written confirmation of triple
           talaq, with the statement, "From today on I do not have any
           relationship with her.  From today on she is free of me."  The
           parties continued to live together as man and wife.

         . On 5 November 1999, a FIR was filed at Lyton Road Police
           Station, Lahore under sections 148, 149, and 427 C D OF Criminal
           Act 154 (violence and damage to property)  SN's husband was
           accused of encouraging fire setting and damaging property as
           part of a riot (400/500 people) against the suspension of the
           PML Government. The FIR contains no mention of murder or
           gunshots.

        2000

         . On 1 June 2000, SN filed a complaint at Ichhra Police Station
           Lahore, seeking legal action against police officers who came to
           her home at 7 am looking for her husband (Nadeem Shahzad),
           forced entry, beat her, tore her clothes, harassed her children
           and threatened her if she did not produce him.  She told them he
           had gone to Rawalpindi for personal reasons.  They did not give
           up looking for her husband.  On 21 July 2000, SN filed a second
           complaint at Ichhra Police Station Lahore, complaining that
           policemen had entered her home by force, seeking to arrest her
           husband; the police beat her children and took her colour
           television together with R40, 000 in cash.  She sought
           protection, and return of her goods and money.

         .  The search for her husband was unsuccessful and on 23 August
           2000, local police issued an arrest warrant addressed to Nadeem
           Shahzad directing him to present himself to Ichhra Police
           Station within 15 days, for violations of Pakistan Law 148, 149,
           307.  The Court was satisfied that he had disappeared or was in
           hiding to avoid receiving the warrant.  He did not surrender,
           and was already in the United Kingdom by this stage.

         . On 22 November 2000 Newham Social Services became involved,
           because of police concerns about the welfare of the couple's
           children.  The family were to be assessed by a social worker
           from Newham's Central Assessment Team fixed for 24 November
           2000.  Back in Pakistan, the authorities continued to look for
           SN's husband, and on 5 December 2000, a second arrest warrant
           was issued requiring Nadeem Shahzad to present himself within 15
           days to Ichhra Police Station for violations of Pakistan Law
           148, 149, 427. Again, the court was satisfied that Mr Shahzad
           had disappeared or was in hiding to avoid receiving the warrant.

        2001

         . Meanwhile, concerns about the family and in particular the
           children, continued. On 4 September 2001, Children + Families
           (Social Services) referred them to the Asian Women's Association
           for more support, and on 13 September 2001, SN was offered
           support by Victim Support Redbridge, after a domestic incident
           involving police at Ilford.  On 30 November 2001, another oral
           talaq was issued and confirmed in writing, stating, 'From now on
           I do not have any relationship with her and from today she is
           free.'  On 5 December 2001, her husband issued a final
           confirmation of triple talaq, saying again, 'From now on I do
           not have any relationship with her and from today she is free.'
           On 28 December 2001, after a Social Services initial assessment
           (Child Protection), they pronounced themselves satisfied that
           there were no further concerns, and closed the case file.  There
           is no indication in the papers before us that SN has any contact
           now with her ex-husband, who is still in the United Kingdom.

        2002

         . 5 March 2002 Certificate of no objection by Javaid Iqbal Bhatti
           Advocate High Ct, 053 District Ct Lahore, indicates that SN's
           divorce has been accepted 'throw consul'.  After that, 'she is
           independent and no objection for marriage'.  At some time
           between January and March 2002, SN met the man with whom she is
           now living.  There is no suggestion that her husband has
           interfered with or objected to her new life, or that he has
           anything to do with her, having achieved his often-repeated
           desire to divorce her.

        2003

         . On 19 August 2003,   Javaid Iqbal Bhatti wrote confirming that
           SN was Nadeem Shahzad's divorced ex-wife.  His parents had come
           to know of the divorce and had been giving threats as the
           divorce had been effected.   The reason for their objection was
           not clear nor the nature of the threats.   Nothing happened then
           for over a year.

         . On 19 August 2003, a letter from Javaid Iqbal Bhatti confirmed
           that both SN and her ex-husband lived in London. SN was living
           separately.  Her parents lived in Lahore, and her ex-husband's
           parents were making serious threats to her parents that if she
           returned to Pakistan they will kill her.  He also confirmed that
           her ex-husband was wanted in 'other cases in Pakistan'
           (unspecified). Four days later, on 23 August 2003, Zulfiqar Ali,
           state Counsel for Government of Punjab Lahore, Legal Advisor,
           Consultant, Attorney at Law, High Court Advocate, of Zulfiqar
           Ali Law Associates, Lahore, in a letter addressed 'My Dear' to
           (presumably) SN confirmed that he had acted in 'all your suits
           and cases since beginning'.  Her ex-husband has 'brought up
           excessive vengeance and dreadful plans in his heart against you.
            Already he has divorced you.  You are advised very sincerely
           not to come to Pakistan.  Please try to arrange some security
           and defence whilst living in United Kingdom also.'  He does not
           mention that her ex-husband was still in England.

    12. If SN is to establish a credible fear on return, it would not be of
        her husband, because he is here in the United Kingdom, but  of  her
        in-laws in Lahore.  Their political influence must  be  limited  if
        they have been unable to have the  proceedings  against  their  son
        dropped over a period of four years, and in any event,  we  do  not
        accept that they would be able to exercise  any  influence  outside
        the home area of Lahore.

    13. The Adjudicator accepted that SN  had  difficulties  with  her  ex-
        husband in Pakistan and that he  abused  and  assaulted  her,  both
        there and in the United Kingdom, and that his family  condoned  the
        violence.   She  also  accepted  that  they  were  divorced.    She
        considered that sufficient state protection was available  for  the
        appeal and that she could return to another part of Pakistan, where
        she would  be  safer.   There  were  support  groups  and  shelters
        available to SN as a single mother if she were to return.

    14. The Adjudicator also accepted that the  claimant's  husband  was  a
        member and supporter of the ousted PML, and subject of  two  arrest
        warrants because of his part in demonstrations for  the  PML.   The
        Adjudicator recited, but  did  not  expressly  accept,  the  murder
        charge and the claimed prominence of her husband in  Lahore.   That
        appears to us to be a fair  summary  of  the  documentary  evidence
        before us and one with which the Tribunal will not interfere.

    15. The Adjudicator also considered that there was no well-founded fear
        in relation to her ex-husband's activities.  On  the  human  rights
        issue, she accepted that  SN  and  SA,  her  current  partner,  had
        established private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom  since
        2002 (Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
        Freedoms 1950) and that her children by her ex-husband  now  had  a
        relationship with him.  The decision to return her would  interfere
        with that right but was proportionate as she could  apply  to  join
        him as a fianc�e or spouse, or alternatively, there was  no  reason
        why SA could not return with her to Pakistan or join her there. The
        appeal was dismissed.

        Facts and history of appeal in HM's case

    16.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  with  permission  against  the
        determination of an Adjudicator (Mr N M Paul) allowing the claimant
        HM's appeal against his refusal to recognise her as a refugee or to
        grant humanitarian protection.

    17. Leave to appeal was granted on all the Secretary of State's Grounds
        of Appeal; that the Adjudicator's adverse comments  on  credibility
        in paragraph 9 of the determination were not linked to his  finding
        of a risk to her in paragraph 11;  that internal flight options had
        not  been  considered  (Liaquat  [2002]  UKIAT  04408);  that   the
        Adjudicator failed to state his conclusion as to whether the  late-
        produced FIR was a forgery or  a  genuine  document;  and  that  in
        consequence,  the  determination  was  unsound   and   inadequately
        reasoned.

    18. HM  suffered  extreme  domestic  violence  during  seven  years  of
        marriage.  She has two children of that marriage.  She alleges that
        her husband has senior contacts in the police force; in any  event,
        the  police  have  not  been  prepared  to  help   her   with   her
        difficulties.  At the  Adjudicator  hearing,  HM  produced  an  FIR
        stating that an allegation of adultery had been made  against  her.
        On one occasion, in May 2003, she reported his abuse at the  police
        station, but in general her husband  believed  in  keeping  matters
        within the family and SN within the house.  HM then  went  to  stay
        with her friend Aqeela in Karachi.  Her mother's house  was  raided
        and  various  acquaintances  questioned.   The  police   eventually
        reached Aqeela's house on 18 June 2003, but fortunately by then she
        was staying with Aqeela's  parents-in-law  in  Azizabad.   Aqeela's
        husband was taken in for questioning and HM decided she had  better
        leave Pakistan.

    19. She saw a doctor only once, after her husband beat her senseless in
        June 2003, when he found out that she had involved  the  police  in
        his family affairs by making that report.  She called her mother on
        6 June 2003.  She has not spoken to anyone in Pakistan since  then.
        There was no medical evidence. HM says that  she  is  charged  with
        adultery (Zina), theft of money and jewellery, and  kidnapping  her
        children when she fled with them.   She  argues  that  she  has  no
        protection anywhere in Pakistan.   Unfortunately,  the  Adjudicator
        failed to make clear findings  on  some  of  the  details  of  HM's
        flight, or on the credibility of her account that her  husband  had
        contacts with senior police officers and politicians, which goes to
        internal flight.  She finally fled Pakistan via Faisalabad and came
        to the United Kingdom, she says on  16  July  2003,  travelling  on
        false documents.

    20. The Adjudicator identified various credibility problems;  the  late
        production of the FIR, the  lack  of  explanation  as  to  how  the
        claimant got hold of it if she had no contact with her mother;  the
        illegal passport she used to enter and the lack of explanation what
        happened  to  it  or  who  provided  it.   Nevertheless,   to   the
        appropriate lower standard, he considered  HM's  account  credible.
        Paragraph 11, headed 'Conclusions and Reasons', is concise:

        "11.     The CIPU Report spells out in detail the position of women
        in Pakistan at the moment.  Furthermore I  was  provided  with  the
        Amnesty International document April 2002 dealing with Pakistan and
        insufficient protection of women.  As was pointed out in  the  case
        of Shah and Islam the position of women in Pakistan  is  appalling.
        The CIPU Report refers to the fact that some 70% to  80%  of  women
        are the victims of domestic violence.  Furthermore the position  of
        women's rights in Pakistan is so far behind that of men's  that  it
        seems impossible for women to contemplate  leading  an  independent
        life.  When I combine the objective evidence with the account given
        by NM, I am satisfied that she has established that she has a well-
        founded fear of persecution. No separate consideration needs to  be
        made of her human rights save to say that clearly if she were to be
        returned there would b a possible  breach  of  her  Article  2  and
        Article 3 rights."

    21.  That  reasoning  is  inadequate,  particularly  as  it  omits  any
        consideration of internal flight or her current  relationship.   We
        shall consider this appeal on the basis of  the  facts  found,  and
        submissions at the Tribunal hearing, against the objective evidence
        filed for these Tribunal hearings.

        Submissions

        SN

    22. For SN, Mr Khan sought to give evidence of a  conversation  between
        SN and her mother in  Pakistan.  There  had  been  no  new  witness
        statement or application to call evidence.  The Tribunal  indicated
        that he should confine himself to the evidence actually  filed.  He
        had filed no new evidence to deal with  the  Tribunal's  evidential
        concerns as set out in the grant of permission to appeal.

    23. Mr Khan contended that SN's husband was searching for  her  in  the
        United Kingdom and argued that the repeated talaqs  pronounced  did
        not amount to a valid divorce because SN's husband had returned  to
        her on all occasions but the last.   That would  suggest  that  the
        validity of divorce proceedings under Pakistani  law  depends  upon
        the subsequent  actions  of  the  parties.   The  argument  is  not
        supported by the documents the appellant submitted as genuine,  and
        upon which she relies.  The  documents  make  it  plain  that  this
        couple are divorced, and she is free to remarry.

    24. Mr Khan  relied  upon  the  April  2003  CIPU  Country  Report  for
        Pakistan, paragraphs 6.151-7, 6.163-8.  Her husband and his  family
        were prominent in the PML and if she were attacked,  nothing  would
        be done about it.  In the US State  Department  Report,  he  relied
        upon the passage about honour killings at p.178 of SN's bundle; the
        couple came to  the  United  Kingdom  together  to  flee  political
        problems.  SN's new partner, SA, was also from Lahore.  Her husband
        was still in the United Kingdom, as far as she knew.

    25. He argued that the decision in Liaquat could  be  distinguished  as
        there was there no question of  adultery.     The  Adjudicator  had
        considered and applied his mind to the core  account  (persecution,
        husband wanted and a FIR issued, risk on return) but failed to make
        any finding on her detailed case.  The appeal must be  remitted  as
        the factual findings were totally inadequate.

    26. For the Respondent, the Secretary of State, Mr Deller  argued  that
        the evidence of impunity was not persuasive to any standard,  given
        the family's inability to deal with the  FIR  and  arrest  warrants
        against SN's ex-husband. The talaq pronouncements did  not  mention
        adultery and there was no evidence that SN had committed  adultery.
        Her new relationship had been entered into after  the  end  of  the
        previous relationship.

    27. The documents showed that SN's marriage came to  an  end  in  March
        2002 after repeated talaqs  and  acceptance  'throw  consul'.   The
        couple were divorced.  Particularly in the light of  her  husband's
        evident wish to end the marriage, as evidence by the repeated talaq
        documents, the suggestion of any malevolent pursuit by  him  of  SN
        after the end of the marriage was simply too speculative.

    28. For SN, Mr Khan sought to give evidence of a  conversation  between
        SN and her mother in  Pakistan.  There  had  been  no  new  witness
        statement or application to call evidence.  The Tribunal  indicated
        that he should confine himself to the evidence actually  filed.  He
        had filed no new evidence to deal with  the  Tribunal's  evidential
        concerns as set out in the grant of permission to appeal.

    29. Mr Khan contended that SN's husband was searching for  her  in  the
        United Kingdom  and  that  the  divorce  was  not  valid,  even  in
        Pakistani law.  That is plainly wrong,  for  the  reasons  set  out
        above.  There is no ambiguity in the appellant's  own  evidence  in
        the documents she submitted as genuine.  The couple  are  divorced,
        and she is free to remarry.

        HM

    30. In relation to HM's appeal, Mr Deller for the  Secretary  of  State
        (the appellant in the  HM  case)  contended  that  the  Adjudicator
        appeared  not  to  have  considered  substantial  elements  of  the
        claimant's  evidence  and  that  his  findings  of  fact  were   in
        consequence unsustainable.  The appeal must be remitted for hearing
        afresh.

    31. For the claimant, Mr Bokhari argued that the Adjudicator had  found
        the claimant credible and that all other points in her detailed and
        consistent account were accepted. The claimant had been pursued  in
        three, or possibly four, different cities, by the  police  and  her
        husband.  The Adjudicator looked at the facts  and  accepted  them.
        Azizabad was close to Karachi, in Sindh  province,  but  Faisalabad
        was in the Punjab, one  and  a  half  to  two  hours  from  Lahore.
        Nevertheless, the Adjudicator  had  accepted  that  the  claimant's
        husband found her there.

    32. On the particular facts of HM, the Tribunal agreed with Mr Deller's
        assessment of the determination and the proper  course  of  action.
        The appeal will be allowed and remitted.


        Relevant authorities and background information

    33. The leading decision on the position of women in Pakistan  is  Shah
        and Islam [1999] Imm AR 283 HL,  which  predates  the  coming  into
        force of the Human Rights Act 1999.  In his  judgment,  Lord  Steyn
        summarised the position of women in Pakistan in 1999 as follows -

        "Generalisations  about  the  position  of  women   in   particular
        countries are out of place in regard to issues of  refugee  status.
        Everything depends on the evidence and  findings  of  fact  in  the
        particular case. On the findings of fact and unchallenged  evidence
        in the present case, the  position  of  women  in  Pakistan  is  as
        follows.  Notwithstanding  a   constitutional   guarantee   against
        discrimination on the grounds of sex a woman's place in society  in
        Pakistan is low. Domestic abuse of women and violence towards women
        is prevalent in Pakistan. That is also true of many other countries
        and by itself it does not give rise to a claim to  refugee  status.
        The distinctive feature of this case is that in Pakistan women  are
        unprotected by the state: discrimination against women in  Pakistan
        is partly tolerated by the  state  and  partly  sanctioned  by  the
        state. Married women are subordinate to the will of their husbands.
        There is strong discrimination against married women, who have been
        forced to leave the matrimonial home  or  have  simply  decided  to
        leave. Husbands and others frequently  bring  charges  of  adultery
        against such wives. Faced with such a charge  the  woman  is  in  a
        perilous position."

    34. Lord Hoffman considered that there could be no  suggestion  that  a
        woman was entitled to refugee status merely because she lived in  a
        society which, for religious or  any  other  reason,  discriminated
        against women -
        " Although such discrimination is contrary not merely to western
        notions but to the constitution of Pakistan and a number of
        international human rights instruments, including the Convention on
        the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which
        Pakistan ratified in 1996, it does not in itself found a claim
        under the Convention. The Convention is about persecution, a well
        founded fear of serious harm, which is a very different matter. The
        discrimination against women in Pakistan found by the special
        adjudicator to exist there is relevant to show that the fear of
        persecution is on a Convention ground but is not in itself enough.
        Furthermore, the findings of fact as to discrimination have not
        been challenged. They cannot be ignored merely on the ground that
        this would imply criticism of the legal or social arrangements in
        another country. The whole purpose of the Convention is to give
        protection to certain classes of people who have fled from
        countries in which their human rights have not been respected. It
        does not by any means follow that there is similar persecution in
        other Islamic countries or even that it exists everywhere in
        Pakistan. Each case must depend upon the evidence."

    35. Lord Hope of Craighead considered that women fell to be treated  as
        a particular social group within the meaning of Article 1A  of  the
        Refugee Convention in Pakistan because "they are women and  because
        women are discriminated against in that country" and that there was
        no  need  to  define  the  group  more  closely.    Lord   Millett,
        dissenting, considered that -
        "Where the authorities perceive a particular social group to be
        hostile, they may persecute its members by openly withdrawing their
        protection and leaving them to the mercy of criminal elements. The
        fact that those who take advantage of the situation to use violence
        against members of the group do so for their own private purposes
        does not matter; the members should be regarded as the victims of
        official persecution by the state. To qualify for refugee status,
        however, they must still prove that the state authorities have
        withdrawn their protection for a Convention reason.
        Such questions will depend on the evidence. The evidence in the
        present case is that the widespread discrimination against women in
        Pakistan is based on religious law, and the persecution of those
        who refuse to conform to social and religious norms, while in no
        sense required by religious law, is sanctioned or at least
        tolerated by the authorities. But these norms are not a pretext for
        persecution nor have they been recently imposed. They are deeply
        embedded in the society in which the appellants have been brought
        up and in which they live. Women who are perceived to have
        transgressed them are treated badly, particularly by their
        husbands, and the authorities do little to protect them. But this
        is not because they are women. They are persecuted as individuals
        for what each of them has done or is thought to have done. They are
        not jointly condemned as females or persecuted for what they are.
        The appellants need to establish that the reason that they are left
        unprotected by the authorities and are liable to be persecuted by
        their husbands is that they are women. In my opinion they have not
        done so."

    36. The group here posited is 'women victims of  domestic  violence  in
        Pakistan'.  That is a shorthand description and perhaps should more
        properly be treated as women who may on return  become  victims  of
        domestic violence in Pakistan.  We considered whether the  evidence
        set out in the current CIPU Country Report and US State  Department
        Reports is the  same  as  that  in  1999,  or  can  be  treated  as
        substantially the same for  the  purpose  of  determining  risk  on
        return.  We have been referred to  paragraphs  6.151-6.168  of  the
        CIPU  Country  Report  for  October  2003.   The   law   of   Qisas
        (retribution) and  Diyat  (compensation)  is  set  out  in  a  1990
        Ordinance, but cannot be invoked  where  the  victim  is  a  direct
        lineal descendant of the perpetrator.  Domestic violence under this
        Ordinance  is  a  question  of  the  victim  or  heir's  right   to
        retribution or compensation, and  only  if  these  are  waived  can
        discretionary punishment (Tazir) be applied  (6.151).    Police  in
        practice  are  reluctant  to  interfere.    In  October  2000,  the
        Interior Minister said that all discriminatory laws  against  women
        should be repealed or  amended  to  remove  discrimination  against
        women, and in November 200, Chief Justice Saeed ul  Zaman  Siddiqui
        told a convention of women lawyers in Islamabad that  the  Pakistan
        Law Commission was currently engaged in urgent reform of this  area
        (6.152).

    37.  A Special Committee of the National Commission on  the  Status  of
        Women has been reviewing the controversial Hudood  Ordinance  since
        May 2002 (6.153).  Women fare better in urban areas and the  middle
        and upper class sections of society (6.156), and can assume greater
        control  of  their  lives.    Women's   rights   continue   to   be
        insufficiently protected (6.158).  In 2001, as many  as  204  women
        were killed in Sindh as honour killings or for adultery (Karo/Kari)
        and the  Government  failed  to  take  action,  particularly  where
        influential families were involved (6.163).  Nationally, more  than
        800 women were killed by family members in honour killings.

    38. The latest US State Department Report (for the year 2003,  released
        in March 2004) confirmed  that  discrimination  against  women  was
        particularly harsh in some areas of rural  Sindh  and  Baluchistan.
        The Government had criticised violence  against  women  and  opened
        crisis centres for women, which  provided  counselling,  legal  and
        medical referrals and a hotline for  women  in  distress.   Women's
        organisations  operated  primarily  in  urban  centres   and   many
        concentrated on educating women about existing legal rights.  Other
        groups concentrated on providing legal aid to poor women in  prison
        who might not be able to afford an attorney.

    39. The Amnesty International report for 2003 states that -

        "Women and girls continued to be subjected to abuses in the home,
        the community and in the custody of the state. Impunity for such
        abuses persisted. Hundreds of women were killed in so-called
        "honour" killings. Some private initiatives were announced. For
        instance the head of the Leghari tribe said in March that "honour"
        crimes would no longer be permitted. However, the state did not
        take any action to ban the practice or to ensure that the
        perpetrators were held to account. The law of Qisas and Diyat
        relating to murder remained unchanged. This law allows criminal
        prosecution only if the family of the murder victim wishes to
        pursue it. In case of "honour" crimes this often does not occur,
        leading to persistent impunity. Police failed to respond adequately
        to abuses reported by women."

    40. In relation to internal  flight,  the  Secretary  of  State's  CIPU
        Country Report accepts that  the  internal  flight  option  may  be
        limited for  women  and  mixed  religion  or  mixed-caste  couples.
        Flight from rural areas to  the  cities  was  frequently  exercised
        where economic circumstances permitted, but even there the woman or
        couple might not be safe  from  families  or  religious  extremists
        (6.122).

        Application to these appeals

    41. Leave to appeal was granted  in  SN's  case  because  the  Tribunal
        considered  that  the  Adjudicator  arguably  had  not   considered
        adequately the risks  to  a  person  in  her  position  on  return.
        Questions might have arisen under the matrimonial law  of  Pakistan
        as to the validity of a talaq which had  not  yet  been  registered
        with the Nikah Union Council; but SN has chosen to present herself,
        through her lawyers' letters, as  legally  divorced,  and  free  to
        remarry.

    42. On SN's case as she presented it, she is not an adulteress; the new
        relationship began once she was free.  She has  not  explained  why
        she should not simply marry her partner and return to another  part
        of Pakistan, since she has been free to do  so  since  March  2002.
        SN's husband had been actively trying to free himself from her  for
        years and there is no evidence of any recent attempts by  him,  nor
        credible evidence of such attempts by his family,  to  contact  SN.
        We therefore find that her former husband and his  family  have  no
        continuing interest in her and in particular  that  her  ex-husband
        been trying to divorce her since 1999 at least.

    43. As regards the risk from SN's former husband's family, the evidence
        before us is very scanty.  A rather convenient letter from a lawyer
        indicates an adverse reaction to delayed news of the  divorce,  but
        there is no satisfactory evidence that outside the home  area,  his
        family are sufficiently influential to cause  her  any  difficulty.
        Indeed, her ex-husband is wanted for  criminal  offences  and  they
        have been unable to quell  the  pursuit  of  those  offences.   The
        family is plainly not as influential as SN believes.

    44. We consider that any risk to SN does not meet  either  the  Refugee
        Convention or ECHR Article 3 standard even in  the  home  area  and
        that internal flight does not arise.  SN has  a  partner  whom  she
        could marry before returning to Pakistan.  Despite a  direction  to
        do so, she did not produce evidence relating to the availability of
        shelters in Pakistan for the Tribunal hearing.  We  do  not  accept
        that SN is still of interest to her  ex-husband's  family,  and  we
        consider that she could now return as a  divorcee  and  resume  her
        life in Pakistan outside her home area, with or without her partner
        here, whom she told us would be free to marry her.  They do plan to
        marry in due course.  Thus, on the particular facts of  SN's  case,
        and despite the general difficulties for women in Pakistan, she has
        not discharged the burden upon  her  of  showing  a  real  risk  or
        reasonable degree of likelihood from her  husband's  family  should
        she return to Pakistan and not live in her home area.

    45. In HM's case, the appeal is that of the Secretary  of  State.   The
        Tribunal has already  indicated  that  we  find  the  Adjudicator's
        determination  inadequately  reasoned.   Given  the  lack  of   any
        consideration of internal flight, or findings of fact  in  relation
        to the strength of her husband's political and  police  connections
        in Pakistan as a whole, there is in our view no alternative but  to
        remit  this  appeal  for  fresh  consideration   by   a   different
        Adjudicator.

        General conclusions

    46. As was stated as long ago as 1999 in Shah and Islam [1999]  Imm  AR
        283, the position of women  in  Pakistan  is  unsatisfactory,  with
        widespread discrimination and insufficient State protection.  There
        has been some progress in the last five years, and particularly  in
        urban centres, crisis support  may  now  be  available.   The  then
        President of the Tribunal, Mr Justice Collins, held in  AE  and  FE
        that -

        "The  concept  of  IR  [internal  relocation]  is  based   on   the
        recognition that surrogate protection is only required if there  is
        no part of the country of nationality which can be regarded as safe
        in that no well-founded fear of persecution  exists  there  and  to
        which it would not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to
        relocate."

    47. Government criticism of the abuse of women has had only  a  limited
        effect, but absent any evidence filed on behalf of these claimants,
        we considered the account of available assistance for women at risk
        from family problems, as set out in the  CIPU  Country  Report  for
        Pakistan, April 2004 -

        "6.210 According to Amnesty International in a 2002 report,
        shelters for women at risk continue to be inadequate in number and
        the kind of support they offer.  According to their website
        (accessed in 2002), the organisation Lawyers for Human Rights and
        Legal Aid in conjunction with UNICEF has set up Madadgaar which can
        be contacted by a hotline and provides legal aid and advice and has
        links with shelters for women.

        6.211 According to the US Department of State report 2001, a crisis
        centre for women in distress was opened in Rawalpindi by the
        Progressive Women's Association.  After several years of lobbying
        the Government, in 1997 the Government opened a centre in Islamabad
        with the assistance of the PWA and other local NGO's.  The centre
        offers legal and medical referrals from volunteer doctors and
        lawyers, counseling from trained psychologists and a hotline for
        women in distress. The USSD Report 2003 notes that The Government
        has criticized the violence against women and has opened some
        crisis centers for women. In 2002, the Crisis Center for Women in
        Distress helped 89 women through legal and medical referrals,
        counseling from trained psychologists, and a hotline for women in
        distress As noted by Amnesty in a 2002 report,, six Women Crisis
        Centres were set up by the Government in late 1999 in different
        parts of the country in Islamabad, Vehari, Lahore, Sahiwal, Karachi
        and Peshawar.  Within six months of their opening 780 women had
        approached them seeking legal aid, looking for shelter and medical
        help.

        6.212 According to Amnesty in their 2002 report, the state-run
        shelters (Darul Amans), some of which are severely overcrowded,
        have been described by women's groups as constituting virtual
        prisons where women are deprived of freedom of movement.  Staff at
        these frequently advise women to accept reconciliation and return.
        According to the Daily Dawn newspaper dated 29 September 2002, a
        speaker at a seminar on "Legal and Shelter Facilities for Destitute
        Children and Women" in September 2001 said that in Karachi, a city
        of over 10 million people, there were only two shelters for
        destitute children and women, a Darul Aman and one run by the Edhi
        Foundation (a national and international NGO) (as stated on the
        Edhi foundation website). In the country as a whole it was stated
        that there are 13 Darul Amans, three Edhi Centres and certain other
        privately-managed shelter houses not thought to be sufficient in
        number.

        6.213 According to the US Department of State report 2003 Women's
        organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate
        on educating women about existing legal rights. Other groups
        concentrate on providing legal aid to poor women in prison who may
        not be able to afford an attorney.

        6.214 With regard to victims of trafficking the US Department of
        State report 2003 cites that, "The Government sponsored shelters
        and training programs for actual and potential trafficking victims.
        There were 276 detention centers where women were sheltered and
        given access to medical treatment, limited legal representation,
        and some vocational training. The Government provided temporary
        residence status to foreign trafficking victims; however, police
        often treated victims of trafficking as criminals. The Government
        does not provide specialized training to assist trafficking
        victims. Very few NGOs deal specifically with trafficking; however,
        many local and provincial NGOs provide shelter to victims of
        trafficking and women and children at risk of trafficking."

    48. The same CIPU Country Report accepts that internal  flight  options
        are limited for women, but it does not  state  that  there  are  no
        internal flight possibilities and each case will depend on its  own
        particular factual matrix. We find that some support  is  available
        in the cities, and we  also  consider  the  geographical  scale  of
        Pakistan (covering an area of about 307,374 square  miles,  with  a
        population of 140,470,000); the question of  internal  flight  will
        require careful consideration in each case.  The general  questions
        which Adjudicators should ask themselves in cases of this kind  are
        as follows -

              a) Has the claimant shown a real risk or reasonable likelihood
                 of  continuing  hostility  from  her  husband  (or   former
                 husband) or his family members, such as  to  raise  a  real
                 risk of serious harm in her former home area?

              b) If yes, has she shown that  she  would  have  no  effective
                 protection in her home area against such a risk,  including
                 protection available from the Pakistani state, from her own
                 family members, or from a current partner or his family?

              c) If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection extend  to
                 any other part of Pakistan to which she could reasonably be
                 expected to go (Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089,  AE  and  FE
                 [2002] UKIAT 036361), having regard to the available  state
                 support, shelters, crisis centres, and  family  members  or
                 friends in other parts of Pakistan?

    49. The appeal should  be  allowed  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or
        Article 3 ECHR only if, on the  facts  as  at  the  Adjudicator  or
        Tribunal hearing, having regard  to  the  background  evidence  and
        jurisprudence, a positive answer can be  given  to  each  of  these
        questions.

        Summary of Decisions

    50. In the case of SN, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    51. In the case of HM, the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.   We
        direct that this appeal be  remitted  for  hearing  afresh  by  any
        Adjudicator other than Mr N M Paul.




                                                                       [pic]


Dated:     14 May 2004                             J A J C Gleeson

                                             Vice-President


