

     HE (DRC - credibility and psychiatric reports) DRC [2004] UKIAT 00321
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  5 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                       .16/12/2004..........

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                               Mr M E Fraenkel
                              Dr J O de Barros

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Kuranchie of Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C P Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo,  born
     on 1 January 1940.  She arrived in the United  Kingdom  by  air  on  6
     April 2002 and sought asylum two days later.  This was  refused  on  6
     June 2002.  Her appeal against that refusal was  dismissed  on  asylum
     and human rights  grounds  by  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  B  Grewal,  in  a
     determination promulgated on 21 November 2002.

  2. The Adjudicator set out the evidence  at  some  length.   It  included
     evidence from the Appellant herself and also from her daughter who had
     been in the United Kingdom since about 1995, who herself was  said  to
     have an outstanding asylum claim.

  3. One of the grounds of appeal is that there were  areas  of  the  claim
     which the Adjudicator did not deal with.  However, the  claim,  as  he
     set out it, was that the Appellant left Kinshasa in 1998, having lived
     there for nearly forty years with her husband and family, and went  to
     live in the rural east of  the  country.   They  left  three  children
     behind and lost all  contact  with  them.   After  a  while,  and  the
     Adjudicator took  it  to  be  about  2001,  she  began  to  experience
     difficulties with the rebels.  She hid her nephew in the  forest  from
     the rebels who wanted to recruit him.  They demanded to know where  he
     was, beat her, took her husband away and burnt  her  home  down.   She
     tried unsuccessfully to find her nephew and grandchild in the  forest.
     She walked to a mission where the priest took her to a man who  helped
     her by taking her to another man, who drove her  to  the  airport  and
     assisted her to board.  She had not known till then that she was going
     to board an aeroplane.  Nor did she know where  she  was  going.   She
     only thought she was in Europe when she landed in the United  Kingdom,
     where she knew her daughter  was.   She  met  some  people  who  spoke
     Lingala, and they asked friends if they knew her daughter.  They  did,
     and that same day she met her daughter and has  lived  with  her  ever
     since.  The daughter said that it was a few days later that  they  met
     up.

  4. The Appellant was said to  be  in  need  of  international  protection
     because she had problems in rebel-held areas, and could not return  to
     Kinshasa because  she  had  lived  in  a  rebel-held  area,  would  be
     suspected of rebel connections or would  be  in  further  difficulties
     because her husband had been a Mobutu soldier.  She also  had  medical
     problems, including PTSD, and had no known relatives in Kinshasa.   It
     would breach Articles 3 and 8 to return her to Kinshasa.

  5. The Adjudicator rejected her claim.  He said that  she  had  not  been
     involved in any political activity, and had not been detained  by  DRC
     authorities.  Her fear of harassment by rebels because she  would  not
     tell them of the whereabouts of her  nephew  and  grandchild  did  not
     amount to a well-founded fear of persecution.  That would not put  her
     in any difficulties vis a  vis  the  government.   She  would  not  be
     returned to a rebel controlled area and even if that  were  to  happen
     she was unlikely to be of any interest to them.  The Adjudicator  then
     went on to make a series of strong adverse credibility  findings.   As
     issue was taken with the rationality of these, we set them out.

           "17.  Like the Secretary of State I find the appellant's account
                 of her escape from DRC as completely  incredible.   I  find
                 her account of walking through the forest and surviving  on
                 bananas and cassava implausible.  She claims to have  slept
                 in the forest without any cover  or  shelter  and  yet  the
                 appellant says in paragraph 5 of her statement at B10  that
                 she was able to keep  in  touch  with  the  people  of  her
                 village and that they told her about the  rebels  and  that
                 her husband was still with the rebels.   I  simply  do  not
                 believe the appellant's story.  In my  view  the  villagers
                 would not have  risked  contacting  the  appellant  in  the
                 forest knowing that  her  husband  was  involved  with  the
                 rebels.  I find the rest of the  story  about  her  journey
                 even more incredible.  I find it incredible that the priest
                 would risk all by sheltering the appellant and then  taking
                 her to (        ) house.  I simply do not believe the story
                 of her journey with  (         )  who  allegedly  took  his
                 bicycle and they went through the forest.  She  would  have
                 me believe that this man walked with her for a  whole  week
                 before he literally handed her over to  another  man  along
                 with an envelope which was  apparently  stuffed  presumably
                 with money.  She would further have me  believe  that  this
                 man made all the arrangements for her travel to the  United
                 Kingdom and then in fact travelled with her all the way  to
                 the United Kingdom.  I was given no explanation  whatsoever
                 why (         )would be interested in parting with a  large
                 amount of money to help the appellant whom he had  not  met
                 before.   In  my  view  the  whole  story  is  a   complete
                 fabrication and it damages the appellant's credibility very
                 seriously indeed.


           18.   I also take into account the fact that the  appellant  and
                 her  daughter  gave  differing  accounts  about   how   the
                 appellant traced her daughter.  Once again I simply do  not
                 believe the appellant that she did not know  that  she  was
                 coming to the United Kingdom till she landed in the  United
                 Kingdom  and  saw  white  people.   This   is   even   more
                 implausible in view of the fact that the appellant knew all
                 along that her daughter was living in the  United  Kingdom.
                 The appellant would have me believe that she was not  aware
                 of her daughter's whereabouts in the  United  Kingdom  when
                 she arrived here.  She told me at the hearing that when she
                 arrived in the United Kingdom she established contact  with
                 her daughter through people who were speaking  Lingala  and
                 when she asked  them  if  they  knew  some  Batetela  tribe
                 persons they traced her daughter.  Miraculously she appears
                 to have traced her daughter by the end of the day.  Yet  in
                 her statement dated 17th April 2002 the appellant says that
                 after she arrived in the United Kingdom with this person he
                 took her to a place where she stayed for three  days  until
                 Monday and that she went with  him  on  Monday  to  Croydon
                 where she claimed  asylum  on  22nd  April.   I  take  into
                 account  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  daughter   gave
                 evidence at the hearing and she told me that she had  found
                 out about the appellant only  after  she  arrived  in  this
                 country.  Once again I simply do not  believe  the  account
                 given by the appellant's daughter.  She told  me  that  she
                 found out about her mother through a charity called  Lo  Sa
                 Lo and that they phoned her that her mother was there.  She
                 could not remember the date.  At this stage the witness was
                 either unable or unwilling to answer  the  questions  being
                 asked and eventually stated  that  she  had  been  in  this
                 country for some days before she met  her.   The  appellant
                 had apparently told her daughter that she had  stayed  with
                 the agent but did not know where.  These  discrepancies  in
                 the appellant's account undermine the  credibility  of  her
                 account and her own credibility.


           19.   I also note that the appellant had said that she had heard
                 some Lingala speakers and then went to their house.  I need
                 to be satisfied that the appellant has  given  an  accurate
                 account of past events in order to assess whether the fears
                 she claims to have as to what may  happen  to  her  in  the
                 future is well-founded.  Certainly  in  the  case  of  this
                 appellant I am far from being satisfied that she has  given
                 an accurate account of past events and accordingly  I  have
                 serious doubts about the appellant's claim to have a  well-
                 founded fear of persecution.


           20.   Having heard the appellant give evidence I have  concluded
                 that neither the appellant nor her daughter  were  credible
                 witnesses.  In my view the appellant's story is a  complete
                 fabrication.  In fact I am firmly  of  the  view  that  the
                 appellant was very well aware of where her daughter was and
                 in fact arranged the journey to join her  daughter  in  the
                 United Kingdom for economic reasons rather than for fear of
                 persecution.  I did not believe a word of  the  appellant's
                 or her daughter's account.   In  my  view  the  appellant's
                 journey was well-planned and meticulously executed."


  6. After saying that the Appellant and her daughter were totally  lacking
     in credibility and dealing with other matters, the  Adjudicator  said,
     in a paragraph which was also the subject of criticism:

           "24.  I have given careful consideration to the medical  report.
                 As it is based on the appellant's  account,  which  is  not
                 credible, I am unable to attach much weight to it."


  7. The first ground of appeal was that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
     consider an important aspect of the claim which was that the Appellant
     had claimed to have left Kinshasa because she had been attacked  there
     by people favourable to Laurent Kabila.  At interview,  she  had  said
     that people had thought that cousins she had  to  stay  were  Rwandans
     because they were strangers and  because  her  husband  was  a  former
     Mobutu soldier.  Their house had been attacked and burnt and for  that
     reason she and her husband left for the rural area.  This  meant  that
     if she were returned to Kinshasa, which is the  only  place  to  which
     returns take place, she would be again at risk.  This aspect  was  not
     dealt with.  She would be seen as someone  coming  from  a  rebel-held
     area and that would place her at risk in  Kinshasa.   These  could  be
     seen as imputed political opinions  and  give  rise  to  a  Convention
     reason for persecution.

  8. The second and third grounds of appeal took  issue  with  the  adverse
     credibility findings.  It  was  contended  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     failed to give weight to the psychiatric report of Dr Seear, which was
     relevant to the credibility of the Appellant in having suffered as she
     said she had.  We were referred to two  cases;   in  one  the  medical
     evidence was strongly corroborative of the medical claims and had been
     wrongly discounted in the assessment of credibility;   in  the  other,
     Ibrahim [1998] INLR 511, the then President His Honour Judge Pearl had
     commented that any medical or psychiatric report deserved careful  and
     specific consideration in each and every aspect.  The passage cited in
     the grounds did not refer to credibility as such.

  9. It was also contended  that  there  was  nothing  implausible  in  the
     Appellant surviving in her walk through  the  forest  on  bananas  and
     cassava, or in her claim that villagers would  have  looked  for  her;
     they would have been quite likely to  try  to  find  someone  who  was
     elderly and had been beaten.  There was nothing perverse in  the  idea
     that a mission priest would assist the Appellant, particularly  if  it
     were a wealthy mission;  there was nothing implausible about it  being
     the mission rather than anyone else who provided financial  assistance
     to the Appellant.  Whether or not the Appellant knew that her daughter
     was in the United Kingdom was peripheral.

 10. The fourth and fifth grounds of appeal are  also  inter-related.   The
     Appellant's personal circumstances, as an elderly woman with no  known
     relatives living in Kinshasa, suffering from  medical  problems  which
     would be exacerbated by her return, meant that it would be a breach of
     Article 8 for her to be returned.   The  position  of  her  daughter's
     asylum claim was unknown and it could not be assumed that she would be
     able to return with her mother.  As a woman, she was subject to  legal
     discrimination, as the CIPU Report for April 2004  and  the  US  State
     Department Report made clear.  This would all  be  compounded  by  the
     fact that her house had been burnt and  that  she  would  be  at  risk
     anyway from the adverse attentions of the  Joseph  Kabila  authorities
     because of her past and her perceived origins from a rebel-held area.

 11. It was conceded by the Secretary of State  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     failed to deal with the flight from Kinshasa,  which  he  should  have
     done, but that the background material showed  that  even  if  he  had
     accepted what she had to say about that, there was now no risk to  her
     upon return.  This should not be seen as an internal relocation case.

 12. It is correct  as  the  first  ground  of  appeal  contends  that  the
     Adjudicator makes no finding in relation to the Appellant's  claim  to
     have left Kinshasa in 1998 as a result of  action  taken  against  her
     home because they were suspected  of  harbouring  Rwandans.   However,
     there is no evidence that it was a significant part of the case before
     the Adjudicator as opposed to a part of the background to the story of
     her entanglement with the rebels and her escape  from  them.  This  is
     equally so whether the incident in Kinshasa was seen as an  aspect  of
     persecution or as an aspect of problems on return.  The limited  part,
     if any, played by the events in Kinshasa can be seen  by  the  lengthy
     and detailed recital of the case  by  the  Adjudicator.   We  find  it
     difficult to accept that it was a large part of  the  case  so  as  to
     require to be specifically dealt with, in the absence of  evidence  as
     to how the case was actually put to the Adjudicator. Next, it is  very
     surprising that after living peacefully in Kinshasa for  nearly  forty
     years, the arrival of her relatives should lead the  relatives  to  be
     regarded as Rwandans and should spark such hostility. In any event the
     rejection of the Appellant's  credibility  is  so  strong,  sound  and
     comprehensive that nothing in the Kinshasa  events  would  affect  the
     overall adverse findings, even if they were accepted to have occurred.
      Finally, it is difficult to see that the Adjudicator would have  said
     anything other than that she could  not  believe  anything  which  the
     Appellant told her, in the light of her  conclusions.   It  would  not
     have therefore been of relevance to the assessment of risk on return.

 13. However, even if it were accepted as true in isolation, we accept  the
     submission from Mr Buckley that it would not show that  the  Appellant
     was at risk of persecution or of treatment which breached  Article  3.
     First, the CIPU Report of April 2004 deals with FAZ or  former  Mobutu
     soldiers.  In paragraph 6. 58, it says:

           "... the security situation in the DRC for former  FAZ  soldiers
           has improved since Joseph Kabila  became  president  in  January
           2001.  According to the CEDOCA report, in 2002, many former  FAZ
           soldiers were serving in the current Congolese army.   In  2002,
           all the key positions in the FAC high command were  occupied  by
           former FAZ soldiers and an estimated 20,000 to 25,000 former FAZ
           soldiers were living in Kinshasa."

 14.  Then  after  dealing  with  the  problem  of  certain  former  Mobutu
     officials, which was their pillaging of the country  and  the  actions
     taken against them, it said in paragraph 6.59:

           "The security situation improved for persons closely  associated
           with the Mobutu regime when  Joseph  Kabila  came  to  power  in
           January 2001, and even more so, after the Sun City Peace  Accord
           was signed in April 2002.  A large  number  of  persons  closely
           associated with the Mobutu regime have now returned to the DRC."

     This shows that there would not be a risk on return on account of  her
     husband's former position as a Mobutu soldier.

 15. Second, if the hostility was the result of it being  thought  by  some
     people that they were harbouring Rwandans, the significance is that it
     would have shown the Appellant to have been thought of as  enemies  of
     Laurent Kabila, and as former Mobutu supporters.  This is explained in
     the CIPU Report at paragraphs 4.8, 4.11 and 4.21.  In 4.8, the Rwandan
     Hutus had allied themselves with the FAZ in the mid 90s;  Tutsis  from
     Rwanda had sought to overthrow Mobutu  with  rebel  Congolese  led  by
     Laurent Kabila.  In 4.11, it points out that  there  was  a  rebellion
     against Laurent Kabila in 1998, which supports the Appellant's  story.
     Joseph Kabila had become President in  January  2001.   In  4.21,  the
     peace agreement of July 2002 is referred to, foreign troops were to be
     withdrawn, most of them left, and only the Hutus did not recognise the
     agreement.  A year after the agreement, a provisional  government  had
     been set up which ended the five year civil war between the government
     and the rebels.  An attempted coup on March 2004, which some  laid  at
     the door of former Mobutu soldiers and involved a small number of men,
     was dealt with rapidly and  was  not  seen  by  the  government  as  a
     destabilising factor.  We do not consider that there is  now  evidence
     that someone, who at the start of the civil war was seen  by  some  as
     having anti Laurent Kabila sympathies, at the very limited level which
     applied here, would now be at risk on return  on  that  account.   The
     former  soldiers  have  returned  to  be  integrated  with  the   army
     generally, the  war  is  over  and  former  rebels  are  part  of  the
     government.  That is not to say that all is stable, but  the  incident
     in Kinshasa is not a basis for a real  fear  of  persecution  for  the
     Appellant on return there.  There is nothing to show  that  she  would
     now be regarded as a Mobutu supporter,  or  as  a  rebel  against  the
     Joseph Kabila government, or that they would be troubled by her  past.
     She is not a Rwandan, either Hutu or Tutsi.  The Tribunal's assessment
     in CI (Link to Mobutu) DRC CG [2004] UKIAT 00072, and the cases  cited
     in it, supports that assessment.

 16. We turn to ground two which relates to the role of the  report  of  Dr
     Seear in the assessment of credibility.  It is worth pointing out that
     the citation of what Forbes J had to say is of  no  assistance  unless
     the medical report offers some corroboration for what an appellant  is
     saying.  If the report truly does  offer  that  support  it  would  of
     course be wrong to ignore it.  But his comment does not  suggest  that
     medical reports should be seen as offering corroboration as a  general
     proposition.  Whether they do or not depends on the  reports  and  the
     acts which it is said that they support.  As to the citation  of  what
     His Honour Judge Pearl said in Ibrahim, we comment that that cannot be
     regarded as a sound approach, of relevance to each and  every  medical
     or psychiatric  report  on  issues  of  credibility,  or  indeed  more
     generally.  The experience of the Tribunal  over  a  number  of  years
     since then is that the quality of reports is  so  variable  and  sadly
     often so poor and unhelpful, that there is no necessary obligation  to
     give them weight  merely  because  they  are  medical  or  psychiatric
     reports.  The consideration given to a report depends on  the  quality
     of the report and the standing and qualifications of the doctor.

 17. A particular difficulty arises in the contention that a report  should
     be seen as corroborating the evidence of an applicant for  protection.
     A doctor does not usually assess the credibility of an applicant;   it
     is not usually appropriate for him to do so in respect of a patient or
     client.  That is in any event the task of the fact-  finder  who  will
     have often more material than the doctor,  and  will  have  heard  the
     evidence tested.  So for very  good  and  understandable  reasons  the
     medical report will nearly  always  accept  at  face  value  what  the
     patient or client says about his history.  The report may be  able  to
     offer a description of physical conditions and an opinion  as  to  the
     degree of consistency of what has been observed  with  what  has  been
     said by the applicant.  But for those conditions, eg scarring,  to  be
     merely consistent with what has been said by the  applicant,  does  no
     more than state that it is consistent with other causes also.   It  is
     not common for the phrases which indicate a higher probative value  in
     the observed conditions to be used.  That limits the weight which  can
     be afforded to such a report  when  judging  the  credibility  of  the
     claim.  Rather than offering  significant  separate  support  for  the
     claim, a conclusion as to mere  consistency  generally  only  has  the
     effect of not negating the claim.

 18. Where the report is a psychiatric report,  often  diagnosing  PTSD  or
     some form of depression, there are often observations of behaviour  at
     the interview, and a recounting of  the  answers  given  to  questions
     about relevant conditions eg dreams  and  sleep  patterns.   Sometimes
     these answers are said to be consistent with what has been set out  as
     the relevant history of the applicant.  It is more difficult  for  the
     psychiatrist to treat what he observes as objectively  verified,  than
     it is for the description of physical conditions, because they are the
     more readily feigned;  it is rare for a psychiatrist's  report  to  be
     able to indicate that any part of the observations were undertaken  in
     a way which makes them more objectively verifiable.  It  is  the  more
     difficult for there to be any verification  of  conditions  which  the
     psychiatrist cannot observe and for which he is  wholly  dependant  on
     the applicant.  The further major problem with the contention  that  a
     psychiatric report can be used to support an applicant's claim to have
     told the truth about the history, is  that  there  are  usually  other
     obvious  potential  causes  for  the  signs  of  anxiety,  stress  and
     depression.  These include the fact that the applicant may  be  facing
     return to the country which he has left, at some  expense  to  himself
     and family, and it may well not  be  a  pleasant  place  to  which  to
     return.  He may face the loss of friendships and  lifestyle  which  he
     has enjoyed in the United Kingdom.  There may  be  a  loss  of  family
     contacts and of medical treatment.  He may  anyway  suffer  from  some
     depression,  without  having  been  ill-treated  in  a  way  requiring
     international protection.  He may have experienced difficulties  other
     than those which he relies on for his claim.  But it is very rare, and
     it will usually be very difficult, for a psychiatrist to  assess  such
     other factors without engaging in the process of testing the truth  of
     what the applicant says.  This is not his  task  and  if  there  is  a
     therapeutic side to the interview, it may run counter to those aims as
     seen properly by the doctor.

 19. Accordingly, the part which a psychiatric report can play in assisting
     the assessment of credibility is usually very limited indeed.  It will
     be even rarer for the report to be or contain a  factor  which  is  of
     real significance in the assessment.  Where the report merely recounts
     a history which the Adjudicator is  minded  to  reject,  and  contains
     nothing which does not depend upon the truthfulness of the  applicant,
     the part  which  it  can  play  is  negligible.   In  any  event,  and
     importantly, the report is unlikely to have  considered  other  causes
     for what has been observed, or the possible diagnosis, if any, if  the
     history is untrue.  We must illustrate that in this case.

 20. The report of Dr Seear is of no real value in  assessing  credibility.
     That is not a criticism of the report; it was not its  purpose  to  be
     used in that way.  He assumes, perfectly understandably, that what  he
     has been told by the Appellant is true.   He  does  not  consider  any
     other causes for any symptoms of depression which he records.  He does
     not consider whether any of the matters which  he  observed  could  be
     feigned.  Yet this was a woman of 62, not in the best of  health,  who
     had come to the United Kingdom  allegedly  by  coincidence  and  by  a
     remarkable stroke of good fortune, had found her daughter.  She  faced
     return to the Democratic Republic of Congo.  It is obvious that  there
     could be some scope for depression from that alone.  Anyone living  in
     the Democratic Republic of Congo for sixty years may  well  have  seen
     events which were troubling mentally for a long  while.   She  had  an
     obvious possible interest in feigning or exaggerating symptoms or  her
     descriptions of her conditions.  Yet  the  report  does  not  consider
     this.  This comment, we emphasise, is not a criticism of Dr Seear:  it
     would not have been his place to undertake such an exercise, for it is
     not his task as a doctor, but it is the Adjudicator's as  fact-finder.
     Our comment is a warning against the argument addressed to  us,  which
     complained that a report was not put to a purpose for which it was not
     intended and which it cannot serve.

 21. It is perfectly understandable, in view of the  Adjudicator's  finding
     that the Appellant planned her  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
     economic reasons to join her daughter, that she would be depressed  at
     the thought of returning, having  wasted  her  money  and  having  her
     naively entertained hopes dashed.  The Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
     may be far from pleasant for a  62  year-old  woman  and  the  medical
     facilities far worse.  She may be depressed anyway.  Had he been asked
     to assess her on the basis, as is  perfectly  obvious,  that  she  had
     deliberately come to the United Kingdom to join her daughter here, and
     that the rest of her story was a fabrication, some  of  the  diagnosis
     might have remained the same;  it might not.  An assessment of feigned
     or exaggerated symptoms and descriptions of conditions would  have  to
     be considered.  It is difficult to see what value could be put on that
     report as a support for the Appellant's credibility.

 22. Where the report is specifically relied on as  a  factor  relevant  to
     credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with it as an  integral  part
     of the findings on credibility rather than just as  an  add-on,  which
     does not undermine the conclusions to which he would  otherwise  come.
     We asked Mr Bobb what part of it had been said to be of value in  this
     respect to the Adjudicator.  He was unable to say. Where  an  advocate
     seeks to support  credibility  findings  by  reference  to  a  medical
     report, he must identify what about it affords  support  to  what  the
     claimant has said and which is not dependant on what the claimant  has
     said.

 23. We asked Mr  Bobb  what  part  he  said  was  important  in  assessing
     credibility, and  he  referred  in  the  most  general  terms  to  the
     diagnosis.  This is hopeless;  it is incapable of giving rise  to  any
     doubt at all over the credibility findings.  We  hope  that  advocates
     will be much more cautious about relying on  psychiatric  reports  for
     credibility support unless they  identify  what  in  it  supports  the
     credibility of the claimant and on appeal they  should  identify  what
     aspect they relied on which the Adjudicator is said to  have  ignored.
     That should be the subject of specific evidence.

 24. As to  the  other  challenges  to  the  credibility  findings,  it  is
     significant that no challenge could be raised to the  conclusion  that
     the story of  the  Appellant  arriving  at  an  airport,  not  knowing
     anything at all about her destination until she arrived and finding by
     a marvellous coincidence that it was the United Kingdom where she knew
     her daughter was, and very shortly, with a few inquiries  miraculously
     finding her daughter, was nonsense.  The conclusion that the Appellant
     had made a planned journey to the United Kingdom for economic  reasons
     to be  with  her  daughter  and  that  they  both  lied  about  it  is
     inevitable.  To suggest that this was peripheral, as did Mr  Bobb,  is
     wholly unrealistic.  This finding means that even  if  some  criticism
     could be made of a few comments, they do not go to  the  core  of  the
     Adjudicator's reasoning.

 25. One can debate whether or not someone of  the  Appellant's  age  could
     survive in the forest for a  week  on  bananas  and  cassavas  without
     shelter;  but it is not a large point on any  view.   The  Adjudicator
     was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  he  did  on  it  anyway.   The
     rejection of the story that the  villagers  helped  her  is  reasoned;
     they would not have risked their lives for her.  The  suggestion  that
     that is too  cynical  an  approach  and  that  they  would  have  felt
     charitably towards her is a point which the Adjudicator  was  entitled
     to reject as implicitly he did.  No explanation was offered as to  why
     they would risk themselves for her, apart from the  suggestion  of  Mr
     Bobb that they were kindly people.

 26. The suggestion that it was the mission which paid the airfare  is  not
     how the story was told but even if it were, it is pure and  improbable
     speculation on the part of Mr Bobb  that  a  mission  would  be  large
     enough to be willing to spend that amount of money on  a  stranger  to
     leave the Democratic Republic of Congo  and  to  leave  by  air  to  a
     country as far away as the  United  Kingdom.   Apparently  it  did  so
     without inquiring if the Appellant had any  relatives  there,  for  no
     such evidence is given by the Appellant.

 27. We turn to Article 8.  Although  the  submissions  did  not  make  the
     position clear, there are really two bases for  the  consideration  of
     this point.  First, on the Adjudicator's findings as  to  credibility,
     it is difficult to see that Article 8 has much content here.  Much  of
     the factual basis for the claim has not been proved even to the  lower
     standard.  She lived in Kinshasa for forty years  and  the  allegation
     that she left because of  the  events  described  in  1998  cannot  be
     regarded as reliable in view of the adverse credibility findings.  The
     whereabouts of her husband, whom  she  said  had  been  taken  by  the
     rebels, cannot be taken from what she said.  It cannot be assumed that
     she would return to life as a single woman with no family  support  in
     Kinshasa, even if her daughter in the United Kingdom  were  unable  to
     return with her. There is no real risk to those who return  merely  as
     failed asylum seekers.

 28. The daughter was said before the Adjudicator to have  an  undetermined
     asylum claim, dating  back  to  1995.   We  asked  Mr  Bobb,  who  was
     contending that she  could  not  return  with  her  mother,  what  the
     position now was.  He did not know.  The two live together.  It is for
     the Appellant to prove her case to  the  lower  standard.   She  could
     ascertain the position easily if this were a point of  relevance.   We
     are not prepared to assume that  the  claim  has  been  successful  or
     remained so long undetermined.  If either of those had been  the  case
     we would have expected to see evidence supporting that.

 29. The report of Dr Seear  poses  problems  for  the  Appellant  in  this
     respect. It is impossible to tell whether any of the  diagnosis  would
     have been the same if the assessment had been carried out on the basis
     upon which the Tribunal now approaches it.  It appears at best  to  be
     suggested that she needed counselling and anti-depressants  two  years
     ago.  The risk that her condition would be  worsened  upon  return  to
     where she previously experienced trauma  assumes  that  she  would  be
     returned to a rebel controlled area, because  the  trauma  relates  to
     what happened in the village and not to what happened in  Kinshasa  at
     all.

 30. On the basis of the Adjudicator's approach, there was  no  content  of
     substance to the Article 8 claim.  She merely had a family  life,  now
     for two years with one child, whom she had not lived with for at least
     seven years before.  What her position would be in  Kinshasa  was  not
     credibly shown.  She cannot improve her case through her lies, leaving
     the position unknown.  Her life  here  would  be  disrupted,  but  the
     degree to which that would happen depends on the daughter's status and
     we are not prepared to assume that  she  would  be  unable  to  return
     either because she has an undetermined claim, if it is, or because  it
     has been determined favourably to her, in the absence of evidence from
     an unimpeachable source.  The Secretary of  State  did  not  know  the
     position but he was not relying on it and did not have  the  advantage
     in this respect of living with the daughter.  The mental integrity  of
     the Appellant depends upon the weight given to the report of Dr  Seear
     and we do not think in this case that any weight can be given to it.

 31. Second, even  taking  the  position  to  be  more  favourable  to  the
     Appellant than is justified, we would have to accept the  incident  in
     Kinshasa as true but it would be of no  real  significance.   We  have
     dealt already with the position on return of those who might have been
     former Mobutu soldiers or have been involved with Rwandans  who  aided
     the rebellion against Laurent Kabila.  Her involvement  was  not  with
     them but only through marriage with a former  soldier;   there  is  no
     basis for supposing that  she  would  now  be  perceived  as  a  rebel
     supporter from that incident.   The  evidence  does  not  support  any
     conclusion that a short period spent in a rebel area from which a non-
     Rwandan person left to seek asylum, gives rise to a real  risk  of  an
     adverse  perception,  and  then  of  consequent  persecution  or  ill-
     treatment.

 32. Events in Kinshasa were not the basis of the  trauma  which  would  be
     reawakened by return.  The evidence that there might be a  reawakening
     of stress, excluding the unreliability of the material upon  which  it
     is based, is  not  sufficient  in  degree  in  any  event  to  show  a
     significant impact on mental integrity to set against the requirements
     of immigration control.  The need for medical treatment by counselling
     and anti-depressant was raised two years ago, and assuming neither  to
     be available in Kinshasa, does not add anything of significance.   Her
     physical ailments are quite mild.   Even  if  the  Appellant  were  to
     return to Kinshasa without her daughter  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
     lived there alone, which is a hypothesis which we do not accept,  this
     would  not  involve  a  breach  of  Article  8.   She  could  make  an
     application under the Immigration Rules, and if there were none  which
     availed her, that would not mean that her return was disproportionate.
      Rather it would suggest that no improper advantage should be taken of
     a deceitful asylum claim.

 33. She lived in Kinshasa for nearly  forty  years  without  any  problems
     until 1998; she would be no stranger to the city and would instead  be
     familiar with her surroundings.  She might have no property of her own
     to live in but it is inconceivable that she would have no contacts who
     would be able to assist. Three children were living there in 1998.  Mr
     Bobb referred to a passage in the CIPU Report, 6.33, which  said  that
     women were discriminated against in many walks of life,  and  required
     their husband's permission before  engaging  in  various  transactions
     including those concerning property.  It is far from clear  that  this
     applies to someone in the position of the Appellant,  the  whereabouts
     of whose husband is allegedly unknown.  She might well find life tough
     and harsh, but that does not involve a  breach  of  Article  3's  high
     threshold, nor does it mean that return would be  disproportionate  if
     Article 8 were engaged. It is no basis for international protection or
     for saying  that  her  human  integrity  would  be  disproportionately
     interfered with.

 34. However, that second set of factors is based on a premise which we  do
     not accept.  The Adjudicator did not err in not dealing with Article 8
     in the light of her findings of fact and the content of the Article  8
     point raised.

 35. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say
     about the relevance of medical and psychiatric reports to  credibility
     and the way in which advocates relying on them for that purpose should
     set out their case.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


