
 | |
|                                                                   |
|AH(Kurd-PKK-Risks in KDP area) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00318          |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:  28 July 2004                                     |
|Date Signed:       200                                             |
|Date Determination Notified:       200                             |
|08/12/2004                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|Mr A R Mackey - Vice President                                     |
|Ms D K Gill - Vice President                                       |
|Ms P L  Ravenscroft                                                |
|                                                                   |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|and                                                                |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|For the Appellant:   |Miss J Stevens, of counsel representing      |
|                     |Wesley Gryk Solicitors, London               |
|For the Respondent:  |Miss J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer|
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


The appellant, a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity,  from  the  Northern
Iraqi town of Duhok, an area currently controlled by the Kurdish  Democratic
Party (KDP). He appeals the decision of  an  Adjudicator  Mrs  C  M  Howden-
Beale, promulgated 12 December 2003, wherein she dismissed the  appeal  made
against the decision of the respondent, who had  issued  removal  directions
on 17 July 2003, and refused asylum and human rights claims.




Preliminary Matters

At the outset Ms Gill disclosed that she had had some prior family
association with the firm of Wesley Gryk, although there was no current
contact or association. There was no objection to her proceeding to hear
the matter by either party.

Ms Stevens provided us with a skeleton argument, dated 28 July 2004, which
had attached to it part of the United States Department of State "Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices: Iraq". We were also provided with a full
appellant's bundle running from A1 through to E42. The latest Home Office
CIPU Report was also provided.

The bundles contained an updated expert report written by Professor Emile
George Howard Joffe, dated 8 July 2003, relating specifically to the
appellant and a detailed commentary prepared by Prof Joffe on the CIPU
Country Report of April 2002. Prof Joffe attended the hearing and gave
evidence.

In reaching our determination we have considered all the material placed
before us, the skeleton argument, and the evidence of Prof Joffe, along
with the submissions of both parties.

This matter came before us after Statutory Review by the High Court. Mr
Justice Collins had concerns that the matters relied on by the Adjudicator
were not properly put to the appellant's advisors and the "Joffe report"
was not dealt with. In addition the relocation issue was not referred to by
the Adjudicator. We thus had before us the grounds for Statutory Review, as
well as the grounds of appeal, which were originally presented in support
of the application for permission.

The Adjudicator's Determination

Both parties were represented before the Adjudicator, Miss Stevens
appearing for the appellant on that occasion as well. The Adjudicator found
that the appellant was a 35 year old man who had arrived in this country on
9 February 2000 and lodged a statement of evidence(SEF) on 28 November
2000. He was interviewed on 7 March 2003 and his asylum application was
refused on 2 July 2003. He gave evidence before the Adjudicator and
supplied a witness statement and a report by Prof Joffe, along with other
objective evidence, all dated 2003, including reports from Amnesty
International, UNHCR, The Guardian, Christian Aid, Agence-France Presse,
Radio Free Europe and International Crisis Group.

The appellant claimed that his father had been a  member of the KDP, and
the family had always been perceived as KDP supporters. The appellant was
educated in Duhok, and set up a car repair business. In 1991 he took part
in the Kurdish uprising and helped the Peshmergas to free Duhok, for the
KDP. In an Iraqi counter attack in 1992 he had moved to Turkey temporarily.
After his return in 1993 he sold his business and he and his cousin started
trading with the major Turkish/Kurdish opposition group, the PKK. Business
was good and, at that time, the KDP were also helping the PKK. However, in
1994 the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) and the PKK fell out. Also at
this time the PUK left Duhok leaving the KDP in control. Soon after the
appellant claimed that the KDP and the PKK relationships also had soured
and the KDP began to seek out those in KDP areas who had or were assisting
the PKK. As a result of this his cousin and business partner was arrested,
presumably by the KDP, and his whereabouts are unknown to this day.

At the time of the cousin's arrest the appellant claimed he was away of
business on the Turkish/Iraqi border. His cousin's brother travelled to
meet him and warned him that the same fate awaited him and therefore the
appellant should flee. The appellant then walked until he entered the
government controlled area of Iraq ( Sheikhan, in En Sufni province), where
he remained until 5 October 1999, repairing cars with a friend. On that
night someone fired on a house of a kinsman of Saddam Hussein. The
appellant was then arrested as a suspect and an outsider. He was handcuffed
and blindfolded and taken to detention in what he later discovered was
Mosul. On11 November 1999 he was placed with another prisoner who he was
being taken away for execution. This scared him as he thought he would have
the same fate. He continued to be held until January 2000 when an Iraqi
officer came to see him and effectively asked him to work for the Iraqi
government(BP) as a spy within the KAZ. He was  that if he did so he would
be released. The appellant agreed because he feared he would be executed
like his fellow prisoner if he did not. He was given a small sum of
money.After staying for three days in Mosul ,so as not to allay suspicion,
he then hired a taxi ( on 10 January 2000), and made his way to the Iraqi
-KAZ border. He then claimed he had walked across the border to Duhok. He
went to stay with his sister, in secret, for two days. On the third day his
brother in law took him to the Turkish border where they found an agent who
eventually delivered him to the UK.

The appellant claimed his wife and children had left Duhok at the beginning
of 2002, because the KDP kept harassing them, and asking for his
whereabouts. His wife had told the authorities that he was En-Sufni and
that he had been arrested and she knew nothing of his whereabouts. He
further claimed that his wife had paid an agent to take her and the
children to Mosul, but he  had no further contact with them since the
coalition invasion of March/April 2003.

Because of the challenge to the Adjudicator's findings in paragragh 54 of
the decision, it is important to record the Appellant's evidence , from the
Interview record sheet, as it relates to his wife's movements in Iraq. The
reply to Question 64 is relevant.

This states :" Q64-Since leaving , have you had any contact with anybody
living in Iraq(both KAA/Iraq)? Reply-

" Yes, I phone my sister to know my own families destiny. They were in my
sisters's house until 2000, they had been taken to the security department
twice. Wife and children move to Duhok in beginning of 2000 to sister's
house, they taken to security for questioning twice and they could not
stand it, so they return to Mosul in 2002."

Although he claimed his father had been a KDP member and the family were
perceived as KDP supporters, he personally had never been a member or
politically active. Also he had not been a PKK activist or supporter. He
stated he had merely done business with them . He did know that they were
illegal organisation but apart from being aware they were against the
Turkish government, little else.

He claimed that now that the Saddam Hussein regime no longer existed he
could not live anywhere in Iraq because the KDP had a strong influence, not
only in the former KAZ, but also in other parts of Iraq, and they would be
able to find him where-ever he went. He was sure that his cousin had been
killed by the KDP for trading with the PKK and that he would face a similar
fate if returned. Finally he confirmed that despite agreeing to spy for the
Iraqis (BP) he never actually gave them information and the small amount of
money given to him was only for travel arrangements.

After hearing submissions from both parties the Adjudicator went on to
consider the objective information. In relation to the PKK she noted that
it had been formed in 1978 and had actively advocated the arms struggle to
achieve an independent Kurdish state, which included parts of Turkey,
Syria, Iran and Iraq. When its leader ,Abdullah Ocalan, was captured by the
Turks in 1999, the PKK ceased its violent operations, although the Turkish
government did not agree to the ceasefire. She noted that in 1999/2000
Turkish forces had invaded the PUK and the KDP controlled areas in search
of the PKK, and in July 2000 the PUK had attempted to remove the PKK from
it's area with casualties on both sides. Subsequently a ceasefire was
agreed between those two parties and she noted it that, in July 2003, a
United Kingdom/Danish fact finding mission report had stated that there was
no longer any PKK activity in Iraq.

The Adjudicator concluded her determination noting the dramatic change in
Iraq and the collapse of the BP regime. She considered the appellant was no
longer at risk from the BP.

In relation to the KDP risks she noted that, at a time when the appellant
fled to En-Sufni, in 1995, the conflict between the KDP and the PKK was at
its height, as were the conflicts between the PKK and the Turkish
Government. She noted however that in 1999 the PKK gave up its fight
against the Turkish government. She acknowledged however that the PKK had
recently indicated it had abandoned the ceasefire but she was unaware of
any clashes between the Turkish government and PKK at the present time. She
also noted that in 2000 the PUK and the PKK declared a ceasefire.

She went on to note that the appellant had been captured by the previous
Iraqi regime and released in 2000 and had then been able to return to
Duhok, for a short time, before fleeing the country. She noted that the
situation had completely changed since the appellant fled and that there
were no reported clashes between the PUK or the KDP and the PKK since 2000.

At paragraph 54 the Adjudicator stated:

           "The appellant claims that the security forces had been looking
           for him and have questioned his wife as to his whereabouts while
           she was living in Duhok, on two occasions. He claims that as a
           result of the harassment she fled to Mosul at the beginning of
           2002. She has not been questioned or harassed since then. I note
           that having questioned his wife in Duhok the security forces do
           not appear to have questioned his sister, who was and still is
           in Duhok, and, with whom, the appellant is in contact. I find it
           unlikely that the security forces, if they were interested in
           the appellant, would only question his wife and not the rest of
           his family, who live in the city. I do not accept therefore that
           his wife was questioned as he claimed, particularly since she
           was not questioned between 1995 and 1999, when he was in El-
           Sufni, but only when he fled to the United Kingdom in 2000."

She then stated that, bearing in mind the lack of hostilities between the
KDP and the PKK, and lack of hostilities between the PKK and the Turkish
Government she did not find, after this length of time, that the security
forces would "have the slightest interest in a former trading partner with
the PKK. The current situation in Iraq means they have far more important
things on their minds. I do not find therefore that the Appellant has a
well -founded fear of persecution either from the old regime or the KDP."

She then considered whether there would be a breach of Article 3 on return,
and did not consider there were substantial grounds for believing the
appellant would be at a real risk of ill-treatment "from the KDP for
something he was doing over eight years ago and which at the time all Kurds
were doing". She concluded that in any event he could live with his family
in Mosul where his wife has allegedly has been since 2002, without any
problems. She therefore dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human
rights grounds.


Professor Joffe's evidence


Prof Joffe was called and we heard evidence from him, which was followed by
cross-examination and re-examination.

The written material before us from Prof Joffe consisted of:- a report
dated 30 September 2003, consisting of 19 pages, and relating directly to
the appellant; a commentary on the CIPU Country Report (April 2004)
contained in the bundle A4-A19;  a short letter dated 8 July 2004 which
sets out comments on recent events dealing with the current status of
Kadek, previously known as the PKK. Prof Joffe sets out at the commencement
of the letter of 8 July 2004 that he had been unable to provide a report
specifically related to this appellant's situation for reasons explained to
the instructing solicitors. We understand that this came about due to a
lack of continuing funding being available to the Appellant.

Firstly Miss Stevens asked Prof Joffe his opinion as to what risks were
faced by the appellant,on return to his home district of Duhok, given the
background and perceived risks from the KDP?

Prof Joffe stated that his reply was somewhat conjecture but fell into
three parts. Firstly the risks to this appellant would appear to be not
only from the perceived associations with the PKK, going back to 1995, but
also that he hdd effectively joined the BP. This would be an additional
matter that could cause offence to the KDP.

Next was the question of whether, after the period time that had elapsed he
would be so recognised? His view was that, given the nature of Kurdish
society, which is intensely tribal and kin related through extended
families, it was almost inevitable he would be recognised, within that
family structure and within a short time. This was quite different to the
anonymous situation people could achieve within Europe. He therefore stated
there was considerable danger the appellant would be identified and his
past attributed to him.

Thirdly, he considered the attitude of the KDP to the PKK and BP had to be
taken into account. He considered that the antagonistic attitude towards
the PKK had intensified since 1 June 2004 and, at this time, there where
direct tensions between the KDP and the PKK, as the KDP wished to avoid
Turkish interest being taken in the KDP area. His view was that,
particularly in the Duhok area, those with PKK links would be under intense
suspicion by the KDP. To this had to be added, the BP issue. All Kurds in
the former KAZ, with past BP associations, would be seen as people who had
betrayed the Kurdish interest. He saw no reason for this to change.

He also confirmed that the Duhok area was very much in the control of the
KDP who carried out the policing in that area.

He was then cross-examined by Miss Sigley. She asked whether it was common
for people, such as the appellant, to trade with the PKK in the KDP from
1990-1995. Prof Joffe considered it was not common, but was not unknown up
to 1995, and tat that time, in effect, the KDP tolerated the PKK because it
was another Kurdish nationalist movement, although admittedly primarily
operating within Turkey. Hostility arose when the Turks intervened and
placed their forces within the KDP area. The PKK response to this was to
try and reinforce their position in Iraqi Kurdistan. This antagonised the
KDP and thus those trading with the PKK would be seen as politically
suspect. Thus in 1995 the KDP moved against the PKK supporters in its area
and rounded up those connected with the PKK. Both the KDP and the PUK had
tried to move against PKK enclaves within Iraqi Kurdistan. This was part of
the spur for tension between them.

 Miss Sigley then asked whether the KDP would have a serious interest in
the appellant given his current profile. Prof Joffe considered he would be
seen as a threat because of his past commercial links and that these could
be also seen as possible political links. He noted that Duhok was close to
the former border between the former KAZ and the government controlled
Iraqi area, and that there was a very permeable border. He also noted that
there had been a very strong intelligence service operated by the KDP and
thus, although the appellant had been outside of the KDP controlled area
and thus avoided risk, there would have been, over the period 1995-2002, a
likelihood that the KDP intelligence would have known of his activities.

 Miss Sigley then referred to Prof Joffe to the Fact Finding Mission Report
Danish/UK, of July 2003, which set out that the PKK did not appear to be
operating in Iraq. He was asked to comment on this.

Prof Joffe noted that between 1999, when Oclan was captured, until possibly
June 2004, that the PKK had operated a type of ceasefire. This impacted on
their operations in Iraqi Kurdistan. However, now that 5,000 Kadek (PKK)
remained inside Iraqi Kurdistan, in the KDP area, near the border between
Turkey, Iran and Iraq, there was heightened tension. The Turkish government
had tried to get the United States to end the PKK presence, but there had
been no response from the United States to this recent request. Therefore
Turkey continued to contain the PKK within an area in the northern KDP
controlled zone of influence. This lifted tensions in the area dramatically
and thus the situation that prevailed, when the Fact Finding Report of July
2003 took place, should no longer be seen as the current situation.

He agreed that there had been a lull in activities between 1999 and 2003.
He did not consider that this meant the KDP dropped it's interest in PKK
problems and that people, such as the appellant, were not still be seen as
of interest during that period, and also at the present time. When asked to
give examples of this he said that he constantly monitored the Kurdistan
Observer (an English Newspaper) which showed a number of examples of people
being picked up and detained for suspicious links or otherwise with the
PKK. He had not provided copies of that newspaper because of the
limitations of the latest letter, as discussed above.

Miss Sigley then asked for comment on a  report from the "Washington
Institute for Near East Policy (USA) - The PKK's New Offensive Implications
for Turkey, Iraq, Kurds in the United States" of  25/06/2004, which was set
out from A72  of the appellant's bundle. She asked us also to note several
parts of this report. At the outset this report stated that from 1 June
2004 the PKK had declared it had rescinded its unilateral ceasefire of
February 2000 and  the implications for heightened PKK violence were also
grave for Iraqi Kurds and the United States. It stated that the PKK had
more than 5000 loyalists in portions of Northern Iraq controlled by the KDP
and the PUK. She noted the report went on to state that:

      "The PKK is also distanced from the PUK in Iraq, in his new role as an
      Iraqi statesman, PUK leader Jalal Talbani has publicly sided with
      Turkey against the PKK's latest offensive. Moreover, amid reports that
      Iraqi Kurdish members of the PKK are leaving the terrorist
      organisation to join the KDP, former KDP official and current Iraqi
      Foreign Minister Hoshwar Zebari promised to allow the PKK to remain in
      Iraq. Nevertheless, the PKK is still very much active in Northern
      Iraq."( Italics added)

Prof Joffe commented that the KDP wished to break up the power of the PKK
and at the time this was written it appeared that the KDP were accepting
defectors. However he considered that those who did not come forward could
still have problems from the KDP.

 Miss Sigley asked whether this was the situation for someone who had only
sold provisions to the PKK? Prof Joffe considered if the appellant returned
he would face problems as even if he apologised for his PKK associations,
and that where accepted, he would still have problems because of his former
BP association.

He was asked why there would be any knowledge of his BP association given
that he never operated as a spy and left after only apparently a few days?
Prof Joffe considered that the KDP intelligence network system, in former
Saddam controlled Iraq, was a very good one and that on occasions the KDP
formally co-operated with the Iraq security forces. Thus, those of
particular interest such as BP informers, would be likely to be known to
the KDP. There were thus grounds to believe the KDP would know of the
appellant's acceptance of BP membership. He also considered that even after
the appellant's refusal to operate for the BP this information could be
passed on to the KDP, as a potential form of punishment to the appellant
for not carrying out his role as a spy. He was however unable to comment as
to whether contacts made with the family were because of his possible BP
associations. He was also unable to give examples of low-level BP party
member's receiving maltreatment in the KDP area. He explained that these
were unlikely to be reported in respect of those with a low-profile. The
reports he read were usually one or two lines. However, the failure to
report did not mean that it was not taking place.

 He expanded on this further  with questions from ourselves. He advised us
that the reports contained in the Kurdistan Observer were along the lines :
"Two people arrested in Duhok suspected of links with PKK". No further
detail on this was usually provided. He explained that there was also a
Turkish News Agency reporting similar matters and further reports, were
possibly available from Radio Free Europe - Radio Liberty, although he had
no specific evidence on this. He agreed with our summary that he was not
aware of any people who had previous trading links with the PKK, which had
ceased nine years ago, now being suspected and punished for those links by
the KDP. He agreed that there would have been many people with such trading
links in the past but those people would have come under pressure if they
had substantive links with the PKK. How they responded was up to the
individual. As with this appellant he had moved across the border and that
was rational response in the situation.

There was no re-examination and we then excused Prof Joffe.

The Appellant's Submissions.

Miss Stevens expressly contested the negative credibility findings in
paragraph 54 of the determination.

She submitted that the Adjudicator had failed to put the issue of the
questioning of the appellant's wife to the appellant. Had this taken place
the appellant would have clarified that his wife did not remain in Duhok,
she also relocated to En-Sufni and it was only in 2000, after the appellant
fled to the United Kingdom that the appellant's wife returned to Duhok. Had
this issue been raised the Adjudicator would also have been referred to the
appellant's answers to question 64, of the interview ,where he stated that
it was at the beginning of 2000 that his wife and children moved back to
Duhok to stay with his sister. In addition it was not put to the appellant
whether or not his sister was actually questioned. Given that his wife was
living with his sister the authorities would have clearly visited the
sister's house. Thus it would not have been surprising if the focus of
attention as to the appellant's whereabouts had been on the wife, as she
had suddenly returned to Duhok after a number of years, without the
appellant returning with her. In this situation therefore the Adjudicator
had made an error of fact in her conclusions. This was therefore an error
on her part and accordingly we were placed in a situation where there were
actually no negative credibility findings against this appellant. Thus we
should therefore treat his evidence at its highest.

Miss Stevens submitted that it was important that we look at the current
climate between the KDP and PKK and the new interim government of Iraq, in
reaching our conclusions. She referred us to a list of bullet points
relating to the PKK in Iraq set out in her skeleton argument. In particular
the last three bullet points on page 3 under "The PKK in Iraq", these
stated:


      -"On 25 June President Bush pledged to work with Turkey and the new
      Iraqi administration to deal with the PKK (A74 bundle).


      - One of the first actions of the new Iraqi government after taking
      over sovereignty from the US-led coalition on 28 June, was to include
      the PKK in a list of terrorist organisations (A86).


      - On 3 July the Iraqi interim government announced it was drawing up a
      strategy to rid Iraq of the PKK. The Ministry of Defence stated that
      the interim government would work with Turkey and the Kurdish
      Administrations in Erbil and Suleymaniya in Northern Iraq in this
      matter (A79)."

She submitted this indicated heightened tension around the PKK issue and
thus this appellant could be perceived not just as a former trader with the
PKK, but as a supporter. We needed to keep in mind that the appellant's
cousin had been arrested for this reason and that must be coupled with the
possible BP association of this appellant in the past. She submitted that
therefore, even if he stated he had nothing more to do with the PKK, there
was still a residual suspicion. Past trading associations could also show
useful information possibilities in a crackdown on the PKK. This again
could lead to the KDP taking interest in him.

She then referred us to an Amnesty International report set out in A25 of
the bundle. She submitted this indicated suspected terrorists could be in
danger throughout the whole of Iraq. She also referred us to examples of
persons detained and set out at A26 of the bundle in the same Amnesty
International report.

In summary therefore she submitted that there were continuing risks to this
appellant in the KDP area, despite the length of time since he had trading
links with the PKK. Given the level of intelligence, indicated by Prof
Joffe, and held by the KDP, including the possibility of his BP links being
known, he would be seen as a person who has betrayed KDP interests.

The Respondent's Submissions

Miss Sigley firstly addressed paragraph 54 of the determination and the non
acceptance by the Adjudicator that the appellant's wife had been
questioned, as he claimed. She submitted this was a safe conclusion, open
to the Adjudicator, particularly as no evidence had been produced by the
appellant as to where his wife was and what she was doing during the period
1995 to 1999. While the appellant gave evidence that his wife had returned
to Duhok no evidence had been supplied as to where she had been during the
period the appellant had been in En-Sufni, outside the former jurisdiction
of the KDP. The evidence, at best, did not make it clear where his wife had
been. In this situation the Adjudicator was able to reach the conclusions
she did, in a valid manner. She submitted there was no need for the
Adjudicator to go through the evidence point by point, but an overall
conclusion could be reached, in the manner set out in paragraph 54. She
submitted that all of the evidence in this regard was flimsy, however
particularly since the appellant had left in1995.

In relation to Prof Joffe's evidence that the intelligence forces of the
KDP were very effective and it was likely would have records on the
appellant's activities over the period 1995 to 2000, she submitted that
this conclusion by Prof Joffe was speculative and  did not appear to have
objective and sourced material to back it up. She submitted that if the KDP
authorities had been looking for the appellant it was strange that they
would not have done anything for a period of five years (1995-2000) and
this supported the Adjudicator's findings. She asked us to note that during
the period 200-2003, there was a lull in KDP interest in PKK activities and
supporters, yet this was the time when the appellant had claimed his wife
had been approached. This also appeared to support the Adjudicator's
conclusions on credibility in  paragraph 54. She then moved to the core
issue of the risk to this appellant on return. She submitted that this was
a man who had traded a few items with the PKK, for a short period in the
mid 1990's, when it was legitimate. He was clearly not a terrorist or a
person who would arouse suspicion. She submitted that the objective
evidence showed an increasing Turkish interest in the PKK, in an enclave
they appeared to hold within the KDP controlled area and this was where KDP
interest was also directed. There was nothing to show, from the objective
evidence, a current interest in a person such as the appellant, who was of
no profile. It was far-fetched to consider that there were substantive
risks to a person of the appellant's profile, particularly given the nine
year gap. She also referred us again to the article in "Washington
Institute for Near East Policy (USA) , The PKK's New Offensive -
Implications for Turkey, Iraq, Kurds and the United States" - 25/06/2004

She submitted that this quote showed that there was a defector situation
taking place. This did not indicate an oppressive attitude towards Iraqi
Kurdish members of the PKK.  She noted that possible terrorists with strong
associations to the PKK, may be still questioned and be at risk, but this
appellant clearly was not. She submitted that if the PPK members were able
to defect it was highly unlikely that the KDP would be taking interest in
someone of the appellant's profile, given the minor associations; by way of
trading only, this appellant had in the past with the PKK.

In respect of his possible BP linkage, she noted firstly that this was  a
late addition to the appellant's case. She submitted that Prof Joffe's
evidence in this regard had again been speculative. There was no evidence
that the appellant, had actually signed on to join the BP. The only
evidence was that  almost at once, after being approached to become a spy
for them, he had escaped, without conducting any activities from them. She
also submitted that it was highly speculative and unlikely that the former
Saddam regime would have passed on information to the KDP, firstly that
they had recruited him as a spy and secondly that he had refused to carry
out his activities as such. Indeed she submitted if the intelligence of the
KDP had been so good then the appellant would have been caught during the
three days when he returned to Duhok. She also noted that the appellant's
wife had been able to return to Mosul without problems. If she had been the
wife of a suspected spy this would have been highly unlikely.

Against the evidence, when logically and objectively assessed therefore,
she submitted that the appellant could now be safely returned to the KDP
controlled area of Iraq.

As an alternative she submitted that if the KDP did wish to talk to the
appellant about his previous activities that this, of itself, would not
lead to persecution or a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. She submitted
that firstly it was unlikely that a prosecution against him would be
pursued after some nine years, and secondly, even if it was, the objective
information showed that the judiciary was functioning effectively in an
independent manner in the KDP controlled area (CIPU paragraph 5.28)  and
that  general human rights obligations were observed (CIPU paragraph 5.30).
She submitted that while torture may have been used in the past by the KDP,
it was unlikely in the current situation that this would be carried out,
given the clear desire by the KDP to present itself as a viable governing
body in Northern Iraq, which observed international norms of good
government.

She submitted therefore even on this alternative basis the appeal should be
dismissed.


Reply


In reply Miss Stevens submitted that the issue of whether or not there was
an independent judiciary in the KDP area had been considered in the
original Prof Joffe report and we were referred to that.

In relation to the submission by Miss Sigley that the KDP had not taken
interest in the appellant's wife moving to Mosul, she asked us to note this
issue had been before the Adjudicator who did not find against the
appellant on this point. She agreed with us that this was a submission only
made by the respondent and not a challenge to credibility.

In relation to the lull of the KDP actions against the PKK over the period
2000-2003, she submitted that this did not indicate there had been an lack
of adverse interest continuing against PKK supporters by the KDP. It should
be noted, in ground 1(e) of the application for permission to this Tribunal
that the Adjudicator failed to take evidence of continuing interest over
the period 2000-2003 into account, even though the objective evidence
showed clashes continued. She submitted this did not effect the current
risk to the appellant from the KDP, who she submitted ,on the evidence,
were prepared to act against members and supporters of the PKK.

In relation to the claim by Miss Sigley that there was a gap in the
evidence relating to the appellant's wife's activities from the period 1995-
2000 she submitted that it was only in the year 2000 that the appellant (
and his wife) had returned to Duhok and this would explain why she was not
questioned during that period. In addition the appellant had never been
asked about his wife's sister or her activities during the hearing. Beyond
this she submitted that as the evidence of the appellant was that his wife
had been staying with his sister in Duhok over the period 2000-2002, it was
logical to assume that when his wife was taken to the security services ,
twice, his sister would also have been questioned by those forces of the
KDP. She agreed with our comment that no evidence on this point had
actually been given by the appellant as well.

We reserved our determination noting that if it arguable that there was a
well-founded fear to this appellant on return to the KDP controlled area of
Northern Iraq there would be a need to either resume this hearing to
consider issues of an internal relocation or to submit pending country
guidance cases to the parties for written submissions. Clearly if we found
there were no real risks to the appellant on return to Duhok that would be
the end of the matter.
Issues

It was agreed by both parties that the central issues before us for
determination were:

           a. whether the Adjudicator was correct in her assessment of the
              appellant's evidence relating to his wife's situation as
              concluded in paragraph 54 of the determination? If the
              Adjudicator was incorrect in her conclusions on credibility
              at this paragraph could we reach our own conclusions in this
              matter treating the evidence at its highest. If not, would
              this matter have to be remitted for clear findings on this
              potentially critical issue of continuing interest in the
              appellant?


           b. the risks of persecution or maltreatment to this appellant,
              on return to Iraq from the KDP, because of his past
              associations, perceived or real, with the Kurdish Workers
              Party (PKK) and/or the Ba'ath Party (BP)? If this is
              established then -


           c. whether an internal relocation or flight alternative (IFA)
              was available to this appellant. If so to where, and would it
              be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to so relocate?
              In relation to the IFA issue it was agreed that this matter
              would not be argued unless it became necessary, based upon
              our conclusions on the first two issues. In such case we
              undertook to distribute a forthcoming country guidance case
              to the parties, in which Prof Joffe had also given evidence.
              In that situation it was agreed that, after the country
              guidance case had been distributed, the possible issues
              arising would either be dealt with by way of written
              submissions or the reconvening of this hearing. In the
              circumstances, for the reasons set out below, as we do not
              consider that this appellant would be at a reasonable
              likelihood of being persecuted on return to his home district
              and we find no substantial reasons for concluding a real risk
              of a breach of any of the provisions of the ECHR on return to
              his home district, it has become unnecessary to determine
              this third, (IFA), issue.

Decision

We turn to the first issue, the negative credibility assessment made in
paragraph 54 of the determination. As stated above the Adjudicator did not
accept that the appellant's wife was questioned as he claimed. He also
considered that the security forces did not appear to have questioned the
appellant's sister who was, and still is in Duhok. However, as is clear
from question 64 of the appellant's interview record sheet the evidence
given by the appellant was that his wife had been living at his sister's
house in Duhok from the beginning of 2000 until he returned to Mosul in
2002. It would appear that the submissions of Miss Stevens in this regard
have merit. It would appear the Adjudicator has not fully read the answer
to question 64. It is logical that if the appellant's wife was living with
his sister, the security forces would have at least been aware of the
appellant's sister in Duhok and have possibly questioned her. If the
Adjudicator had concerns in this regard this issue should have been raised
with the appellant for clarification. His conclusions therefore that there
was a lack of continuing interest in the appellant because they have only
questioned his wife and not the rest of the family does not appear to be a
safe one based on the actual evidence the appellant provided. To this
extent the findings of the Adjudicator are flawed and in error.

This then leaves the situation where we must decide, on the basis of the
findings of the Adjudicator, which we consider are unsafe on the issue of
contacts with the appellant's wife and sister, there is sufficient evidence
for us to reach our own conclusions on the objective evidence before us?

We find that the question of continuing interest in the appellant after he
left Duhok himself in early 2000 is one that is critical to this
determination. Clearly if there is continuing interest established and
accepted as credible then the assessment of whether there is a real risk to
this appellant from the PKK at this time, on return to the Duhok area, may
well be very different to a situation where this continuing interest is not
accepted. We do not find the conclusions of the Adjudicator sufficiently
clear in this regard and, as it is an issue that goes to the core of the
appellant's claim, we find that the only pragmatic and expedient way of
determining this appeal is for it to be allowed to the extent that it
should be remitted for hearing afresh before another Adjudicator apart from
Mrs Howden-Beale. At the time of the remittal the Adjudicator will be able
to take into account all of the objective evidence set out above and the
determination of the Tribunal in EH (HX/52571/2003) a country guidance case
on the returnability of applicants to the former Kurdish Autonomous Zone.

This appeal however, is allowed to the above extent only.



                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President




