
ar
TK (Consideration of Prior Determination - Directions) Georgia [2004] UKIAT
00149


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                            Date of HearingDetermination  : 18 February 2004

                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 3 June 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 His Honour Judge Huskinson (Vice President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice President)




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the Appellant : Ms C. Record, counsel, instructed by Ashgar & Co.
For the Respondent : Mr C. Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Georgia,  born on 3 October  1974.   She
      appeals to the Tribunal, with leave, from the Determination of Mr P.D.
      Southern, Adjudicator, promulgated  on  7  October  2003,  whereby  he
      dismissed the Appellant's  appeal on  asylum  and  grounds  and  human
      rights  grounds  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
      Appellant asylum, and to refuse her leave to enter the United  Kingdom
      and to give directions for her removal to Georgia.




2.    The principal matter raised in this appeal is a procedural  matter  as
      to the Adjudicator's  approach to a prior Determination promulgated on
      21 November 2002 by Mr J.J. Neyman,  Adjudicator,  whereby  Mr  Neyman
      dismissed the appeal by the Appellant's husband on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.  In these circumstances the Appellant's claim  can  be
      briefly summarised.

3.    She was born in Tbilisi in Georgia. After her marriage  she  continued
      her education which was completed in 1997 and she  then  worked  as  a
      teacher. She says that her problems first began  on  1  November  2001
      when she and her family were at a family party. At  about  10  pm  two
      cars pulled up outside her house and   six  men  emerged  and  started
      shooting at the house and calling out her husband's name.   The  party
      ran out of the house and avoided injury, save that  a  cousin  of  her
      husband's was shot  in  the  knee.  About  thirty  minutes  later  the
      security police came to the house and took her husband  away,  without
      telling the Appellant anything.  The husband was  detained  for  about
      ten or eleven days and eventually was released through  payment  of  a
      bribe. The  Appellant  says  that  she  asked  her  husband  what  was
      happening and he said that he had problems  and  would  not  tell  her
      anything more, but he said that things were dangerous for her to  stay
      at home and that they should get into hiding. They went to  live  with
      an aunt in Tbilisi where they stayed in  hiding.  The  Appellant  says
      that she heard from neighbours that security forces were asking  about
      her husband's whereabouts and, although they all needed to  flee  from
      Georgia, they only had enough money for her husband to flee.  He  left
      on 9 March 2002 and came to the United Kingdom where  he  applied  for
      asylum.  The Appellant says she continued to stay in hiding  with  her
      son at the aunt's house.

4.     The  Adjudicator  summarised  the  Appellant's  account  as  to  what
      happened thereafter in paragraphs 14 to 16 of the Determination  which
      are in the following terms:

             '14.      The next event described by  the  Appellant  in  her
                 written statement was on 20 November 2002.   The  Appellant
                 and her son had returned home as she thought the  situation
                 may  have  improved.  However,  when   they   arrived   she
                 discovered from neighbours  that  the  police  were  asking
                 about her husband's whereabouts. She  said  therefore  that
                 she returned straightway to her aunt's house only  to  find
                 that in the  short time they had been away two men from the
                 security police had arrived  at  the  aunt's  house  asking
                 about  her  whereabouts.  The  following  day  a  neighbour
                 telephoned the aunt's house to say that the Appellant's own
                 house had been burnt down.  The  Appellant's  father-in-law
                 reported this event locally and a certificate  is  produced
                 by the Appellant which he says confirms  the  event.  There
                 are also some photographs.


             15. The Appellant says that it was then necessary to leave the
                 aunt's  house  and  they  moved  into  a  vacant   property
                 belonging to a friend, again  in  the  region  of  Tbilisi.
                 Relatives raised enough money between them for an agent and
                 the  Appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.  There  was
                 insufficient money for her son  to  accompany  her  and  he
                 remains in Georgia with her husband's parents.


             16.  Finally,  since  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom   the
                 Appellant has heard from a neighbour that the KGB has  left
                 two summonses for her  and  her  husband  to  attend  their
                 office or the police station and this, the Appellant  says,
                 demonstrates that her life is still in  danger  in  Georgia
                 and so she cannot return.'

5.    The Appellant's husband also gave evidence before the Adjudicator.  We
      regard it as important to note that his evidence  was  precisely  that
      offered at his own appeal hearing, where it had been rejected  by  the
      Adjudicator  as  being  untrue  (as  noted  in  paragraph  3  of   the
      Adjudicator's Determination of this appeal). In summary, the husband's
      account was that he became of adverse interest to the security  police
      by reason of his becoming a member of Mkhedrioni in 1992, which was  a
      temporary military group supporting the president. This  group  became
      liable to be hunted down after the change of government in  1997.   In
      November 1997, the husband says, he was detained and beaten,  but  was
      able to be released to compete in the European Wrestling  Championship
      (he being a leading  performer  in  that  sport).  He  had  a  further
      incident with the police in January 1999. In that  month  the  husband
      decided the family should move to Moldova where the husband  was  able
      to obtain Moldovan citizenship because he was wrestling  for  Moldova.
      In October 1999 he competed in the world championship judo competition
      in Birmingham but fell into difficulties because, contrary to  threats
      to do otherwise, he won his wrestling match. This put him at  risk  of
      violence from the Chechens.   The husband says  that  he  returned  to
      Moldova after this tournament and in January 2000 went back  with  his
      family to Georgia to celebrate the new year with  his  wife's  mother.
      In spring 2000, at a time when the Appellant's  husband  says  he  was
      living alone, men came to his home, beat him and took him away in  the
      car.  He says he was taken to a bridge and told 'either jump  off  the
      bridge or be shot'.  He jumped off and the men started shooting at him
      but he was able to escape without injury. Later the  husband  went  to
      Romania to compete in other sporting events and upon return  to  where
      he was staying he found a friend's car had been burned out,  which  he
      took as a message of warning because the friend kept  Georgian  people
      in the house. Because of this the husband says he decided to return to
      Georgia and stay in hiding, which he did at the end of  2000  when  he
      rejoined his wife who was then living with an aunt. The  husband  then
      went on to describe the event at the  sister's  birthday  party  on  1
      November 2001 that the Appellant herself had described.  He said  that
      after  he  had  been  arrested  and  taken  away  he  was  beaten  and
      interrogated each day during his ten or eleven day detention and after
      he was released, following payment of the bribe, he stayed  in  hiding
      until he left Georgia on 9 March 2002, leaving  his  family  with  his
      wife's aunt in Georgia.

6.    The previous Adjudicator, Mr J.J. Neyman,  disbelieved  the  husband's
      account and dismissed his appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
      because of this adverse credibility finding.  The husband sought leave
      to appeal to the Tribunal but this was refused.   It may be noted that
      the present Adjudicator, Mr Southern, stated at paragraph 22  that  he
      would have reached a similar conclusion relating  to  the  Appellant's
      husband's evidence rejecting as untrue, as did  Mr  Neyman,  each  and
      every one of the incidents upon which the husband relied.

7.    The substance of the Appellant's appeal in the present case arises  in
      the following manner. Clearly there existed in  documentary  form  the
      Determination of Mr Neyman promulgated on 21 November 2002 in relation
      to the husband's appeal.  A question arose as to whether  this  should
      be available to the present Adjudicator. The procedure regarding  this
      took the following course:

      (i)   On 15 August 2003 Mr  M.J.  Blandy,  Adjudicator,  gave  various
           directions including a  direction  that  the  respondent  should
           serve a copy of Mr Neyman's Determination so that this would  be
           available at the hearing of the Appellant's appeal


      (ii)  The Appellant's representatives took exception to this direction
           and they applied to the Deputy Regional Adjudicator who,  on  11
           September 2003, stated the following:


                 'You object to the directions given by the Adjudicator  for
                 the production of the husband's Determination and the other
                 documents relating to the husband's application for asylum.




                 Your client based her claim on the basis of  her  husband's
                 activities and as such the Home Office would be entitled to
                 cross-examine your client and her husband  in  relation  to
                 it.  In the circumstances it would only be  right  for  the
                 Adjudicator to have that information before  him.  I  agree
                 that the Determination in the husband's case should not  be
                 before the Adjudicator. The Adjudicator's direction to that
                 extent is rescinded.'

8.    When the matter came before the  present  Adjudicator,  there  was  no
      representation on behalf of the Respondent and accordingly there would
      not be any cross-examination. The  present  Adjudicator  recorded  the
      Deputy Regional Adjudicator's response which is set out above and then
      in paragraph 5 of the Determination he stated as follows:

             'Counsel for the Appellant did not seek to resist that amended
             direction. The difficulty, of course, was that the  Respondent
             was not represented at the hearing and so there  would  be  no
             cross-examination on the basis of information available to the
             Respondent relating to the husband's appeal.  I  indicated  to
             counsel for the  Appellant  that  I   was  minded  to  take  a
             different  view  with  regard  to  the  Determination  in  the
             Appellant's husband's appeal and that I  would read it  before
             the hearing commenced. I reached  this  decision  because  the
             Appellant had prepared for the hearing  in  expectation  of  a
             cross-examination based upon the husband's  Determination  and
             so would not be disadvantaged if I had available to me details
             contained  within   the   Determination.    I   regarded   the
             Determination of the  husband's  appeal  as  an  authoritative
             Determination of the facts relating to the husband's  evidence
             as at 15 November 2002. I indicated that I  would be happy  to
             hear any evidence  relating  to  matters  subsequent  to  that
             hearing but that I was not prepared to revisit    the decision
              that had already  been  made  by  the  first  Adjudicator  in
             relation  to  the   Appellant's   husband's   evidence.    The
             Appellant's case was that her husband had not disclosed to her
             any of the difficulties he had experienced as were set out  in
             his own asylum claim and  therefore  the  adverse  credibility
             finding reached by the Adjudicator in respect of the husband's
             evidence did not mean that a similar  view  would  necessarily
             have to be taken of the evidence of the Appellant herself.'

9.    We were told by Miss Record, who appeared  for  the  Appellant  before
      the Adjudicator, that the Adjudicator  gave  this  indication  at  the
      commencement of the hearing and then retired to read the Determination
      of Mr Neyman in respect of the Appellant's husband's case. Having done
      so, the case then proceeded. Miss Record confirmed that  she  and  her
      client were aware of the contents of  Mr  Neyman's  Determination  and
      that she and her clients were also aware throughout the  hearing  that
      the Adjudicator had read this Determination.
10.   In support of the Appellant's appeal,  Miss  Record  relied  upon  the
      grounds of appeal and advanced the following contentions:

      (i)   The present Adjudicator should have followed and been  bound  by
           the direction contained in  the  Deputy  Regional  Adjudicator's
           letter.


      (ii)  The present Adjudicator should have recognised that Mr  Neyman's
           Determination was not part of the Respondent's case, in that  it
           had not  been  formally  put  forward  by  the  Respondent.  The
           Adjudicator  should  therefore  have  recognised  that,  as  the
           proceedings  were  adversarial  and   not   inquisitorial,   the
           Determination of Mr Neyman was not part of the evidence  adduced
           in  the  case  and  should  not  have  been  looked  at  by  the
           Adjudicator.


      (iii) Prior to the hearing the Appellant and her husband,  and  indeed
           she  herself,  had  been  proceeding  on  the  basis  that   the
           Adjudicator would not read the Determination  in  the  husband's
           case.


      (iv)  The present case  was  a  case  for  cross-examination  and  the
           Adjudicator should only  have  reached  an  adverse  credibility
           finding in respect of the husband's evidence after  hearing  him
           cross-examined.   He  should  not  have  treated   Mr   Neyman's
           Determination as authoritative as to the husband's evidence.


      (v)   The Appellant perceived herself to have been the subject  of  an
           unfair hearing.


      (vi)  There was also a point regarding the interpreter which  we  will
           deal with separately below.

11.   After hearing  Miss  Record  develop  her  submissions,  the  Tribunal
      indicated to Mr Buckley that it did not need to hear from him.

12.   Before coming to the reasons  why  the  Tribunal  concludes  that  the
      Appellant's appeal must be dismissed, it is helpful to set out first a
      provision in the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and,
      secondly,  a  provision  in  the  Immigration   and   Asylum   Appeals
      (Procedure) Rules 2003.  Section 85(4) of the Act provides:


           '(4)  On an appeal  under  Section  82(1)  or  83(2)  against  a
                 decision an Adjudicator may  consider  evidence  about  any
                 matter which he thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the
                 decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a   matter
                 arising after the date of the decision.'

13.   Rule 48(1) of the 2003 Rules states:

            'An Adjudicator or the Tribunal may allow oral, documentary  or
            other evidence to be given of any  fact  which  appears  to  be
            relevant to an appeal or an application for bail, even if  that
            evidence would be inadmissible in a court of law.'

14.   As regards the contention by Miss  Record  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      effectively    bound  by  the  direction  of   the   Deputy   Regional
      Adjudicator, the Tribunal cannot accept that  this  is  correct.   The
      Adjudicator hearing the case is a master of the proceedings before him
      in accordance with the statutory provisions governing  such  hearings.
      Section 85(4) expressly indicates that  an  Adjudicator  can  consider
      evidence about any matter which he thinks relevant to the substance of
      the decision appealed against.  An Adjudicator is not to  be  deprived
      of  this  power  by  a  previous  procedural  direction  from  another
      Adjudicator, whether the Deputy Regional Adjudicator or otherwise.  Of
      course, if a decision to depart from a prior direction  meant  that  a
      party was disadvantaged, in the sense of being unprepared to deal with
      the case on  the  new  basis,  then  that  might  be  a  case  for  an
      adjournment.  However, in the present  case,  the  Appellant  and  her
      husband and her counsel  had  all  read  the  Determination  and  were
      expecting cross-examination of the husband.  It has not been suggested
      that their preparation of the case would have been different  if  they
      knew the Adjudicator was going to read the Determination. There was no
      application for an adjournment and there  was  and  is  no  reason  to
      suppose that an adjournment was necessary in the interests of justice.



15.   On the separate question of whether, quite apart from the question  of
      being bound by the Deputy Regional  Adjudicator's  direction,  it  was
      open to the Adjudicator to look at  Mr  Neyman's  Determination,  once
      again the Tribunal considers that Section 85(4) and Rule 48(1)  answer
      the question.  The Adjudicator,  having  concluded  that  Mr  Neyman's
      Determination was relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision  being
      appealed against, was entitled to look at Mr Neyman's Determination  -
      and he was  entitled  to  do  so  'even  if  that  evidence  would  be
      inadmissible in a court of law', see Rule 48(1).

16.   As regards the argument by Miss Record that this was a case where  the
      claimant's husband was prepared for cross-examination and that it  was
      unfair for the case to be decided without the husband's evidence being
      cross-examined and considered for credibility by the Adjudicator,  the
      Appellant and her husband can scarcely  demand  cross-examination  and
      complain of unfairness if he is not cross-examined.

17.   We turn next to the question  of  whether  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      treating Mr Neyman's Determination as authoritative on the question of
      the husband's evidence.   For the reasons set out  below  we  conclude
      (a) that the Adjudicator was entitled to do so on the  facts  of  this
      case, and (b) that in any event the Adjudicator in fact considered the
      husband's evidence on its own merits.

18.   The Tribunal considers it important to  notice  that  in  the  present
      case the Appellant's appeal was  based  upon  a  fear  of  persecution
      because of the experiences of her husband, rather than  anything  that
      she has herself done or been perceived to do: see paragraph 3  of  the
      Determination.  It is also important to note that in paragraph  3  the
      Adjudicator records that:

             'Counsel for the Appellant confirmed that the evidence of  the
             husband to be tendered in support of  the  wife's  appeal  was
             precisely that  offered  at  his  own  appeal  hearing,  which
             evidence was rejected by the Adjudicator as being untrue.'

19.   In these circumstances the Tribunal considers that not  only  was  the
      Adjudicator   entitled   to   read    Mr    Neyman's    Determination,
      notwithstanding  the  arguments  to  the  contrary  which  have   been
      considered and dealt with above, but was  also  entitled  to  conclude
      that it would be wrong to revisit Mr Neyman's decision in relation  to
      the Appellant's husband's evidence. Were the Adjudicator not  entitled
      to take this course, the following  extraordinary  circumstance  could
      arise. The head of a family, call him X, claims asylum on the basis of
      his own  account  and  loses  on  the  grounds  that  his  account  is
      disbelieved.   There  follows  thereafter  a  succession  of  separate
      members of X's family  who each makes his/her own  asylum  application
      and each expressly accepts that the risks which they fear are based on
      the risks to X as head of family.  If Miss Record's  submissions  were
      correct, then  there  could  be  a  succession  of  hearings  where  a
      succession  of   Adjudicators,   each   deprived   of   all   previous
      Adjudicator's Determinations, could be asked to  reappraise  over  and
      over again the same basic account from X, being an  account  on  which
      all the successive family members were relying as  showing  that  they
      were at risk because X was at risk. Unless some very good  reason  was
      advanced to the contrary, for example, compelling new evidence to show
      that  X's  evidence  (which  originally  had  been  disbelieved)   was
      mistakenly appraised by the original Adjudicator, a future Adjudicator
      is,  in  the  Tribunal's  view,  not  merely  entitled  to  read   the
      Determination in X's case but also to treat it as determinative as  to
      X's account.

20.   In the present case, no such compelling new  evidence  is  alleged  to
      have been available. It  is  merely  suggested  that  so  far  as  the
      Appellant's husband's account is concerned (which he was tendering  to
      the Adjudicator  in exactly the same terms as he  tendered  it  to  Mr
      Neyman, see paragraph 3 of the Determination) the Appellant's  husband
      should have had another chance to persuade  another  Adjudicator  that
      his story was  credible.   The  only  extra  material  was  supporting
      evidence from the Appellant herself as  to  a  small  portion  of  the
      husband's account - the Appellant  had  indicated  that  she  did  not
      herself know of the husband's alleged problems prior   to  1  November
      2001.

  21. We are assisted in reaching this conclusion by  the  starred  Tribunal
      determination  in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   Devaseelan   is
      distinguishable to the extent that that  case  was  concerned  with  a
      second  Adjudicator hearing a second appeal  by  the  same  applicant,
      whereas in the present case  the Adjudicator was  concerned  with  the
      first appeal by the Appellant (the wife)  who  was  relying  upon  the
      claimed risk to her husband, whose case  had  been   determined  in  a
      previous appeal decided by the Adjudicator, Mr  Neyman.  However,  the
      general approach of the Tribunal in paragraphs  37 to 42 of Devaseelan
      as to the extent to which matters can properly be relitigated  are  of
      importance and are of relevance to the present  case.   Of  particular
      relevance is the approach identified in  paragraph  41  as  being  the
      approach to adopt where an applicant claims  that  his  removal  would
      breach Article 3 for the same reasons that he claimed to be a refugee.
      This indicates

             'If before the second  Adjudicator  the  Appellant  relies  on
             facts that are not materially different from those put to  the
             first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim  by  what
             is in essence the same  evidence  as  that  available  to  the
             Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator  should  regard
             the issues as settled by the first Adjudicator's Determination
             and make his findings in line with that  Determination  rather
             than allowing the matter to be relitigated.'

       We  are  aware  that  there  was  some  extra  evidence  (namely  the
      Appellant's own evidence) and that  this  was  not  available  at  the
      hearing of the husband's  appeal  as  she  was  not  in  the  country.
      However bearing in mind that (as pointed out in  paragraph  20  above)
      her evidence only supported a small portion of the  husband's  account
      and bearing in mind that the husband's  evidence  as  offered  in  the
      Appellant's appeal was precisely the same evidence as offered  in  his
      own appeal (which had been disbelieved), the Tribunal  concludes  that
      the Adjudicator acted consistently with the principles in   Devaseelan
      in treating Mr Neyman's  Determination  as  authoritative  as  to  the
      credibility of the husband's evidence as given to  Mr  Neyman  and  as
      offered again to the Adjudicator.

22.   Quite apart from the foregoing, the Adjudicator in  the  present  case
      did in fact himself consider the  merits of  the  husband's  evidence:
      see paragraph 6 above.  Thus it cannot in any event be said  that  the
      Adjudicator rejected the husband's account without directing  his  own
      mind to it and reaching his own view in respect of it.

23.   As regards  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  regarding  more  recent
      matters, i.e. matters  which  took  the  account  forward  beyond  the
      husband's  account,  the  Adjudicator  gave  separate   and   detailed
      consideration to this part of the Appellant's evidence and disbelieved
      it.  He gave  clear  and  sufficient  reasons  for  disbelieving  this
      evidence and these reasons are not challenged in the grounds of appeal
      on their own account. The rejection of  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
      merely challenged on the basis that the Adjudicator came  to  consider
      this evidence with  a  biased  eye  -  i.e.  because  he  had  already
      concluded against the Appellant's husband's account of the basis of Mr
      Neyman's Determination.   If the  Adjudicator  had  not  examined  the
      Appellant's evidence regarding these later events on their own  merits
      and had  instead  disbelieved  her  evidence  merely  because  he  had
      disbelieved the earlier part of the account (as given in the husband's
      evidence)  then  this  would  have  been  an  error.    However,   the
      Adjudicator did give separate  consideration  on  the  merits  to  the
      Appellant's evidence and gave a reasoned decision for disbelieving the
      Appellant's account of later events.  The fact that he  reached  these
      conclusions against a background knowledge that the husband's evidence
      was not to be believed does not render such a decision flawed.

24.   There was a separate and subsidiary  matter  raised  by  Miss  Record.
      She contended that the feeling of unfairness which the  Appellant  had
      was increased by the fact that the interpreter before the  Adjudicator
      was  also  present  as  the  interpreter  during  the  two   screening
      interviews. However, the Adjudicator gave  separate  consideration  to
      this  point  in  paragraph  6  of  the  Determination  and  reached  a
      conclusion that was clearly open to him to the effect that this was no
      reason for the hearing to be adjourned.

25.   We conclude that the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  proceed  in  the
      manner he did and to read Mr Neyman's Determination and to  accord  it
      the significance which he did.  He was also  entitled  to  reject  the
      Appellant's separate evidence as being not credible for  the  detailed
      separate reasons given  by  him.   Whatever  may  be  the  Appellant's
      subjective feelings, there is no objective  basis  for   doubting  the
      fairness of the hearing before the Adjudicator or his Determination.

26.   In the result therefore  we dismiss the Appellant's appeal.




                         HIS HONOUR JUDGE HUSKINSON
                               VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      2


