
ar                     NM (Effect _ Delay) Croatia [2004] UKIAT 00029


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                             Date of HearingDetermination  : 2 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            20 February 2004

                                   Before:

                           Mr P R Lane (Chairman)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr G. Lee, counsel, instructed by Sutovic and Hartigan
For the respondent : Mr J. Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, an ethnic Serbian  citizen  of  Croatia,  appeals  with
      permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr B.  Dawson,
      sitting at Taylor House, in which he dismissed  on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent on 13 June 2001 to refuse him leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom.

   2.  There  was  no  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  in  relation  to   the
      Adjudicator's dismissal of the appeal  on  asylum  grounds.  The  Vice
      President who granted permission to appeal has, in  addition,  limited
      the grounds so  as  to  exclude  any  argument  that  removal  of  the
      appellant to Croatia would be a violation of Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
      Since permission to appeal was granted in July 2003, the Tribunal in K
      (Croatia) [2003] UKIAT 00153, in which the determination  was  written
      by the President, has found that  the  current  situation  for  ethnic
      Serbs in Croatia is  not  such  as  to  engage  that  Article.   Quite
      rightly, Mr Lee did not seek to permission to expand the  grounds,  so
      as to encompass Article 3.

3.    Accordingly, the question for this Tribunal to  determine  is  whether
      the Adjudicator was wrong to find that Article 8 of the ECHR would not
      be violated by removing the appellant from the United Kingdom.

4.    Mr Lee accepted that his client's case rested entirely upon the  Court
      of Appeal judgment in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 233.

5.     The  Adjudicator  in  the  present  case  has,  in   the   Tribunal's
      assessment,  given  inadequate  attention  to  the  Article  8  issue.
      Paragraph 30 of his determination is rightly to be criticised.

6.    That said,  however,  the  Tribunal  is  in  no  doubt  but  that  the
      appellant is not entitled to succeed in his appeal under section 65 of
      the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, by reference to Article 8.

7.    In order  to  bring  himself  within  the  scope  of  Article  8,  the
      appellant must first show that his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
      would interfere with his right to respect for family or private  life.
      As regards family life, there would plainly be no  such  interference.
      The only family member of the appellant in the United Kingdom to which
      reference has been made is the appellant's  wife.  She  is  also  from
      Croatia and it is not disputed that, in the event of  the  appellant's
      removal from the United Kingdom, she would be removed with him.

8.    The Tribunal enquired of Mr Lee as to  the  appellant's  circumstances
      in the United Kingdom, so that we might ascertain  whether  he  has  a
      private life and, if  so,  whether  that  private  life  would  suffer
      interference  by  his  removal.  Having  taken  instructions,  Mr  Lee
      informed the Tribunal  that  the  appellant  has  never  been  in  any
      employment in the United Kingdom.  Although, at paragraph  16  of  his
      statement of 7 February 2003, the appellant says that  when  he  first
      arrived in the United  Kingdom  he  'attended  college  ...  to  learn
      English', Mr Lee confirmed that  the  appellant  was  not  at  present
      engaged in any course of study.  In short, apart from the  appellant's
      contention at paragraph 16 that he and his wife feel  settled  in  the
      United Kingdom, there is nothing to show  that  the  appellant  has  a
      private life here which  would  be  interfered  with  were  he  to  be
      removed. His private life would, thereafter, continue to be pursued in
      Croatia.

9.    In the light of this, it is, in the Tribunal's view, difficult to  see
      how the appellant brings himself within Article 8 at  all.  Unless  he
      can, the proportionately test inherent in Article 8(2)  never  arises.
      Since Shala is all about the application of that test, it follows that
      that case is likewise of no relevance.

10.   Even if the appellant can be said to be  carrying  on  in  the  United
      Kingdom a private life which would suffer interference  by  reason  of
      removal, we do not consider  that  Shala  entitles  the  appellant  to
      succeed in his appeal.

11.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  July  1999.   Bulletin
      4/99, published by the respondent on 25  November  1999,  acknowledged
      that whilst each application for asylum by Croatian Serbs  had  to  be
      considered carefully, ethnic Serbs had been found to be  'very  likely
      to suffer persecution and discrimination based on ethnicity'.

12.   In the present  case,  the  appellant's  application  for  asylum  was
      determined by the respondent in June 2001, just under two years  after
      the application was  submitted.   The  contention  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant is that this delay was excessive and that if one  assumed  a
      prompt response by the respondent had taken place in relation  to  the
      appellant's application, it is likely that, having regard to  Bulletin
      4/99, the appellant would have been  granted  four  years  exceptional
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

13.   At paragraph 28 of his determination, the Adjudicator found  that  the
      appellant's account of his experiences in  Croatia,  insofar  as  they
      could be believed, did not amount to a persecution.  Accordingly, even
      if the respondent had reached an extremely rapid decision on the facts
      of the appellant's case, it is unlikely that the appellant would  have
      been granted asylum, even bearing in mind the situation in 1999.

14.   Even if one accepts that a decision taken in 1999, even if adverse  to
      the appellant in terms of asylum, would have  resulted  in  his  being
      granted four years exceptional leave to remain, this  does  not  bring
      him any closer to succeeding in his appeal.

15.   Leaving aside the  fact  that,  compared  with  Shala,  the  delay  in
      processing the appellant's application in  the  present  case,  whilst
      regrettable, is less than two years (compared with over four years  in
      Shala), the key distinction between Shala and the present case  is  to
      be found at paragraph 14 of the  judgment  of  Keene  LJ.  There,  the
      'exceptional feature' identified by the learned Lord Justice  is  that
      if Mr Shala's 'asylum application [had]  been  dealt  with  reasonably
      efficiently, he would have been  likely  to  have  obtained  at  least
      exceptional leave to remain as a Kosovo refugee, thereby  giving   him
      the ability to apply from within the United Kingdom for a variation in
      that leave on the grounds of his marriage'.

16.   Contrast the position here. The appellant  is  not  basing  his  claim
      upon having married a British citizen or other person who  is  settled
      in this country.  On the contrary, as we have already  noted,  he  and
      his wife would return to Croatia together.  Assuming the appellant had
      been granted four years exceptional leave to remain in 1999, it is  to
      say the least highly unlikely that the respondent would  have  granted
      him any further leave in 2003, based upon his personal  circumstances.
      The appellant himself was not doing anything particular in the  United
      Kingdom.  The only degree  of  connection  with  it  was  through  the
      appellant's wife, who had managed to obtain  on  the  National  Health
      Service an operation to remove scar tissue injury, occasioned  to  her
      as a child. According to a letter  of  21  July  2003  from  Mid-Essex
      Hospital Services NHS Trust, the appellant's wife suffered 'some minor
      problems with the skin graft and the scarring' which have resulted  in
      her being 'followed up' by way of periodic visits to the hospital,  to
      see if all is well.

17.   Mr  Lee  submitted  that,  in  carrying  out  the  relevant  balancing
      exercise,  account  should  be  taken  of  the  potentially  difficult
      circumstances in which the appellant and his wife,  as  ethnic  Serbs,
      would find themselves upon returning to Croatia.  Whilst a reading  of
      K (Croatia) makes it plain  that  the  position  of  ethnic  Serbs  in
      Croatia,  despite the significant improvements which have taken  place
      since 1999, is far from ideal, the Tribunal in that case  was  plainly
      unattracted by the argument that Article 8 was relevant in  that  case
      (see paragraph 95).  The appellant in the present case  is  a  twenty-
      five year old, apparently able-bodied man who, whilst in Croatia,  has
      worked both as a brick maker and in a bar (see statement of 7 February
      2003, paragraphs 6 and 10).  His  wife  has  had  her  operation  and,
      whilst she is subject to ongoing  monitoring,  no  evidence  has  been
      supplied to indicate that such monitoring would be unavailable to  her
      in Croatia (albeit at a cost).

  18. In conclusion, although the Adjudicator should  have  dealt  with  the
      matter more fully, he was plainly right to conclude  that  removal  of
      the appellant would not violate Article 8 of the ECHR.




19.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                  P.R. LANE
                               VICE PRESIDENT




                           -----------------------
      1


