
H-BR-V4
|AK (Iraq - Christians - risk) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00298          |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 23 August 2004          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|...08.11.2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen - Vice President                                     |
|Mr A R Mackey - Vice President                                    |
|Mrs M E McGregor                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who appeals to the  Tribunal  with
    permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T S  Culver,
    who dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 1
    September 2003 refusing leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom,  asylum
    having been refused.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 23 August 2004.  Mr E Michaels of
    the MECMAC acting on behalf of Rai Solicitors, appeared  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, and Mr M Blundell appeared on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was raised as a Christian
    and considered risk to him on return to Iraq in that regard.  Otherwise
    he found his claim to be at risk on account of his father's involvement
    in the Ba'ath Party to lack credibility.  It can be seen from paragraph
    32 of the Adjudicator's determination that it was  made  clear  by  the
    Appellant's then representative that he was no longer  relying  on  the
    Article 8 aspect of his appeal.

4.    Permission was granted limited to the  issue  of  risk  in  Iraq  for
    Christians and perhaps particularly Assyrians such  as  the  Appellant.
    The grounds of appeal adverted to the Article 8 issue but of course  it
    can hardly be said that there was an error of law in that regard by the
    Adjudicator since he had specifically been told that that issue was  no
    longer being argued.  Nor was permission granted  with  regard  to  the
    political aspect, and at the hearing before us  Mr  Michaels  expressly
    did not take that point any further, but limited his submissions to the
    issue of risk on return on account of the Appellant's Christianity.

5.    In that regard he drew our attention to the objective evidence  which
    showed, contrary to the figure noted by the Adjudicator at paragraph 61
    of his determination that there are  some  1.5  million  Christians  in
    Iraq, that the figure was now nearly 700,000, very significant  numbers
    having fled because of  persecution.   He  took  us  to  the  objective
    evidence concerning the attack on six churches in early August 2004  by
    Muslim fundamentalists.  Nearly 4,000 families had fled Iraq to  Syria,
    Lebanon and Jordan recently and 20 per cent  of  those  who  fled  were
    Christians.  He took us to the bundle concerning  threats  against  the
    clergy and at page 113, a document  from  the  Barnabas  Fund,  to  the
    effect that there had been other  attacks  on  churches  and  Christian
    religious  buildings  prior  to   the   August   2004   attacks.    The
    fundamentalists  always  resented  the  Christian  minorities  and  the
    minority Shiites sought establishment of  a  Muslim  state  and  recent
    events in southern Iraq were a good example of this.  He took  us  also
    to pages 118-120 of the bundle which was indicative of the feelings and
    emotions and the degree of suffering there.  This was an  excerpt  from
    the Christian Science Monitor of July 13 2004.  Christians would  leave
    if they could.  The country was in chaos, and the worst was expected.

6.    In his submissions Mr Blundell argued that the threshold as  set  out
    in Hariri and Batayev involving the need to show gross  and  systematic
    persecution had to be met and that threshold had not  been  reached  in
    this case.  Clearly there  had  been  isolated  incidents  of  violence
    towards to certain groups of Christians mainly, Mr Blundell  contended,
    in the south.  He argued that the Appellant,  as  an  average  Assyrian
    Christian, only risked being bombed in his church and that  was  not  a
    real risk in  accordance  with  the  proper  standard  of  proof.   The
    particular features leading to targeting did not apply  to  him.   Such
    people as eminent clerics, people who spoke English on account of their
    Christianity, alcohol sellers, women who would not wear headscarves and
    those who ran cinemas showing sexually explicit films might be at risk,
    but the Appellant did not come into any of these  categories.   It  was
    clear from his interview that he had been interviewed in Arabic.

7.    By way of reply Mr Michaels argued that the problem was not  only  in
    the south but all over  Iraq.   He  did  not  consider  that  it  could
    properly be said that there had been  isolated  incidents  of  violence
    given the nature and degree of the attacks.  As regards  the  Appellant
    speaking Arabic at interview,  95%  of  Immigration  Officers  fail  to
    provide an Assyrian language speaking interpreter, so in effect he  had
    had no choice.  As regards the headscarves point, he questioned whether
    Christian women should be denied the right to wear what they liked  and
    this was discrimination.

8.    The Iraq Country Report  at  paragraphs  6.33  and  6.38  contains  a
    helpful overview of the history of  the  situation  for  Christians  in
    Iraq.  We have a good deal more detail of the history of the  Assyrians
    in the Article entitled 'Christians in Iraq' by  Michael  N  Chancy  at
    pages 93-97 of the bundle and in particular at pages 94-95.  It is said
    in the Country Report that Christians are concentrated in the north  of
    Iraq and in Baghdad according to  the  US  State  Department  Religious
    Freedom Report of 2003.  It seems  clear  that  Christians  experienced
    discrimination from the regime of Saddam Hussein  and  at  times  worse
    than that.  For example it is said at page 103  of  the  bundle  in  an
    internet report from World Net Daily  that  under  Saddam  Hussein  the
    Assyrians suffered severely under his discriminatory ethnic  policy  of
    Arabisation.  It is said however  at  paragraph  6.37  of  the  Country
    Report that since the fall of Saddam  Hussein  Islamic  radical  groups
    have been flexing their new found muscles, and acts  of  violence  have
    been committed against Christians  including  the  killing  by  unknown
    militants of two shopkeepers in Basra for selling alcohol.  UNHCR  have
    reported systematic attacks on  the  minority  Christian  community  in
    Basra and that most of these families have in fact  left  Iraq  fearing
    the resurgence of fundamentalist  religious  leaders.   In  a  document
    which seems to come from the Syrian International  News  Agency  on  20
    June 2004, at pages 108-109 in the bundle, there  is  reference  to  an
    incident of shooting where masked gunmen opened fire  on  Assyrians  on
    their way to work in a district of Baghdad.  Other examples are  given.
    It is said that for the Assyrians liberation has not brought the  level
    of security for which they had hoped.   The  attacks  are  said  to  be
    accompanied often by  notes  demanding  that  the  Christian  Assyrians
    follow the rules of Islam  or  face  the  consequences,  and  this  has
    created an atmosphere of fear  in  the  Assyrian  community.  There  is
    evidence that significant numbers of Christians are concerned  and  are
    trying to leave Iraq.

9.    The incident of particular significance in this regard  concerns  the
    car bombings carried outside six churches, four in Baghdad and  two  in
    Mosul in early August 2004.  It is said that more than  fifteen  people
    were feared killed and scores injured in these attacks.  It also  seems
    sufficiently clear that these were the acts of fundamentalists.  A copy
    of "The Universe" the Catholic newspaper, of Sunday, August 8 2004,  at
    page 91 of the bundle, quotes the Chief Shi'ite Muslim cleric in  Iraq,
    Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Husseini al-Sistani, issuing a  condemnation  of
    the attacks and stating that he deems necessary  the  collaboration  of
    everyone, both the government and the  people  in  putting  an  end  to
    aggression on Iraqis.  It is also said in the Barnabas Fund document at
    page 113 (the Barnabas Fund  works  to  support  Christian  communities
    mainly but not exclusively in the Islamic world where they face poverty
    and persecution) that the  apparently  coordinated  attacks  have  been
    universally condemned by Muslim leaders in Iraq, both Sunni  and  Shia,
    as well as by many ordinary Muslims.  That report goes on to  refer  to
    several other incidents of attacks on churches and Christian  religious
    buildings in Iraq since  the  fall  of  Saddam  Hussein,  comprising  a
    missile attack on a convent in Mosul in September 2003,  the  discovery
    of bombs at two Christian schools in  Mosul  and  Baghdad  in  November
    2003, accompanied by messages ordering them to convert to Islam  or  be
    killed, a bomb explosion at a church in Baghdad on Christmas  Eve  2003
    and in the same month a bomb discovered at a monastery in  Mosul  which
    was defused.  There was also reference to  many  attacks  on  Christian
    shops  and  businesses  and  Christians  having  been  threatened   and
    victimised and several having been assassinated and that women  in  the
    south are being forced for the first time  to  cover  their  hair  like
    Muslim women.  On 4 January 2004 a group of more than 200 mainly Muslim
    intellectuals and political leaders from Iraq called for an end to  the
    attacks on Christians.

10.   As Mr Blundell properly accepted, there are clearly problems at least
    towards particular Christians in Iraq, some  of  which  may  cross  the
    threshold of persecution or Article 3.  We agree with Mr Blundell  that
    various categories to which he referred before us, sellers of  alcohol,
    owners of cinemas where sexually explicit films are shown, and  perhaps
    people who speak English  on  account  of  their  Christianity  are  at
    particular risk.  There may be a degree of risk also to  women  wearing
    headscarves, although the evidence seems to suggest that they would  be
    likely to risk no more than having eggs or tomatoes thrown at them.  In
    particularly at risk are  clerics  of  some  eminence  and  prominence.
    Threats have been made among others to the Patriarch of Baghdad, as  we
    see from page 92 of the bundle which is  a  copy  of  The  Universe  of
    Sunday, August 15 2004.

11.   The Appellant does not however come into  any  of  these  categories.
    Even if he did come into the category for example of alcohol seller  or
    owner of a cinema showing films offensive to Muslims,  we  would  doubt
    that this gave rise to a real risk of breach of  his  human  rights  or
    Refugee Convention rights on return.  To have to refrain from  carrying
    on such activities in order to  avoid  arousing  the  sensibilities  of
    fellow citizens is not, in our view, to be equated with being precluded
    from expressing religious or political views.  Nor does  the  Appellant
    come into the category as identified in the Christian  Science  Monitor
    extract at page 119 of the bundle of being a businessman  of  any  kind
    who might be perceived as being wealthy as in the example there.  He is
    a person who was in the army and on his account of events  was  accused
    of stealing weapons.  Clearly on return he  must  face  an  element  of
    risk.  It is clear in light of the attacks on the  churches  and  other
    religious buildings that a person attending a Christian church in  Iraq
    may face some degree of risk from  a  car  bombing  or  other  form  of
    attack.  Sadly that is the kind of risk which in many ways  the  entire
    population of Iraq faces at the moment given the problems being  caused
    by fundamentalists.  It is clear however from  the  objective  evidence
    not only that the risk emanates from the fundamentalists, but that  the
    Shia and the Sunni authorities have condemned these attacks  which  can
    therefore in no sense said to be condoned by the  government  or  other
    authorities in Iraq today.  As was said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Batayav [2004] INLR 126 at page 138 in particular, there requires to be
    a consistent pattern of gross and systematic violation of rights  under
    Article 3 for that particular threshold  to  be  crossed.   We  see  no
    evidence of that in this case given the particular circumstances of the
    Appellant and the risk as a consequence in the light of that  which  he
    faces.  Nor do we consider that the Appellant has shown a real risk  of
    persecution on account of his Christianity on return to Iraq.  There is
    risk, but it is not a real risk as it is required to be.   This  appeal
    is accordingly dismissed.





                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

