
JH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |AZ (Eligibility for amnesty)|
|                           |        |Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00166   |
|On: 28 May 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|22 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Ms V Street                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
      J F W Philips),  who  allowed  the  appeal  of  a  citizen  of  Uganda
      (hereinafter for convenience referred to as the  appellant)  from  the
      decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his  application  for
      asylum. The determination is reported because it concerns the question
      of the appellant's eligibility for consideration under the amnesty.

   2. Mr A Sheikh appeared for the Secretary of State.  Mr G Ilori of  Ilori
      & Co appeared for the appellant.

   3. The appellant was a youth mobiliser for the ADF.   He  would  talk  to
      people on a one-to-one basis.  He went to  playgrounds  and  explained
      the position of the ADF.  The appellant had  not  taken  part  in  any
      violence and had not witnessed any violence.  He had joined the ADF in
      1997, although he had no rank or position within the organisation.  He
      had not taken part in the armed conflict.   He  had  recruited  people
      because he had understood that the ADF was a reformed organisation.

   4. In November 1999 the appellant was arrested  and  detained  until  his
      escape in March 2001.  He was extensively tortured during detention.

   5. The appellant was asked about the amnesty during  the  course  of  the
      Adjudicator proceedings and he said that he did not believe  that  the
      Amnesty would apply to him as he was still  in  detention  during  the
      amnesty.

   6. The Adjudicator found the appellant to have given a credible  account.
      The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant  had  an  objective  fear.
      The Adjudicator considered the amnesty.  The  Adjudicator  noted  that
      the amnesty had been in place while the appellant was still in  Uganda
      and it had not  been  instrumental  in  affecting  his  release.   The
      Adjudicator had the benefit of a report compiled by Dr L Pirouet dated
      23 August 2002.  Instances  had  been  given  where  people  had  been
      rearrested having been given the benefit of the amnesty.  It was a pre-
      requisite that the authorities were satisfied that the  appellant  had
      genuinely withdrawn his support for the ADF.

   7. The Adjudicator also found that there were compelling reasons  arising
      out of the appellant's previous persecution for him not to  be  forced
      to return - this aspect of his reasoning is not supported by Mr Ilori.



   8. The Adjudicator did not consider that  the  exclusion  clauses  apply.
      The ADF was a factional group and the faction to which  the  appellant
      belonged was a reformed and non-violent part of the ADF.  There was no
      evidence that the appellant had been in  any  way  involved  with  the
      armed conflict or the atrocities committed by the ADF.

   9. The appellant had a well-founded fear of  persecution  on  Uganda  and
      would also breach his Article 3 rights to  return  him  for  the  same
      reasons.

  10. Among the documents lodged on behalf of  the  appellant  was  a  Human
      Rights Watch Report published in March 2004 entitled "State  of  Pain:
      Torture in Uganda".  This referred to the Amnesty.  It stated  that  a
      number of combatants from the various rebel  groups  had  returned  to
      Uganda under the provisions of the Amnesty.   Amnesty  petitions  were
      also available in the civilian prisons and prisoners - including those
      charged with treason or terrorism - might fill them out and send  them
      to the authorities without a lawyer.  Mr  Sheikh  submitted  that  the
      report, which referred to delays in the consideration of  applications
      for amnesty, referred to those in prison rather than those such as the
      appellant returning from overseas.  Mr Sheikh submitted  that  it  was
      not indicated at  any  stage  -  either  in  the  April  2004  country
      assessment, the US State Department Report published in 2004,  or  any
      other of the material that those who returned under the  amnesty  were
      detained  on  arrival.   Moreover,  the  appellant  could  apply   for
      consideration under the Amnesty prior to his return as  appeared  from
      the report of Dr Pirouet and paragraph 6.16 of the April 2004  Country
      Assessment.  The appellant's  re-arrest  was  not  reasonably  likely.
      Former rebels were being given packages to assist their return as  was
      clear from the US State Department Report.  The only complaint was the
      lack of presumably monetary assistance - there  was  no  complaint  of
      being locked  up  on  arrival.   The  appellant  was  simply  a  youth
      mobiliser.  Reference was  made  to  Mbabzi   [2002]  UKIAT  01829  at
      paragraph 4 - the Amnesty was  effective;   and  Kagaba  [2002]  UKAIT
      02042 at paragraph 5 - there  was  no  requirement  to  renounce  ones
      political beliefs.


  11. Mr Ilori submitted the  case  of  Lawanga  [2002]  UKIAT  07115.   The
      appellant had  escaped  from  detention.   He  had  a  long  political
      pedigree having been involved with the Democratic Party prior  to  his
      activities with the ADF.  Reference was made to paragraph 6.125 of the
      Home Office  Country  Assessment.   Failed  asylum  seekers  could  be
      detained on their return to Kampala.  Dr  Pirouet  had  been  cautious
      about applying for the amnesty in the United  Kingdom.   There  was  a
      general climate of impunity and a deterioration  of  human  rights  in
      Uganda according to the Human Rights Watch Report.


  12.  Although  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  about  compelling  reasons
      arising out of  previous  persecution  were  not  relied  on,  it  was
      submitted that the appellant's Article 8 rights would be infringed  by
      returning him.  He had post-traumatic stress disorder.  He  might  not
      get adequate treatment in Uganda.

  13. According to  the  Uganda  Amnesty  International  Report,  under  the
      heading "Armed Political  Groups"  the  Expression  of  Terrorism  Act
      classified several  rebel  movements  as  "terrorist"  and  stipulated
      severe punishments for "terrorists", their  supporters  and  sponsors,
      including the death penalty.  Throughout 2002 former  rebels  who  had
      been  pardoned  under  the  Amnesty  Act  were  rearrested  under  the
      suppression of terrorism Act.  Not all who applied  for  consideration
      under the Amnesty were successful - see Lwanga.

  14. Mr Sheikh in reply  submitted  that  the  appellant  could  apply  for
      consideration in London.  Furthermore, he had  been  detained  without
      charge as a youth mobiliser and had never  been  involved  in  violent
      activities.  There was no evidence he was wanted in Uganda,  nor  that
      he had been charged with  any  criminal  offence.   He  had  not  been
      charged with any terrorist matter.  Paragraph  6.125  of  the  Country
      Assessment made it clear that  only  failed  asylum  seekers  who  had
      previously committed a crime in Uganda and who were on a  wanted  list
      would be  arrested  on  arrival  in  Uganda.   Someone  would  not  be
      imprisoned simply for being returned to  Uganda  as  a  failed  asylum
      seeker.'

  15. Dr Pirouet had referred to the recent rearrest of Tabliq who had  been
      accused of being rebels who had been acquitted by the  Courts.   There
      was no evidence that they had been amnestied.  There was reference  to
      a court marshal which suggested that they had  been  undertaking  some
      kind of military  service.   The  appellant's  post  traumatic  stress
      disorder did not militate against return.  Reference  was  made  to  M
      (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT 00034 and  Djali [2003] EWCA civ1371.  It would
      not be a disproportionate interference with  the  appellant's  private
      life for him to be returned to Uganda.  The appeal should be allowed.

  16. At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We  have  carefully  considered  the  material  before  us   and   the
      authorities  to  which  we  have  been  referred  together  with   the
      submissions on both sides.

  17. The appellant was not a fighter.  On the Adjudicator' findings, he was
      a youth mobiliser engaged in activities on behalf  of  a   non-violent
      faction of the ADF.  He attended playgrounds and  so-forth.   He  was,
      and we accept,  badly  tortured  in  detention  and  he  escaped  from
      detention.

  18. It appears on the evidence before  us  that  the  appellant  would  be
      eligible under the amnesty.  Dr Pirouet appeared to be of  that  view.
      In January 2003  (see  paragraph  6.16  of  the  Home  Office  Country
      Assessment) the International  Organisation  of  Migration  Office  in
      Kenya launched a programme to screen former LRA rebels who  wished  to
      apply for amnesty and returned  to  Uganda.   Some  358  Ugandans  had
      registered to take advantage of the amnesty.   Dr  Pirouet  considered
      that it would be possible for the appellant to negotiate  through  the
      Uganda High Commission in London in order  to  avail  himself  of  the
      amnesty law.


  19. Mr Ilori refers to delays in the application of the amnesty process in
      Uganda.  We  have  carefully  considered  this  submission.   We  have
      already referred to the section in the  Human  Rights  Watch  document
      entitled "Amnesty".  We note that  the  application  for  the  amnesty
      depends on individual application for a certificate accompanied  by  a
      statement that the applicant "renounces and  abandons  involvement  in
      the war or armed rebellion".  We should observe that this would be  no
      difficulty for the appellant who  disavows  any  actions  involved  in
      violence and  on  the  Adjudicator's  findings  was  not  involved  in
      violence.  He belonged to a non-violent faction.  The report refers to
      a number of combatants from the various rebel groups who had  returned
      to Uganda under the  provisions  of  the  Amnesty.   The  report  then
      considers petitions being  available  in  the  civilian  prisons.   We
      accept the submission by Mr Sheikh that  the  complaint  about  delays
      arises from applications made by  prisoners  submitting  petitions  in
      Uganda.  Apparently, various bodies had visited the prisons and  as  a
      result the amnesty process had been speeded up and many prisoners  had
      been released.  However, subsequent amnesty petitions caused a further
      backlog.

  20. We accept Mr Sheikh's submissions that  the  appellant  would  not  be
      subject to the lengthy delays arguably faced by  those  in  prison  in
      Uganda prior to being released under the Amnesty.   Mr  Ilori  submits
      that the appellant  would  be  detained  on  arrival.   He  refers  to
      Paragraph 6.125 of the Home Office Country Assessment.  This reads  as
      follows:

             "The Ugandan Department of  Immigration  confirmed  that  only
             failed asylum seekers who had previously committed a crime  in
             Uganda, and are on their wanted list,  would  be  arrested  on
             arrival in the  country.   Someone  would  not  be  imprisoned
             simply for being returned to Uganda as a failed asylum seeker.
             "


  21. Mr Sheikh submitted there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  was
      wanted.  He had not been involved in any  armed  conflict.   He  could
      apply for amnesty prior  to  his  return  to  Uganda.   There  was  no
      evidence  in  the  background  material  that  returning  rebels  were
      incarcerated so why should the appellant be.

  22. Mr Ilori submits that, even  if  the  appellant  successfully  applied
      under the amnesty, he might face rearrest.  He refers to Dr  Pirouet's
      reference in her report to the recent rearrest of Tabliq  and  to  the
      reference in the Amnesty  International  Report  to  the  rearrest  of
      former rebels - we have already made reference to this  section  which
      is headed "armed political groups".

  23. The appellant was a youth mobiliser who was not involved in any  armed
      violence himself.   His  faction  of  the  ADF  was  not  involved  in
      violence.  We see no reason for  the  appellant  to  be  viewed  as  a
      suspected terrorist.

  24. The United States Human Rights Report refers to Government  assistance
      being provided under the 2000 Amnesty Act "to former rebels to  assist
      their  return  to  the  country."   Several  former  rebels  had  been
      integrated into the UPDF and the Uganda National Rescue Front II which
      had been successfully demobilised as a rebel  force.   Several  former
      rebels had received  reintegration  packages  to  help  them  re-enter
      civilian life.  Apparently others in the group had complained that the
      Government had not delivered assistance that had been promised.

  25. Mr Sheikh makes the point that the evidence was not to the effect that
      those who had the benefit of the Amnesty were detained  on  arrival  -
      they  complained  about  the  absence  of  assistance  that  had  been
      promised.

  26. Reference has been made to Tribunal  authorities  on  each  side.   In
      Lwanga the Tribunal made it  clear  that  cases  were  fact  specific.
      There was some indication in the case of Lwanga that the appellant had
      been thought of as a spy. In this  case  the  appellant  was  a  youth
      mobiliser who did  not  believe  in  violence  and  who  was,  on  the
      Adjudicator' findings, part of a reformed and non-violent part of  the
      ADF.

  27. We accept that the human rights situation in Uganda is far from  ideal
      and that there is a climate of suspicion - see the Human Rights  Watch
      Report.  However, we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to find  that  the  appellant  would  not  benefit  from  the
      amnesty.  Furthermore, on the evidence before us we do not  find  that
      the appellant would be rearrested as a suspected rebel.

  28. So far as the Appellant's medical condition is concerned,  the  report
      relied on was written some time ago - on 4 September 2002.  The doctor
      concludes that re-exposure to the same environment or situation  would
      exacerbate the appellant's symptoms and thereby worsen his condition -
      i.e. of post-traumatic stress disorder.  On our findings the appellant
      should not be exposed to the same situation.  Moreover, he  can  apply
      to be considered under the amnesty in London which should assuage  his
      concerns.   Mr  Sheikh  relied  on  M  (Croatia)  in  support  of  his
      submission that it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to  require  the
      appellant's return to Uganda notwithstanding any interference with his
      private life.  He also referred to Djali [2003] EWCA  Civ1371.   There
      does not appear to us to be substantial grounds for believing that the
      appellant would face a real risk of serious harm to his mental  health
      (see Djali at paragraphs 16ff) and,  were  it  necessary  to  consider
      proportionality issues it would  not  appear  to  us  to  be  properly
      arguable that removal of the Appellant would not  be  proportionate  -
      see, ibid, at  paragraphs  21ff  and,  further,  see  M  (Croatia)  at
      paragraph 28.

  29. For the reasons we have given, the appeal of the Secretary of State is
      allowed and a decision of the Adjudicator is reversed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT




