
                                    AH (Article 8 _ ECO _ Rules) Somalia
[2004] UKIAT 00027
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 17th December 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                             17th February 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                                Miss B Mensah
                        His Honour Judge N Huskinson

Between:





                                                                  APPELLANTS


                                     and


                    Entry Clearance Officer, Addis Ababa


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:          Ms C Hanrahan, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  B  M
     Suchak, who, in a determination promulgated  on  16th  December  2002,
     dismissed the appeal of the four Appellants  against  the  refusal  of
     entry clearance by the Entry Clearance  Officer  Addis  Ababa  of  4th
     December 2001, refusing them entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom.
     (The date of decision in the Adjudicator's determination of  4th  July
     2001 is wrong.)

  2. The first two Appellants are the siblings of the sponsor.   The  third
     and fourth Appellants are her nephew and  niece  through  her  sister.
     The Appellants are citizens of Somalia and were born  respectively  on
     8th February 1985, 5th November 1986, 4th July 1992 and  10th  October
     1993.  The sponsor is a citizen of Somalia but  she  fled  Somalia  in
     December 1999 arriving in the United Kingdom on 4th January  2000  and
     made an application for asylum in  February  2000.   She  was  granted
     indefinite leave to remain as a refugee on 26th June 2000.

  3.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  entry  clearance  under  the
     Immigration Rules HC 395 paragraph 297 because he  was  not  satisfied
     that they would be maintained  or  accommodated  without  recourse  to
     public funds in accommodation owned or  occupied  exclusively  by  the
     sponsor.  There is no dispute about that.  The Entry Clearance Officer
     also said that he was not satisfied that the Appellants' parents  were
     settled in or would be admitted for settlement to the United  Kingdom,
     or that a parent whom they intended to join  was  the  sole  surviving
     parent.  That is true.  Sadly the parents of the first two  Appellants
     and of the sponsor are dead.  The  identity  and  whereabouts  of  the
     father of the third and fourth Appellants is unknown and  the  mother,
     the sponsor's sister, has no real interest in them and may  be  unable
     to care for them in any event.

  4. The Entry Clearance Officer also concluded that there were no "serious
     or  compelling  family  or  other  considerations   which   made   the
     Appellants'  exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom   undesirable".
     Accordingly, the case fell outside the scope of the Immigration Rules.

  5. It was accepted by Mr Toal,  who  appeared  for  the  Appellants  both
     before the Adjudicator and before us, that the  Appellants  could  not
     satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
     However, he contended that they did not fail at every  hurdle  in  the
     way in which the Entry Clearance Officer's decision had suggested.  In
     particular, he submitted that there were serious and compelling family
     or  other  considerations  which  made   the   Appellants'   exclusion
     undesirable, although that, by itself, was not sufficient  to  satisfy
     the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

  6. His primary case was that the Adjudicator had failed to make  findings
     of fact arising from the  evidence  of  the  Appellants  as  to  their
     relationship to the sponsor, and as to the circumstances in which  the
     sponsor departed from  Somalia  as  a  refugee.   He  had  erroneously
     approached the assessment of family life on the  basis  that  she  had
     decided to come to the United Kingdom voluntarily and  therefore  that
     the family life they led was one of her  making.   Mr  Toal  submitted
     that properly analysed, the evidence showed that the interference with
     or respect for the Article 8 rights of the Appellants and sponsor  had
     to be judged against the fact that she was  a  refugee,  as  to  which
     there was no dispute.  This  meant  that  in  addition  to  Article  8
     rights, the Respondent's family reunion policy for refugees  ought  to
     have  been  considered,  including  whether  there   were   compelling
     compassionate circumstances for the grant of entry clearance to  these
     Appellants.

  7. The sponsor's evidence was that she had  lived  in  Somalia  with  her
     parents, siblings, and her nephew and  niece  (the  third  and  fourth
     Appellants) as a single family unit.  The first Appellant was now,  at
     the date of the hearing before the Tribunal, eighteen and  the  second
     Appellant was seventeen.   The  sponsor's  sister  had  been  abducted
     during the civil war and held  against  her  will  and  when  she  had
     returned to the family home  in  1993  she  had  a  child,  the  third
     Appellant, and was pregnant with the fourth.  Her mental state was not
     very good when she returned and she required attention all  the  time.
     Her children had always been regarded as part of her parent's  family;
     they were now eleven and ten.   One  of  the  sponsor's  brothers  was
     killed in 1991 and another died due to a heart condition for which  he
     was unable to obtain treatment.  Her  father  was  shot  dead  in  the
     family home in mid-1996 and her mother and her remaining brother  were
     also now dead, probably following  a  shooting  incident  in  December
     1999.  The mother of the third and fourth Appellants disappeared  from
     the family home after the shooting of her  father  in  1996,  although
     contact was re-established in about August 2002.  She was in Mogadishu
     but when the sponsor spoke to her, her sister did not mention her  own
     children.  The sponsor was raped by two of the men who shot her mother
     and brother in December 1999.

  8. The sponsor's maternal aunt was concerned for the sponsor's safety and
     it was decided that, in view of the sponsor's age and the risk to her,
     the sponsor should be the first to leave.  She fled from  Somalia  via
     Kenya.  Her maternal aunt and the  four  Appellants  left  Somalia  in
     around January 2001 and now live in Addis Ababa.  The four  Appellants
     have no right to live in Ethiopia.  They  are  there  unlawfully,  but
     they live there with the sponsor's aunt, who is now 71.  The  evidence
     was that she was "quite elderly and too ill to work".   They  have  no
     relatives in Somalia, save for the mother  of  the  third  and  fourth
     Appellants whose position is rather uncertain.

  9. The Appellants relied on a remittance of $100 a month sent to them  by
     the sponsor.  The evidence from the sponsor and  from  the  first  two
     Appellants was that the remittances were the Appellants'  sole  source
     of income and that that money had been provided since 2000.  They  are
     in regular contact.  The eldest Appellant's evidence at interview  was
     that he regarded the sponsor, his elder  sister,  as  a  mother,  even
     though she is only six years older.  The sponsor's evidence as to  the
     relationship was "I am here and I want them to come to live  with  me.
     I need them and they need me."

 10. Most, but not all, of what we have set out above is  referred  to  one
     way or another  in  the  Adjudicator's  determination.   The  rest  is
     supported by the Appellants' answers to questions at interview by  the
     Entry Clearance Officer or by material provided to the Adjudicator  in
     a letter to the Entry Clearance Officer on behalf of the  sponsor  and
     Appellants.

 11. Having set out  much  of  the  evidence  as  we  have  described,  the
     Adjudicator referred to the Appellants' claim, based on Article  8  of
     the ECHR.  Mr Toal had relied upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal
     in R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2001] INLR  1,  on  the  recommendations  in  a
     report of 15th December 1999 that a refugee's rights  to  respect  for
     his family life could only  be  enjoyed  through  family  union  in  a
     country where they could lead normal family  life,  and  on  the  Home
     Office  Practice  contained  in   the   family   reunion   guidelines,
     exceptionally to allow members of  the  family  other  than  dependent
     children   to   enter   if   there   were   compelling   compassionate
     circumstances.  Mr Toal had submitted that they all fell  within  that
     latter category.

 12. The Adjudicator first addressed himself to  the  question  of  whether
     there was family life as  between  the  Appellants  and  sponsor.   He
     commented that family life may not  be  static,  that  disruption  and
     changes can take place through  a  variety  of  ways  over  time.   He
     concluded, in paragraph 28, as follows:

           "I find on the evidence before me that there was no family  life
           in existence as between the sponsor and the  appellants  at  the
           date of the decision on 4th December  2001.   In  my  view,  the
           family life which they had was disrupted when the  sponsor  left
           Somalia in December 1999.  It was  her  decision  to  leave  the
           family - the arrangements having  been  made  by  her  aunt  who
           continued to reside with the appellants in  Somalia  until  they
           all left Somalia to go to Ethiopia in January 2001 and they have
           continued to live together as a family since  their  arrival  in
           Ethiopia.  Family life between siblings and other  relatives  is
           more likely to disrupted as family members grow older and  leave
           home to form their own relationships in order to form a new life
           for themselves.  This is exactly what has  happened  insofar  as
           the sponsor is concerned.  She moved out of the family  home  in
           order to form a new life for herself.   ... I should state  that
           the appellants do have a family life, but  they  have  this  not
           only amongst themselves but also with their  aunt  in  Ethiopia.
           There was at the date of decision no family life as between  the
           sponsor and the appellants."


 13. Mr Toal's first ground of appeal was that the Adjudicator  had  failed
     to make findings in relation to the circumstances in which the sponsor
     had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  refugee  and  as  to   the
     circumstances in which the disruption to family life had occurred.  He
     had also failed to make  findings  in  relation  to  the  relationship
     between the sponsor and the Appellants, both  at  the  time  she  left
     Somalia and now.  Ms Hanrahan did not really contest  the  failing  of
     the Adjudicator in that respect.  Mr Toal was  initially  inclined  to
     urge that the matter go back before another Adjudicator in  order  for
     findings of fact to be made.  However, we took  the  view  that  there
     probably had been an acceptance by the  Adjudicator  of  the  evidence
     given by the sponsor and at interview by the Appellants.  There was no
     suggestion in anything that the Adjudicator said that he had  rejected
     their evidence.  In particular, in view of the fact that  the  sponsor
     was granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee and there  was  no
     suggestion that that had been an error,  it  seemed  to  us  that  the
     Adjudicator must have accepted that she had suffered in Somalia in the
     way in which she had described and that she had left because  she  was
     being persecuted.  That was the reason  why  family  life  had  become
     disrupted as between her and the Appellants.  We decided to  determine
     the appeal on the basis that the evidence given by the sponsor and the
     Appellants was true.  It is for that reason that we  have  set  out  a
     little more fully than  is  in  the  Adjudicator's  determination  the
     factors relied on by the sponsor and the Appellants.

 14. Mr Toal's second point was that, viewed against the correct assessment
     of the evidence, namely that the sponsor came to the United Kingdom as
     a refugee forced to flee from Somalia, the disruption  to  the  family
     life that then ensued could not be treated  properly  in  the  way  in
     which the Adjudicator had treated it.  His comments suggested that  it
     was a voluntary decision which the sponsor  had  made  and  which  was
     responsible for the disruption to family  life  or  that  it  was  the
     natural progression of an older sister  leaving  the  family  and  her
     younger siblings behind.  Again, and with  no  real  dissent  from  Ms
     Hanrahan, we accept that criticism is well-founded. It cannot be right
     to approach the disruption to family life which is caused  by  someone
     having to flee persecution as a refugee as if  it  were  of  the  same
     nature as someone who voluntarily leaves,  or  leaves  in  the  normal
     course of the changes to family life which naturally occur as children
     grow up.

 15. Additionally, the Adjudicator's determination failed to realise  first
     the nature of the family life and bond which existed after the  return
     in 1993 of the sponsor's sister, which brought her two  children  into
     the single family unit, and second the responsibility  which  devolved
     upon the eldest child to be a mother figure  to  the  four  Appellants
     after the death of her own parents, probably in violent circumstances.

 16. It is necessary now to consider the Immigration Rules and  any  policy
     insofar as it applies  to  the  family  members  of  someone  who  has
     indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.  The Rules make provision for
     the entry into the United Kingdom of the spouse of a refugee in  352A-
     C, and for the entry of the child  of  a  refugee  in  352D-F.   Those
     provisions are inapplicable to  the  Appellants  because  the  sponsor
     refugee is neither their spouse nor their parent.  It may well be  the
     case that under paragraph 352D, the only requirement that was not  met
     at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  was  that  the
     Appellants were not the children of the sponsor.  It appears from  the
     evidence that the Appellants were under the age of eighteen, were  not
     leading an independent life, were unmarried  and  had  not  formed  an
     independent family unit, but were part  of  the  family  unit  of  the
     sponsor at the time she left Somalia to seek asylum.  But it is  clear
     that the Appellants fall outside the scope of the Immigration Rules.

 17. Mr Toal submitted, however, that he was entitled to rely on the policy
     of the Secretary of State, applicable at the  relevant  time,  dealing
     with the family of refugees who might fall outside the  scope  of  the
     Rules.   The  policy  reminds  caseworkers,  when  considering  family
     reunion applications, of Article 8 ECHR.  The policy  says  that  only
     pre-existing families are eligible for family reunion "ie  the  spouse
     and minor children who formed part of the family  unit  prior  to  the
     time the sponsor fled to seek  asylum.   We  may  exceptionally  allow
     other members of the family (eg elderly parents) to come to the UK  if
     there are compelling,  compassionate  circumstances".   Mr  Toal,  for
     these purposes, relied upon that exceptional provision.  The statement
     of policy continued  under  the  heading  "Eligibility  of  sponsoring
     family members where the sponsor has refugee status":

           "If a person has been recognised as a refugee in the UK, we will
           normally recognise family members in line  with  them.   If  the
           family are abroad, we will normally agree to their admission  as
           refugees.


           It may not always be possible to recognise the family abroad  as
           refugees - eg they may  have  a  different  nationality  to  the
           sponsor or they may not  wish  to  be  recognised  as  refugees.
           However, if they meet the criteria set out in paragraph 2,  they
           should still be admitted to join the sponsor.   The  sponsor  is
           not  expected  to  meet  the   maintenance   and   accommodation
           requirements of the Immigration Rules."


      We have set out the paragraph 2  criteria  above.   Mr  Toal  put  his
      argument on  the  basis  that  the  Appellants  met  the  criteria  in
      paragraph 2, but were not seeking admission as refugees.  He submitted
      that the Appellants were "other members of the family" in "compelling,
      compassionate circumstances".  He suggested more tentatively that  the
      Appellants were minor children within the scope  of  "the  spouse  and
      minor children who formed part of the family unit"  when  the  sponsor
      fled.  We do not  accept  that  latter  suggestion;   in  context,  it
      clearly refers to the spouse of and the minor children of the sponsor-
      refugee.


 18. Mr Toal submitted that in an appeal under Section 59 of the 1999  Act,
     he could contend that a decision was "not in accordance with the  law"
     (schedule 4 paragraphs 21 and 22 of the 1999 Act) where the  Secretary
     of State had a policy which was potentially applicable to a  case  but
     which he had not considered.  This is of  course  different  from  the
     exercise of the discretions given by the Rules which are  specifically
     referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22.  It is established by Abdi v SSHD
     [1996] Imm AR 148 that a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  can
     be "not in accordance with the law" where a policy of  the  Respondent
     outside the  Rules  which  is  potentially  applicable  has  not  been
     considered or has been considered on an erroneous factual basis.

 19. We accept that this policy is potentially applicable to the Appellants
     because they are "other members of the family" and their circumstances
     are capable of falling within the scope of "compelling,  compassionate
     circumstances".  Their case has however not  been  considered  by  the
     Secretary of State under that head, or if so, has not been  considered
     on the correct factual basis.  Accordingly, on that basis, this appeal
     falls to be allowed, but we would not direct that entry  clearance  be
     granted.  It is for the Secretary of State  to  consider  whether  the
     Appellants fall within the scope of his refugee family reunion policy,
     on the basis which we have  set  out.   He  is  entitled  to  reach  a
     decision either way on that matter.

 20. Mr Toal also referred us to the  recommendations  of  the  Council  of
     Europe made pursuant to Article 15 of its statute adopted, he told us,
     by the United Kingdom and some other member states in December 1999 on
     family reunion for refugees.  The  recommendation,  in  its  preamble,
     says "Considering that members of separated families  can  only  enjoy
     their right to respect for family life through the reunion  of  family
     members in a  country  where  they  can  lead  a  normal  family  life
     together; ...".  The following recommendation was adopted:

           "(1)  Member states hosting refugees and other persons  in  need
                 of international protection who have no other country  than
                 the country of asylum or protection  in  order  to  lead  a
                 normal  family  life  together,  should   promote   through
                 appropriate measures family reunion taking into account the
                 relevant case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
           (2)   Members of the family of the refugee or  other  person  in
                 need  of   international   protection   covered   by   this
                 recommendation are the  spouse,  dependent  minor  children
                 and, according to domestic legislation or  practice,  other
                 relatives."


      Mr Toal suggested that  the  Appellants  fell  into  the  category  of
      dependent minor children or other relatives.  He also referred to  the
      provisions of the Vienna Convention  on  the  law  of  treaties  which
      permit subsequent agreements and practice  in  the  application  of  a
      treaty to be taken into account in its interpretation.


 21. We do not accept that the recommendation  itself  gives  rise  to  any
     rights directly enforceable before us by the Appellants.  We doubt  in
     any event that "dependent minor children" is intended  to  be  broader
     than the children of the sponsor-refugee.  The Appellants  are  "other
     relatives" whose position is governed by the  Immigration  Rules,  the
     Secretary of State's  policy  on  family  reunion  to  which  we  have
     referred and to the extent applicable by the Human  Rights  Act  1998.
     In reality these recommendations do not advance matters.

 22. Mr Toal submitted that the Appellants were  not  confined  however  to
     reliance on the compelling, compassionate circumstances which are part
     of the Secretary of State's policy.  He submitted that they could rely
     directly upon Article 8 ECHR, and the positive  obligations  which  it
     contained for respect for family life.  He relied on a number of cases
     which were generally concerned with the effect on family life  of  the
     removal of someone from the United Kingdom, rather than with the entry
     of foreigners, who had no right of entry as such.

 23. In submitting that family life continued between  the  Appellants  and
     the sponsor, notwithstanding that they were now  living  in  different
     countries, Mr Toal relied on Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,
     [2003] INLR 170.  We accept that a family life can continue though the
     family members live apart, and that if Article 8 rights are available,
     it is not necessary that they be enjoyed within  the  United  Kingdom.
     That case also shows that family life  can  exist,  depending  on  the
     particular circumstances, between family members other  than  spouses,
     or parents and dependent children.  But it suggests  in  paragraph  14
     that for certain other relationships, some degree of dependency beyond
     normal emotional ties may be required:   adjectives  such  as  "real",
     "committed" or "effective" support  convey  the  flavour  of  what  is
     required.  That support is not necessarily exclusively economic.

 24. Other cases to which Mr Toal referred us  reflect  in  contexts  other
     than entry or even immigration-related cases more generally, the range
     of relationships which can give rise to  family  life.   Moustaquim  v
     Belgium [1991] 13 EHRR 802 shows that relations between  siblings  can
     constitute family life, just as Kugathas shows that it may not  always
     do so and is unlikely to do so amongst adults.

 25. We accept that in the circumstances of this case,  a  form  of  family
     life existed between the sponsor and the Appellants in Somalia  before
     she left,  and  that  in  a  disrupted  form,  family  life  continued
     afterwards.  Emotional ties, beyond those of normal siblings, continue
     with the Appellants, even though the  older  two  are  at  or  nearing
     adulthood;  financial dependency continues.  They had a quasi-parental
     relationship with the sponsor, diminishing with their growing ages but
     some of that still survives, most strongly with the younger two.   The
     Appellants nonetheless still have family life with their aunt and with
     each other which centres on their life in Addis Ababa.

 26. Mr Toal then submitted that the Appellants were entitled  to  rely  on
     Article 8 ECHR in order to obtain  entry,  notwithstanding  that  they
     were foreigners with no other right to enter the United  Kingdom,  and
     policy and the Immigration  Rules  notwithstanding.   Their  exclusion
     either interfered  with  or  failed  to  respect  their  family  life.
     Alternatively, refusal of entry interfered with the Article  8  rights
     of the sponsor.  He appeared to regard it  as  self-evident  that  the
     Appellants had rights enforceable against  the  United  Kingdom  under
     ECHR so as to obtain entry but upon the Tribunal  indicating  that  it
     did not regard that as self-evident sought and was given time  to  put
     in written submissions to which Ms Hanrahan also responded in writing.

 27. Article 1 of the EHCR provides:

           "The High Contracting Parties shall secure  to  everyone  within
           their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in section  1
           of this Convention."


 28. Mr Toal submitted that jurisdiction could be exercised  by  the  State
     Parties  through  their  acts  producing  effects  outside  their  own
     territory and that an extra-territorial jurisdiction was exercised  by
     consular officials and Entry Clearance Officers.  This, he  said,  had
     been recognised in Bankovic v Belgium [1999] 11 BHRC 435, and provided
     for in the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations  1963.   Thus,  the
     application for entry clearance  brought  the  Appellants  within  the
     scope of Article 1 and all  the  other  Convention  Rights,  including
     Article 8.  The Entry Clearance Officers were exercising  jurisdiction
     over the entry and stay of non-nationals, just as immigration officers
     did.

 29. Section 65(7)(c) included Entry Clearance Officers within the scope of
     those public authorities, appeals  from  whose  decisions  had  to  be
     allowed if the decision relating to entitlement to  enter  the  United
     Kingdom breached an appellant's human  rights.   Paragraph  2  of  the
     Immigration Rules required Entry Clearance Officers to carry out their
     duties in compliance with the Human Rights Act 1998.  Mr Toal accepted
     that under a section 65 appeal, the only relevant rights were those of
     the appellant (R(AC) v IAT [2003] EWHC 389 Admin) and  submitted  that
     in consequence, it showed that  Parliament  must  have  intended  that
     those outside the territory of the United Kingdom must be able to rely
     on the ECHR.  The legislation would  otherwise  be  pointless  in  its
     reference to Entry Clearance Officers.

 30. Mr Toal referred to passages in two Court of Appeal decisions which he
     said supported his approach.  In R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2001] 1  WLR  840
     at paragraph 65, the Master of the Rolls said that  if  the  applicant
     applied for settlement as the spouse of a person settled in the United
     Kingdom, his application would be  considered  having  regard  to  his
     Article 8 rights.  In R (Ekinci) v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  765,  Simon
     Brown LJ made a similar point, reflecting the position  taken  by  the
     Secretary of State in relation to  the  removal  of  someone  enjoying
     family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom:   his  application  for  entry
     clearance and any subsequent appeal under sections  59  and  65  would
     give the Adjudicator jurisdiction to consider  the  appellant's  human
     rights.

 31. Mr Toal submitted that ECtHR jurisprudence also supported him.  In Sen
     v Netherlands [2003] 26 EHRR 7, the ECtHR referred to various criteria
     which established the extent of the state's obligation to admit to its
     territory, the relatives of settled immigrants.   In  that  case,  the
     three applicants consisted of the  two  Turkish  parents  now  legally
     settled in the Netherlands, and their eldest child,  nine  years  old,
     who had been born in Turkey but left behind by them aged  three.   The
     outcome is immaterial for these purposes.

 32. In Ahmut v Netherlands [1996] 24 EHRR 62,  the  ECtHR,  again  without
     drawing a distinction between the  rights  of  the  sponsor,  who  was
     present in the Netherlands, and the son, who was in Morocco, looked at
     the family relationship as a whole rather than distinguishing  between
     those within and those outside the parties' territory.

 33. Ms Hanrahan for the Entry Clearance Officer conceded, on the basis  of
     the  passage  from  Mahmood  to  which  we  have  referred,  that   an
     Adjudicator or Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider  the  section  65
     appeal of an appellant living outside  the  territory  of  the  United
     Kingdom where it was alleged that there was a disproportionate lack of
     respect shown for the appellant's family life with someone living with
     the United Kingdom.  She submitted that Edore v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ
     716 showed the correct approach to the assessment  of  proportionality
     when considering whether a decision was "in accordance with the  law";
     paragraph 21 of schedule 4 to the 1999 Act.

 34. Matters at this stage are not  advanced  by  submissions  relating  to
     family life in a third country, Ethiopia.  It is not necessary that it
     be proved by the Appellants  to  be  impossible  elsewhere.   But  the
     nature and degree of the  problems  which  would  be  experienced  are
     relevant to any consideration of whether refusal  of  entry  would  be
     disproportionate.

 35. The starting point, in our view, is  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in R (Ullah) v A Special  Adjudicator  [2002[  EWCA  Civ  1856,
     [2003] INLR 74.  This pointed out that Article 1 ECHR imposed the same
     limitation on section 6 of the 1998 Act that it did on  the  operation
     of the Convention itself.  The question in that case, as in  this,  is
     as to the limit which the words "within the jurisdiction" place on the
     operation of the ECHR and section 6.

 36. Second, we accept that there are circumstances in which decisions  and
     actions of diplomats, consular officers and Entry  Clearance  Officers
     can be acts of the Parties "within the jurisdiction".  This  is  borne
     out by Abbasi v  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
     Affairs [2002] EWCA Civ 1598 at paragraphs 74-76.  It is  acknowledged
     in Bankovic, but that  case  emphasised  the  restrictive  territorial
     basis of the ECHR.

 37. However, third, we do not accept that this means that  the  activities
     of diplomatic and consular agents always constitute  the  exercise  of
     powers within the jurisdiction for the purposes  of  ECHR  Article  1.
     Such an approach would extend to non-nationals with no right of entry,
     a series of rights upon which to base applications for entry clearance
     simply by virtue of the fact that an Entry Clearance  Officer  had  to
     consider them and that a right of appeal lay against  a  refusal.   It
     would create a right of entry based on Article 3, which would  include
     persecution for a non-Geneva Convention reason;   it  could  encompass
     Article 8 where there was no family in  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
     basis that family life could not be enjoyed in the country  of  origin
     because of its domestic laws on divorce or marriage or adoption.

 38. This would be a  remarkable  extension  of  the  scope  of  the  ECHR,
     particularly as it seems that the Convention was unlikely initially to
     have been intended to affect the right of a State to control the entry
     and residence of non-nationals.  It has only come to do so  in  stages
     and to an uncertain degree  as  Ullah  shows.   As  Lord  Phillips  MR
     pointed out in Ullah,  at  paragraph  24,  the  Strasbourg  Court  has
     repeatedly emphasised  that  Contracting  States  have  the  right  to
     control the entry, residence and expulsion of aliens, subject to their
     Convention obligations.  It is the extent of those which is  far  from
     clear, as Ullah illustrates.  But it would  take  clear  authority  to
     show that the mere fact of an application for entry  clearance  and  a
     subsequent appeal required the Parties to secure  all  the  Convention
     rights to those who  applied  and  to  permit  their  entry  for  that
     purpose.  It would stand in marked contrast to the position under  the
     Geneva Convention where would-be  refugees  who  are  still  in  their
     country  of  nationality  cannot  claim  the  benefit  of  the  Geneva
     Convention and have no right in international law to receive asylum or
     to access a country for the purpose of making a claim;  European  Roma
     Rights Centre v Immigration Officer at Prague Airport and SSHD  [2003]
     EWCA Civ 666, [2003] INLR 374.

 39. Fourth, we do not accept the submission that  the  obligation  on  the
     Entry Clearance Officer under paragraph 2 of the Immigration Rules  to
     carry out his duties, in relation to those seeking to enter the United
     Kingdom, in compliance with the Human Rights Act,  together  with  the
     right of appeal against the  acts  of  public  authorities,  including
     Entry Clearance Officers, on the ground that a decision in relation to
     a person's "entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom"  was
     in breach of his human rights, shows that the rights which they  might
     have under that Convention or Act  are  as  extensive  as  the  simple
     submission that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer brings the
     appellant within the jurisdiction would suggest.

 40. These are provisions which provide a jurisdiction in relation to human
     rights without dealing with what rights, if any, are to be secured  to
     those seeking entry as non-nationals and doing so outside the scope of
     any Rules or  policy-based  discretion.   The  duty  and  jurisdiction
     exists in relation to whatever rights they may have in  the  light  of
     their absence from the territory of the United Kingdom and the  nature
     of what they seek.  For the reasons which we have given, those  rights
     cannot sensibly be regarded as encompassing all the Convention  rights
     which are available to those within the territory.  The  same  applies
     in relation to section 6 of the Human Rights Act:  it does not help in
     determining what those rights may be, in this type of case.  It can be
     said that those provisions evidence a  Parliamentary  assumption  that
     those seeking entry would have some  rights  which  would  engage  the
     ECHR, but unless the improbable assumption was made that they  enjoyed
     all the Convention rights, those provisions evidence only a lesser and
     more uncertain assumption as to those rights, an assumption which  may
     or may not be right.  It would be very surprising if, by the  language
     chosen, Parliament had intended to confer on any  who  might  make  an
     application for entry clearance, a right to enter to  avoid  treatment
     which breached Article 3, where no such right exists under the  Geneva
     Convention.

 41. Nonetheless, fifth, we  do  not  consider  that  there  are  words  of
     limitation to be found in the language of  "entitlement  to  enter  or
     remain".  It is true that one task of Entry Clearance Officers  is  to
     deal with certificates of entitlement to enter, under the  Immigration
     Act 1971 and it could be said that that is the limit of the engagement
     of human rights so far as Entry Clearance Officers are concerned.   In
     other respects, the Entry Clearance  Officers  are  not  dealing  with
     entitlement as such and it could be said that in those cases there  is
     no human rights aspect.  But  that  does  not  sit  readily  with  the
     notion, inherent in that approach to the  statutory  language,  of  an
     entitlement to remain operating as the basis for a restriction on  the
     applicability of human rights in removal cases.  It would also in  its
     turn introduce a degree of arbitrary limitation which might  too  have
     been spelt out more clearly if intended by Parliament.  It adds also a
     degree of circularity because those entitled to enter or  remain  have
     no obvious need of human rights provisions;  they merely need the  law
     and the Rules to be applied to them correctly.  See also Karaharan and
     Kumarakuruparan v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 1102, [2003] Imm AR 163.

 42. It seems to us that the answer to the existence of  Article  8  rights
     for those outside the United Kingdom is to be  found  in  the  way  in
     which the jurisprudence of  the  ECtHR  has  developed  over  time  in
     relation to various areas of human experience, here the entry of  non-
     nationals to a country.  It is not always possible to  trace  a  clear
     line of reasoning from Article 1 through the various  decisions  which
     that Court has reached so as deduce the principles which  apply.   The
     decisions are not always consistent nor do they deal with some of  the
     problems which might be thought to stand in  the  way  of  the  result
     reached.  Ullah illustrates the problems of some of the  reasoning  in
     Soering v United Kingdom [1989] 11 HRR 439, and then  with  the  basis
     upon which Chahal v United Kingdom [1997] 23 EHRR 413 was said  to  be
     consistent with it.  Similar problems are  in  respect  of  the  ECtHR
     approach to entry cases.  But, rather than hunting for a clear line of
     reasoning or principle which deals with the effect  of  Article  1,  a
     line which seems unlikely to exist, the better solution  is  the  more
     pragmatic one of looking to see what has been decided  by  that  Court
     and domestically in relation to this particular area.

 43. The issue was discussed in Ullah in paragraphs 41-47 as  part  of  the
     more general discussion of Article 8.  In particular, the Court was of
     the belief which we regard as well-founded, that Article  8  has  been
     invoked, but only  successfully  in  an  immigration  case,  including
     refusal of entry, where that "has impacted on the enjoyment of  family
     life of those already established within the jurisdiction".  The Court
     referred to its review of the cases in Mahmood.   It  noted  that  the
     basis of the ECtHR decision in Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali  v
     United Kingdom  [1985]  7  EHRR  471  was  that  the  applicants  were
     established within the jurisdiction  and  complained  that  they  were
     being deprived of the company of their husbands who  were  not  within
     the jurisdiction;  the right of the State to control entry acted as  a
     free-standing restriction on Article 8 rather than being a  legitimate
     aim within Article 8(2).  Later ECtHR cases, such as Bensaid v  United
     Kingdom [2001] 33 EHRR 10, [2001] INLR 325, treat immigration  control
     as falling within that qualification.  It appears to have been assumed
     or decided in both Kugathas and Ekinci, that the effective trigger for
     the existence of Article 8  rights,  enforceable  against  the  United
     Kingdom by non-nationals who are  outside  it,  is  the  existence  of
     family life with those who are established in the United Kingdom.

 44. We have already referred to Sen v Netherlands and Ahmut v Netherlands,
     both of which are consistent with what the Court  of  Appeal  said  in
     Ullah about the need for the family relationship, of those relying  on
     Article 8 as a basis for entry, to be with someone who was established
     in the United Kingdom in order for them to have Article  8  rights  in
     respect of family life which are enforceable against  the  State  with
     which they are seeking entry.

 45. Accordingly, we consider, on the  basis  of  ECtHR  jurisprudence  and
     Ullah,  that  the  existence  of  family  life  with  someone  who  is
     established in the United Kingdom provides the basis for the existence
     of Article 8 rights, enforceable against the United Kingdom and is the
     basis for the examination of whether that life is interfered  with  or
     shown a  lack  of  respect.   This  may  reflect  a  developing  ECtHR
     jurisprudence from the position in Abdulaziz.  Such an approach  would
     reflect what the Court of Appeal seems consistently to regard  as  the
     position.  (We have some reservations about the basis  upon  which  Ms
     Hanrahan conceded the point because the short comment in  Mahmood  may
     have been overtaken by the  greater  consideration  of  the  issue  of
     jurisdiction in  Ullah.)   It  does,  however,  represent  an  ad  hoc
     extension of the Convention, but it is not as wide as that which would
     arise from full acceptance of the  appellant's  submissions.   But  it
     also makes some sense of the jurisdictional  provisions  in  the  1998
     Act, with the Parliamentary assumption seen as having some basis.

 46. The consequence of that conclusion is that  the  four  Appellants  are
     entitled to have their Article 8 rights considered by the Secretary of
     State and are not confined  to  arguing  what  for  them  would  be  a
     hopeless case on the Rules, and a deliberately  restricted  one  under
     the extra-statutory discretion.  But it does not follow  at  all  that
     that leads to much greater scope for them to enter.  It would normally
     be the  position  that  the  combination  of  the  provisions  of  the
     Immigration Rules and  extra-statutory  policy  and  discretion  would
     provide a proportionate basis for any interference  with  or  lack  of
     respect for family life in the light of the well-established right  of
     a state to control entry, whether or not that is to be regarded  as  a
     free-standing restriction on the scope of  Article  8  or  as  falling
     within the qualification in Article 8(2).  Those provisions  represent
     what the State, in part with express  Parliamentary  approval  and  in
     part through the executive, have thought fit provisions for the  entry
     into the United Kingdom of those who have some  form  of  family  life
     with someone established here.  As Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  716,
     [2003] INLR 361 holds, the question of whether an interference or lack
     of respect is proportionate to the need for control  over  immigration
     and for the maintenance of the system for its enforcement, is a matter
     for the Secretary of State's judgment in the first  place  and  it  is
     only reviewable if it is outside the  range  of  responses  reasonably
     open to him.  It would be the  exceptional  case  where  circumstances
     fell outside the Rules and the compassionate discretionary policy, and
     yet were such that exclusion  was  an  unreasonable  response  by  the
     Secretary of State.

 47. It is not necessary in this case to deal with the question of what the
     Tribunal's approach should be where the issue has not been  considered
     on the proper basis by the Entry Clearance  Officer  or  Secretary  of
     State, because their attention has been confined to the  Rules.   This
     appeal  is  being  allowed  because  he   has   not   considered   his
     discretionary  policy.   It  will  be  for  him,  if  the  appeal   is
     unsuccessful on  that  ground,  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
     exclusion of the Appellants would be disproportionate to the interests
     of immigration control.

 48. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

