

 MD (Imprisonment in UK - Article 8) Serbia and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT
00292
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                       Date:  11th June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                      ..29th October 2004...

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice-President)

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:     Mr N Stanage, instructed Switalski's Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Giltrow, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr E  H
     Woodcraft, promulgated on 20th  January  2004.   The  Appellant  is  a
     citizen of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia,  Kosovo,  who  arrived
     clandestinely in the United Kingdom in February 2000 with her  husband
     and their children.  He claimed asylum, but when he was imprisoned for
     rape in the United Kingdom the Appellant applied for  asylum  in  July
     2002 in her own name with the children as her dependants.  They are  a
     boy of about eleven and two girls  aged  about  seven  and  two.   The
     Secretary of State refused asylum on 24th July 2003 and  gave  removal
     directions.  The Adjudicator dismissed her appeal on both  asylum  and
     human rights grounds.  In this appeal, we are only concerned with  the
     human rights grounds.

  2. The Appellant is a Roma but her husband is not.  He is, it  seems,  an
     ethnic Albanian.  In  August  2002,  he  was  convicted  of  rape  and
     sentenced to eight years imprisonment.  The Adjudicator  rejected  her
     statements that she would be blamed by his family in  Kosovo  for  his
     imprisonment, because of her evidence that she had had no contact with
     his family since their arrival in the United Kingdom.   She  could  in
     any event go to another part of Kosovo.  He also rejected her evidence
     that she had had no contact with her own family in  Kosovo  since  her
     arrival here, which she had put down to  a  lack  of  money  and  more
     recently to the effect on her of her husband's imprisonment.

  3. The Appellant argued that her return to Kosovo would breach Article  8
     because it would lead to a deterioration  in  her  mental  health  and
     create a risk of  suicide.   The  Adjudicator  pointed  out  that  the
     psychiatric report upon which  she  relied  said  that  there  was  no
     evidence of any prolonged depression before she left Kosovo  and  that
     medical treatment was available in Kosovo.

  4. The Adjudicator rejected next the claim that her family life with  her
     husband would be unduly interfered with were she to be  returned  with
     her children while her husband was still serving a prison sentence  in
     this country.  The Adjudicator held that she could not show  that  she
     had a family life with her husband while he remained  in  prison,  and
     pointed  out  that  they  would  be  reunited  upon  his  release  and
     anticipated deportation to Kosovo.  If the  husband  were  now  to  be
     released, they could all be returned immediately  to  Kosovo  and,  as
     return in  those  circumstances  would  be  seen  as  a  proportionate
     interference with family life, it would be  bizarre  if  she  and  the
     children could be better off as a result of her  husband's  crime  and
     imprisonment.

  5. Although Counsel had advised that there were no grounds for appeal, Mr
     Ronan Toal advised pro bono that  there  were  grounds  and  leave  to
     appeal was granted.   The  points  raised  by  Mr  Toal  are  properly
     arguable grounds and give rise to points of some interest.  He  is  to
     be commended, if we may say so, for his contribution to this case.

  6. It was accepted by Mrs Giltrow that the Adjudicator had erred  in  his
     approach  to  the  survival  of  family  life  during  the   term   of
     imprisonment, both in law and fact.  Imprisonment is  an  interference
     with family life which is justified under Article  8(2).   But  family
     life is not necessarily lost as a result of  incarceration.   We  need
     only refer briefly to what was set out in Mr Toal's grounds of appeal.
      This is clear from R v SSHD ex parte Mellor [2001] EWCA  Civ  472,  R
     (P&Q&QB) v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ 1151 and McCotter v UK [1993] 15  EHRR
     CD 98.  There was factual  material  which  explained  the  continuing
     relationship between the  husband,  the  Appellant  and  the  children
     through visiting, telephoning and letter writing.

  7. We turn to the Appellant and her children's family life and the degree
     to which their return to Kosovo would interfere with  their  right  to
     respect for it.  The husband's claim for asylum has been dismissed but
     he has a human rights appeal.  His anticipated release  date  is  27th
     April 2007.  There was no evidence  about  whether  any  part  of  his
     sentence could be served in Kosovo.

  8. It was agreed that because the three children would leave  with  their
     mother that they should be regarded as Appellants for these  purposes.
     It is also clear that the family life rights of  the  husband  do  not
     fall to be considered, but they are reflected in the position  of  the
     Appellant and her children, and give rise to no separate issue.

  9. The evidence before the Adjudicator had identified that  although  the
     offence had caused  difficulties  in  the  marital  relationship,  the
     Appellant had not abandoned her husband and there  was  evidence  that
     she believed him to be innocent.  (His case was that  he  had  had  an
     affair with the woman he was convicted of raping.)  The Appellant  had
     visited him in prison with the children when he  was  in  HMP  Armley,
     Leeds, but when he was transferred to Hull the journey from  Wakefield
     had been too difficult and  they  had  only  been  able  to  visit  by
     accumulating visiting rights over many days, for which purpose he  was
     brought to Wakefield.  There  was  considerable  evidence  as  to  the
     strain which this lack of visits had imposed  on  the  Appellant,  her
     mental outlook and health, and as to the strain of looking  after  the
     three children without her husband.  The children missed their  father
     and were not coping readily without him;  they spoke  to  him  on  the
     telephone and wrote to him.

 10. This evidence has been updated for the purposes of this  appeal.   The
     husband had been  moved  to  HMP  Wakefield  which  makes  for  easier
     visiting.  The Appellant's statement  said  that  she  now  had  three
     regular visiting orders a month which she used with  the  children  at
     weekends and one privilege visiting order which she used on a  weekday
     to take the youngest child to visit again.  Although the youngest  was
     only three months old when her father went to prison,  she  speaks  to
     him on the telephone and, as with the other children, looks forward to
     the visits and is sad when they are over.  The Appellant affirmed  her
     and his commitment to their  marriage  and  the  continuing  affection
     expressed by the children for their father.  He produced  a  statement
     in which he referred to his affair, his commitment to the marriage and
     his love for his children.  It appears  that  there  are  daily  phone
     calls.

 11. The son's statement made the point that he had been here for four  and
     a half years and now thought of himself as  English.   When  they  had
     moved to Wakefield from South Kirby he had found it difficult to  make
     friends, which would be worse still if he had to  go  to  Kosovo.   He
     enjoyed seeing his father and visited him  whenever  he  could,  would
     miss him and did not think that they could phone from Kosovo.

 12. There was an updated social care report.  It says that the  move  from
     South  Kirby  to  Wakefield  has  been  disruptive  to  schooling  and
     friendships.  The Appellant finds caring  for  the  three  children  a
     constant struggle, needs support but has needed  less  since  she  has
     been able to visit her husband more regularly in HMP  Wakefield.   She
     is still trying to come to terms with her husband's  betrayal  of  her
     through his affair, but  would  rather  continue  as  a  family.   She
     "presents as a  very  vulnerable  and  fearful  lady  when  discussing
     returning alone to Kosovo". She expressed fears as a lone Roma  woman,
     perhaps unable to be reunited  with  her  husband.   The  social  care
     report repeated what Dr Buller, the  psychiatrist,  had  said  to  the
     effect that that she had developed suicidal tendencies, but the social
     worker was unsure whether returning her  alone  or  with  her  husband
     would diminish them.

 13. The son was very unsettled, partly as a result of moving to Wakefield.
      He felt responsible for the family, and had benefited from being able
     to  visit  his  father,  with  whom  over  the  last  few  months  his
     relationship had begun to make some progress.  The older daughter  was
     less easily upset than she had been,  probably  because  of  her  more
     regular visits to her father.  The younger daughter was a happy  child
     who was eager to talk to her father on the telephone.

 14. Mr Stanage, appearing  for  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  she  was
     entitled to stay in order to exercise the visiting  rights  which  she
     had.  There would be real problems with financing visits  by  applying
     for visas, even if they were forthcoming.  It should be  assumed  that
     contact would be maintained in the United  Kingdom,  even  though  the
     Prison Authorities could move the husband to a prison which  would  be
     much more  difficult  for  the  Appellant  to  visit.   There  was  an
     "insurmountable obstacle" to  family  life  being  maintained  if  the
     Appellant and her children were returned to  Kosovo  but  the  husband
     remained in prison in the United Kingdom;  R (Mahmood) v  SSHD  [2001]
     Imm AR 229, Court of Appeal.

 15. In Djali [2003] EWCA Civ 1371, the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  one
     pointer which led to return being proportionate was that the  relevant
     factors were widely  replicable  and  if  acceded  to  would  lead  to
     widespread disregard of the interest  of  immigration  control.   That
     consideration did not apply here.  Mr Stanage countered the point made
     by the Adjudicator that success for the Appellant here would show that
     there was an advantage to  be  obtained  by  one  party  committing  a
     serious crime  enabling  his  family  to  stay  while  he  served  his
     sentence, which would be bizarre, by saying that human rights were not
     a reward for good behaviour or good behaviour by one's family members.
      It would be dangerous to talk of public confidence in the asylum  and
     human rights system in this  context  because  that  could  amount  to
     pandering to the vile enthusiasms of the mob.

 16. He argued that there was evidence that return to  Kosovo  alone  could
     lead the Appellant to commit suicide or  to  harm  her  children.   If
     there was a real risk that either would happen, there would be  breach
     of Articles 3 and 8;  P (Yugoslavia) v SSHD [2003] UKIAT  00017.   The
     psychiatric evidence from Dr Buller was  that  he  did  not  have  the
     impression that there were any prolonged  periods  of  disturbed  mood
     prior to her leaving Kosovo or  of  suicidal  ideation.   It  was  the
     arrest and conviction of her husband for rape which has had  a  marked
     effect upon her mental health.   She  said  that  she  has  though  of
     killing herself in a variety of ways.  There had been  occasions  when
     she had thought momentarily that it would be better if  she  took  her
     children's lives as well but this was not associated with  any  actual
     planning to harm them.  She had then quickly  denied  that  she  could
     harm them.  She said that she would kill herself rather than return to
     Kosovo;  it was apparent that she  thinks,  on  a  regular  basis,  of
     killing herself.  It was even more worrying that she  had  thought  of
     killing the children.  But she denied having any specific plans.

 17. Dr Buller concluded that she suffered from a depressive illness, which
     he characterised as a major  depressive  episode  for  which  she  was
     prescribed anti-depressants, but her doctor  was  concerned  that  she
     should move on to drugs which were not toxic  in  overdose  and  which
     should be prescribed in small quantities.

 18. We asked whether there was a distinction to be drawn between those who
     threaten to commit suicide in this country if they are to be  returned
     (in respect of whom there may be state preventative action of one form
     or another), and those who say that  they  may  kill  themselves  upon
     return to their country where there might be fewer facilities to  help
     them overcome their suicidal ideation.  No case law was cited to us in
     this respect.

 19. Mrs Giltrow submitted that this case should be approached on the basis
     that no member of the family  had  any  expectation  that  they  would
     succeed in staying when they arrived in 2000;  the conflict in  Kosovo
     had ended.  The husband was not settled here, nor  when  his  sentence
     expired would he have any expectation of staying.   The  Secretary  of
     State had expressed his view on the proportionality of the removal  of
     the Appellant and the children in his decision letter and the evidence
     did  not  show  that  there  was  anything  disproportionate  in  that
     decision.  She relied on M  (Croatia)  [2003]  UKIAT  00024*  for  the
     Tribunal's approach.  The evidence showed  that  it  was  possible  to
     maintain a relationship even though there were  visiting  difficulties
     and reliance had  to  be  placed  on  telephone  and  letter  writing.
     Although this was not a floodgates type  of  decision,  there  was  an
     individual interest in the particular circumstances  in  not  enabling
     the Appellant to stay.

 20. As to suicide, there was no clear evidence  that  it  was  a  lack  of
     treatment rather than removal which led  to  the  problem.   Paragraph
     K.5.49 of the CIPU Report October 2003, although primarily written  in
     the context of  PTSD,  recognised  that  treatment  for  other  mental
     disorders was available, although on an  under-developed  basis.   She
     said that certain anti-depressant drugs referred to were available  in
     Kosovo as they were included within the type of drugs referred  to  in
     the CIPU Report.

 21. We consider first the impact of the removal of the Appellant  and  her
     children on their family life with the husband.  The starting point in
     our view is that neither she nor her children (nor indeed the  husband
     for that matter) had a realistic case for asylum when they arrived  in
     this country in 2000, and she had no realistic claim for asylum at all
     when she made her claim in  2002.   The  asylum  claims  are  not  now
     pursued.  It follows that all the arguments which she and her children
     deploy in order to stay in the United Kingdom draw upon the  time  and
     the circumstances which evolved whilst they have been  in  the  United
     Kingdom, all without any original legitimate claim to be  here.   They
     seek to stay only  by  exploiting  two  factors:   first,  the  delays
     throughout the legal processes for finally determining  their  claims,
     during which changes occurred of some significance  for  her  and  her
     children, and, second, the specific fact of her husband's imprisonment
     allied to her lack of resources for making personal visits to him from
     Kosovo.

 22. Were it not for her husband's imprisonment and the obstacle which that
     imposes to his return to Kosovo, there is scarcely any material  which
     would have supported any allegation that their return would involve  a
     breach of Articles 3 or 8.  Indeed,  the  contentions  about  suicidal
     ideation would probably have been without what  evidential  basis  the
     husband's imprisonment and return without him  has  provided  for  it.
     The developing friendships and outlook of the children would not  have
     sufficed to make the return of the family disproportionate.  There  is
     no known basis for the husband's continuing human rights claim.

 23. The key question is whether the Secretary of State's decision  is  out
     with the range of responses reasonably open to him in the light of the
     imprisonment which we assume will last until April 2007.

 24. We accept that there is a disrupted family life enjoyed  here  by  the
     Appellant and her children with the husband and father.  The degree of
     disruption lawfully created by the prison sentence is severe and is  a
     disruption brought about in the final analysis by  the  voluntary  and
     seriously criminal acts of a family member, the  husband  and  father.
     This degree of disruption obviously has had an effect on the  material
     and psychological well-being and development of the family.   That  is
     the consequence of the  crime  and  its  due  punishment.   It  is  an
     inevitable and melancholy consequence that  families  suffer  for  the
     crimes of their justly punished members.

 25. The particular degree of disruption here is sharpened by the  relative
     cultural and linguistic isolation which the Appellant  experiences  in
     the United Kingdom, in the absence of her husband.  But it  was  their
     choice to come to the United Kingdom  at  a  time  when  they  had  no
     realistic asylum claim;  enforced returns began two months later.

 26. There has also been a lessening  of  the  degree  of  disruption  more
     recently as a result of the removal  of  the  Appellant's  husband  to
     Wakefield where he is  more  readily  accessible  for  visits  by  all
     members of his family.  But there is no certainty as to his  continued
     location at Wakefield;  the Prison Service can move him and he is more
     fortunate than some, perhaps many, in his proximity to his family.

 27. We accept that it is unlikely that the family will be able  to  afford
     the costs of travel to the  United  Kingdom  to  see  the  husband  in
     prison, even if visas were obtainable.  We are not in  a  position  to
     reach any definitive  conclusion  on  the  maintenance  of  telephonic
     contact, though we find it difficult to believe that it could never be
     possible.  Letters could be written.  So there would be a loss of  the
     current but not guaranteed level of  contact,  to  be  replaced  by  a
     significantly lesser degree, for some three years.  We assume that the
     husband would be deported at the end of his sentence in the absence of
     any material suggesting otherwise.

 28. We do not regard that as  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
     family life of the Appellant and her children, or that  the  Secretary
     of  State  is  unreasonable  in  treating  it   as   a   proportionate
     interference.  None had any legitimate  claim  to  be  in  the  United
     Kingdom when they arrived.  They would be no worse  off  than  if  the
     husband had come alone, and they, who also had no legitimate claim  to
     come to the United Kingdom, had stayed behind.  Of course, the greater
     degree of separation would bear heavily on the Appellant's ability  to
     cope with the growing children and on their  relationship  with  their
     father and also on their personal well-being.  But we  do  not  see  a
     sufficient  degree  of  interference   as   to   make   their   return
     unreasonable.

 29. We do not accept Mr Stanage's argument that the husband's imprisonment
     constituted "an insurmountable  obstacle"  to  his  return,  and  that
     therefore as a family member faced  such  an  obstacle,  it  would  be
     disproportionate for the family to be returned.  The obstacle  arising
     from the husband's  imprisonment  has  been  created  by  the  husband
     himself through his crime, and its inevitable  consequence.   This  is
     not of the same nature as those which are in essence created by  eg  a
     family member's illness or political activities abroad.  Additionally,
     the obstacle is strictly temporary and finite  and  will  be  overcome
     with, we expect, assistance from the  United  Kingdom  authorities  in
     about three years.  It is reasonably to be supposed that  the  husband
     will wish to rejoin his family rather than prolong  his  stay  without
     them.  The passage relied on  in  Mahmood,  paragraph  55(3),  is  not
     looking at temporary obstacles which will be overcome.

 30. The Appellant and the children would  in  reality  otherwise  be  more
     successful in advancing their  aim  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom
     without even an arguably legitimate basis for doing so, other than the
     husband's lawful imprisonment, than those who are law-abiding and have
     no claim.  We do not consider that such an outcome is what  the  Court
     of Appeal had in mind in Mahmood.  We see nothing disproportionate  in
     the Appellant being no better off than someone who  seeks  a  visa  to
     visit a husband imprisoned in this country, who has no right to  stay,
     and no right to stay because of the prohibitive cost to her of further
     trips.

 31. But whether that  is  so  or  not,  we  see  nothing  unreasonable  in
     regarding the return to Kosovo of those family members not  serving  a
     prison sentence as a proportionate interference with family life.   If
     the decision is one  for  us,  their  return  is  proportionate.   The
     children in various ways and to varying degrees  will  have  put  down
     some roots here and will have adapted  to  life,  school  and  friends
     here.  But that is not a sufficiently significant additional factor in
     this case, viewing all the considerations in the round.

 32. The remaining question is the significance to be attached the  threats
     of suicide or of harm to the children.  We  discount  the  threats  of
     harm to the children.  The Appellant had quickly  disavowed  any  such
     intention, and had only momentarily entertained the notion.  We do not
     consider that an adverse decision  in  this  case  or  the  threat  of
     suicide before return should be treated as a basis for concluding that
     her Article 2, 3 or 8 rights would be breached in the United  Kingdom.
     There is treatment available to which she has access;  the absence  of
     guarantee is to its efficacy at all times does  not  mean  that  there
     would be any breach of her rights at that point.

 33. Although the  Appellant's  threats  of  suicide  are  couched  as  her
     preferred alternative to returning to Kosovo with  her  children  (but
     without her husband), it is  necessary  to  examine  the  prospect  of
     suicide upon return.  She suffers from a depressive illness, for which
     she receives anti-depressants.  It is not really  clear  whether  such
     treatment is available in Kosovo, although it would be  surprising  if
     PTSD were treatable there but not depression.   It  was  not  anything
     which happened in Kosovo which caused the depression but her husband's
     behaviour here, so she would not be returning to a  place  where  past
     traumas could be re-awakened.  She would  however  be  returning,  for
     three years or so, as a lone  woman  with  children,  and  it  is  not
     difficult to see why the prospect makes her anxious and depressed.

 34. The Adjudicator however did not accept, and he  was  entitled  not  to
     accept, the evidence given by the  Appellant  as  to  her  absence  of
     contact with her family and as to her  husband's  family's  actual  or
     supposed reaction to  his  imprisonment  as  being  her  fault.   Even
     allowing for the latter, we do not see that she  has  shown  that  she
     would be without any family support in Kosovo.

 35. There  is  cogent  evidence  that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from
     depression;  but we do not consider that it has the  necessary  degree
     of cogency to show that she would face a significant risk  of  suicide
     on return and that that risk would have been  significantly  increased
     by the fact of return.  The case with which a threat of suicide can be
     made justifies a requirement for cogent evidence as to the  degree  of
     risk and its increase, through return.  It  is  inevitable  that  many
     people view the prospect of returning to the country which  they  have
     left as depressing, particularly in these circumstances.  However, the
     evidence of Dr Buller, her past sound mental  health  in  Kosovo,  the
     cause of her depression, the possibility of treatment in  Kosovo,  the
     comparatively short time before her husband's return, and  the  family
     link persuade us that there would be no breach of Article 3  or  8  on
     her return.

 36. We have applied the test set out in Soumahoro  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  840.
     But we observe that it is unlikely that a real divergence in standards
     of assessment between those who rely  on  physical  illness,  risk  of
     death and the absolute right in Article  3,  and  those  who  rely  on
     mental illness, risk of death and the qualified right in Article 8  is
     appropriate or intended;  see now Razgar v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27,  at
     paragraph 20.

 37. We have looked at all of the factors in the round, but we  regard  the
     decision on return as reasonable and proportionate.

 38. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say  about  the
     significance of imprisonment.










                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


