

                       SS (ECO -Article 8) Malaysia * [2004] UKIAT 00091 | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 19th February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             29th April 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice President)

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                    Entry Clearance Officer, Kuala Lumpar


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr D Seddon, instructed by Laura Devine
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms E Grey, instructed by Treasury Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




  1. This is an appeal against the decision of  an  Adjudicator,  Mrs  C  A
     Scott-Baker, promulgated on 10th October 2002, whereby  she  dismissed
     the appeal of SS against the refusal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,
     Kuala Lumpur, on 21st  March  2001  to  grant  entry  clearance  under
     paragraph 317 of HC 395.  The Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia, born
     28th July 1978, applying for indefinite leave to enter.  His mother is
     settled in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant was 22 at  the  date  of
     decision by the Entry Clearance Officer and 24  when  the  Adjudicator
     reached her decision;  he is now 25 years old.


Background


  2. The background to the case  is  that  the  Appellant's  mother  was  a
     Muslim, ethnic Malay.  She  married  a  Malay  of  Indian  origin  who
     converted to Islam when they were married in 1970.   After  her  first
     child was born, she and her husband converted to  Christianity.   They
     had two further children of whom the Appellant is the  youngest.   The
     three children were brought up as Christians.  Her  witness  statement
     states that she was treated as an apostate because of  her  conversion
     from Islam.  We were told that her then  husband  did  not  so  suffer
     because, as a Muslim by conversion, he was perceived differently.  She
     said that she had suffered ever since her conversion because  although
     Christianity is tolerated,  apostasy  is  not.   She  spoke  of  being
     shunned by her sister and of harassment by the Government.   In  1992,
     after marital differences, she left her husband and the  marriage  was
     nullified because of her change of religion.  She married her  present
     husband, a British national working in Malaysia, in December 1993.  He
     worked in Kuala Lumpur.  From the time the Appellant  left  school  in
     1995, he came to live with them in Kuala Lumpur.  After that time, his
     natural father would have nothing more to do with  him.   Her  witness
     statement said, somewhat surprisingly, that this was  because  of  the
     stigma of her apostasy;  after all they  had  both  become  Christians
     together more than 25 years before.

  3. The Appellant's mother and stepfather had decided  to  retire  to  the
     United Kingdom;  she applied for leave to enter as  the  spouse  of  a
     British citizen and was granted leave in April 1998;  she was  granted
     indefinite leave to remain in 1999.  However,  even  though  they  had
     bought a house for their retirement in  Sheffield,  they  had  had  to
     postpone their settlement in the United Kingdom  because  her  husband
     had been required to stay on in Kuala Lumpur for work.

  4. Her children experienced religious and racial discrimination in  their
     applications for places at university in Malaysia.  Her  eldest  child
     studied in Canada and is now married to a US citizen and lives in  the
     USA.  Her second child  obtained  a  place  at  Sheffield  University,
     graduated and lives in the United Kingdom, in  Beckenham.   He  has  a
     work permit which expires in 2006.   The  Appellant  also  studied  at
     Sheffield University, graduating in geography with a  3rd  class.   He
     had entry clearance as a student from August 1997 to March  2001.   He
     returned to Malaysia in March 2001 and made an  immediate  application
     for entry clearance for settlement, which was refused in  March  2001.
     He said that he had been led to believe  that  it  would  probably  be
     granted, though there has been no evidence as to who said what and  no
     legal argument relating to that has been pursued.  His mother was  his
     sponsor, supported by her husband.  His brother was also  prepared  to
     support his application for entry  clearance  with  accommodation  and
     money. His application for a visitor visa  to  attend  his  graduation
     ceremony in May 2001 was also refused;  it was thought that  he  would
     not return to Malaysia.

  5. The Adjudicator had evidence of the  position  in  Malaysia  for  non-
     Muslims and in particular those who were  apostates.   She  summarised
     that material as follows:

           "To assist me in the assessment of the  discriminatory  measures
           in Malaysia  there  was  before  me  a  copy  of  the  US  State
           Department Report of 1998 together with two reports on  religion
           from the US Department of State of 1999 and 2000.  I  note  from
           the US State Department Report of 1999  that  religious  freedom
           was subject to some restrictions and in particular the right  of
           Muslims to practice beliefs other than Sunni Islam.   The  right
           of  Muslims  to  change  their  religion  face  many   practical
           obstacles.  Longstanding policies give  preferential  status  to
           ethnic Malays and other indigenous people in business, education
           and other  areas  and  some  discrimination  against  indigenous
           people in ethnic minorities  and  some  restrictions  on  worker
           rights persisted.   However  the  constitution  does  prove  for
           freedom of religion and religious minorities which include large
           Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and Christian  communities  who  generally
           worship freely although with some  restrictions.   Adherence  to
           Islam was considered intrinsic  to  Malay  ethnic  identity  and
           therefore Islamic  religious  laws  administered  by  the  state
           authorities to Islamic courts bind all  ethnic  Malays  in  some
           matters.  But the government has not imposed  Islamic  religious
           law beyond  the  Muslim  community.   The  government  generally
           respects non-Muslims' rights of worship but the state government
           carefully controls the building of non-Muslim places or  worship
           and the allocation of land for non-Muslim cemeteries.  The right
           of a Muslim to leave Islam to adhere to another faith is a  very
           controversial question and in practice it is very difficult  for
           a Muslim  to  change  religion.   However  in  August  1998  the
           government had stated that apostates would not  face  punishment
           as long as they did not defame  Islam  after  their  conversion.
           Whilst for a long time the government  has  discouraged  and  in
           practical terms forbidden the circulation in peninsular Malaysia
           of Malay language translations of the Bible and distribution  of
           Christian tapes and printed materials in Malay,  Malay  language
           Christian materials can be found.  I  note  from  the  US  state
           Annual Report on International Religious  Freedom  for  1999  in
           Malaysia that in 1991 8% of the population  were  Christian  and
           only 59% Muslim.  In societal attitudes at Section  II  of  this
           report it stated that the country's various believers  generally
           live amicably.


           The report of 2000 stated that for ethnic Malays  the  right  to
           leave the Islamic faith and adherence to another religion was  a
           controversial question and in  practice  it  was  difficult  for
           Muslims to  change  religions.   In  March  1999  the  country's
           highest court ruled that secular courts had no  jurisdiction  to
           hear applications by Muslims to change  religion  and  that  the
           religious conversion of Muslims was solely the  jurisdiction  of
           Islamic courts.  It noted that if the High  Court  continued  to
           affirm that ruling in future cases it would make  conversion  of
           Muslims nearly impossible in practice.  The  same  report  still
           confirmed that apostates would not face government punishment as
           long as they did not defame Islam after their conversion.


           It is clear from these US  State  Department  Reports  therefore
           that there is a sizeable Christian  community  in  Malaysia  and
           that  whilst  conversion  may  be  coming  more  difficult   the
           communities continue to live peacefully together and  there  are
           no harsh penalties for apostates provided  they  do  not  defame
           Islam.  The expert  report  of  Andrew  Harding  confirmed  that
           Malaysia's population was multi-racial and  multi-religious  and
           the Muslims formed only about 55% of  the  population.   I  note
           from the appellant's evidence that his mother had  converted  to
           Christianity in 1972 and he was born and raised in the Christian
           faith.  I noted that  there  is  evidence  before  me  from  the
           appellant that  he  was  bullied  and  discriminated  at  school
           because he was a Christian but the background evidence before me
           indicates that the communities do live peacefully together."

  6. There was some criticism that  the  Adjudicator  had  focused  on  the
     degree of general religious tolerance rather than on the  position  of
     apostates and the  particular  difficulties  which  they  faced.   The
     Appellant's mother gave specific examples of discrimination which  she
     had experienced and of harassment at the hands of religious police.

  7. The Appellant produced to the Adjudicator and to us a report from Mr A
     J Harding, Professor  of  Law  at  SOAS.   Its  contents  are  largely
     reflected in the passages set out above.   It  emphasises  the  severe
     social isolation  risked  by  those  who  convert  from  Islam,  their
     difficulties in dealing with the state authorities and the  growth  of
     opposition parties who seek to impose strict religious Islamic law.  A
     Muslim family would disown any apostate members.  Conversion was rare.
      He also said that whilst children of full age are allowed  under  the
     Constitution to choose their own religion, in practice the child of an
     apostate would be stigmatised by their  parent's  apostasy  and  would
     face the same social exclusions, discrimination and hostility  if  the
     relationship was known.

  8. The Appellant said that he had experienced a lack of  success  in  the
     very many job applications which he had  made  in  Malaysia;   he  was
     certain that the lack of success was attributable to his Christian and
     mixed Malay background.  It was standard practice to  give  preference
     to ethnic Malays.  His middle two names are English.  He said that his
     mother's maiden name would sometimes be asked for at interviews and he
     would  be  questioned  about  his  ethnic  background  and   religion.
     Application forms often asked for his parent's names and his religion.
      His birth certificate would also show his mother's maiden name.

  9. The Adjudicator commented on the evidence about that in paragraphs 19-
     20:

           "He explained that he had concentrated on looking for  positions
           with  non-Malay  companies  and  international   companies   but
           prejudice discrimination and intolerance of  apostates  and  the
           children of apostates were evident in Malaysia.


           There was a schedule at page  180  of  the  bundle  showing  the
           numerous positions applied for by the appellant since July  2001
           until June 2002.  There was no further evidence  to  corroborate
           the appellant's assertion that he had applied for these jobs  or
           had in fact been rejected as he had suggested.  I note that  the
           appellant had applied for various positions in Malay,  non-Malay
           and international companies and whilst he had been  unsuccessful
           in the majority of applications, since  April  2002  there  were
           applications pending although no  further  evidence  was  placed
           before me as to whether the appellant had been successful in any
           of these job applications."


 10. She did accept that he  was  experiencing  difficulties  in  obtaining
     employment when dealing with his personal circumstances:


           "I note the  appellant's  endeavours  to  obtain  employment  in
           Malaysia.  I noted that he obtained a  third  class  honours  in
           geography from the University of Sheffield which is of course an
           achievement  in  itself  but  does  not  immediately  make   him
           obviously suited to any position of employment as the degree  is
           not vocationally linked.  No evidence was placed before   me  as
           to  what  other  commercial  or  professional   experience   the
           appellant had but I accept that he is encountering  difficulties
           in finding employment which he wishes to undertake."

11. She described his other personal circumstances as follows in  the  light
   of the background evidence and his employment position, in paragraph 21:

           "I was told that he was living in a room in  a  house  in  Kuala
           Lumpur where he had access to a kitchen and a  bathroom.   I  am
           not persuaded on the background evidence that the discrimination
           such as it may exist in Malaysia  can  be  said  to  reduce  the
           appellant to be living in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
           circumstance.  I accept that Islam is the  predominant  religion
           in Malaysia but there is a significant  Christian  community  in
           that country.  The appellant himself, a Christian  since  birth,
           has been living in Malaysia for the majority of his life,  apart
           from the time that he studied in the United Kingdom.  His mother
           chose to continue to reside in Malaysia with her  husband  until
           they decided to leave because of his pending retirement.  Whilst
           it was asserted at the hearing that they had all  suffered  from
           discriminatory practices in Malaysia the family did continue  to
           live in  that  country.   He  has  the  good  fortune  that  his
           stepfather is in the position to be able to  support  him.   His
           parents and siblings may  be  living  overseas  but  those  were
           choices made out of volition and not unilaterally imposed on the
           family."

 12. She concluded that  although  it  was  natural  that  his  mother  and
     stepfather would wish him to be able to live  in  the  UK  and  whilst
     there were compassionate circumstances, they were not exceptional  let
     alone the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.  She  made  it
     clear that she did not  take  into  account  in  that  assessment  the
     circumstances of the  mother,  because  paragraph  317  of  the  Rules
     focused on the circumstances of the applicant for entry clearance.

 13. Paragraph 317 provides so far as material:

           "... the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over  the
           age of 18 if living alone outside the United Kingdom in the most
           exceptional compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly  dependent
           financially on relatives settled in the United Kingdom."

 14. The Adjudicator, unlike the Entry Clearance Officer, had accepted that
     the Appellant was financially dependent on his mother  and  stepfather
     as a matter of necessity.

 15. The Adjudicator then turned  to  the  argument  addressed  to  her  on
     Article 8, saying that the Immigration Rules had been  reviewed  after
     the Human Rights Act 1988 and that paragraph 317 had been concluded to
     be compatible with the ECHR.  There was evidence that the  mother  had
     been suffering from chronic depression which was said  largely  to  be
     due to the separation from the Appellant, for whom she  said  she  had
     always  had  a  special  affection  as  her  youngest.   However,  the
     Adjudicator pointed out that she  had  been  receiving  treatment  for
     depression since 1995 when the Appellant was still living with her and
     that although she had spent some 6  months  in  England  visiting  the
     Appellant when he was in Sheffield and he had spent a  few  months  in
     Malaysia, they had obviously spent the majority of  his  student  life
     apart.  In paragraph 28 the Adjudicator said:

           "I find the appellant's mother's evidence in this regard  to  be
           somewhat inconsistent. She has asked me to have  regard  to  the
           fact that she was worried about her son but she had  voluntarily
           chosen to live in Malaysia whilst her  son  was  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  Whilst she is not  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom,
           voluntarily, her son, the appellant, is in Malaysia.   There  is
           no reason as to why she cannot visit him  on  a  regular  basis.
           The choice of the appellant's mother and stepfather  is  one  of
           choice to reside in the United Kingdom.  They do have rights  of
           residence in Malaysia and I am not persuaded  on  the  testimony
           before me that the family could not continue to live in Malaysia
           as they have done in the past."

      We were told that her anxieties  for  her  son  at  that  period  were
      obviously less because he was safe in England and his brother had been
      in Sheffield for some of that time.

 16. The Adjudicator then considered whether or not the Appellant had shown
     that exclusion would breach the State's positive  obligation  to  show
     respect for private and family life.  She said:

           "Relevant  to  this   consideration   is   whether   there   are
           insurmountable obstacles to  relevant  family  members  enjoying
           their family life elsewhere".

      There was some criticism that she had elevated that into an overriding
      test.  She continued:

           "There  is  no  credible  evidence  before  me  as  to  why  the
           appellant's mother and stepfather could not  have  continued  to
           reside in Malaysia.


           The appellant's evidence is that  he  is  a  healthy  young  man
           looking for work in Malaysia.  There as no evidence that he  had
           particular  reasons  of  health  or  of  mental   or   emotional
           immaturity for his relationship with his mother  and  stepfather
           to require an ongoing dependency.


           Under Article 8 there is no general obligation  on  a  state  to
           admit family members of those within their jurisdiction.   There
           is no  real  obstacle  to  the  appellant  and  his  mother  re-
           establishing their family life  in  Malaysia.   Whilst  I  heard
           evidence as to why the appellant's mother wished to live in  the
           United Kingdom with her husband who is a British citizen and she
           of course herself has indefinite leave to remain,  this  is  her
           choice."

 17. The Adjudicator then turned to proportionality, and said:

           "The only real issue in this appeal is whether the exclusion  of
           the appellant is proportionate.  The appellant is now  aged  24.
           He has been educated and is supported by his stepfather.  He has
           hopefully by now found a job in Malaysia but there was no up-to-
           date evidence of that before me.  On the evidence before me  his
           mother and stepfather can continue  to  return  to  Malaysia  to
           visit and/or reside with him.  They may exercise their choice to
           live in either Malaysia or the United Kingdom."

 18. The Adjudicator again made it clear that she had had  regard  only  to
     the Appellant's position;  if the rights of others  were  said  to  be
     affected they could take other proceedings.   The  Appellant's  rights
     were not breached by his exclusion, though the  Adjudicator  expressed
     her regret at that conclusion.

 19. The Adjudicator also heard evidence from the Appellant's girlfriend, a
     UK citizen.  They were not  engaged;   their  relationship  was  being
     hampered because one party to it was not in the United  Kingdom.   The
     Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant had no family life with her.


The scope of the appeals


 20.  Section  59  appeals  fall  within  the  provisions  of  Schedule  4,
     paragraphs 21 and 22, to the 1999 Act.  Paragraph 21(1)  contains  the
     power to allow appeals if the decision was not in accordance with  the
     law or the Rules.  But in paragraph 21(2) that power  is  subject  "to
     any restriction" on the ground  of  appeal.   Section  65  also  falls
     within the scope of those  provisions;   but  by  section  65(5),  the
     appeal may be allowed either on the ground of  racial  discrimination,
     which does not arise here, or on the ground that the authority  "acted
     in breach of the Appellant's human rights".

 21. Mr Seddon recognised that  on  a  normal  and  unstrained  reading  of
     paragraph 317 of the Rules, the relevant  exceptionally  compassionate
     circumstances were those of the Appellant alone and not those  of  his
     relatives.  Indeed, we regard that as perfectly clear.

 22. Mr  Seddon  accordingly  submitted  first  that  the  phrase  "not  in
     accordance with the law" was broad enough to enable  an  appeal  under
     section 59 to include human rights points, including the human  rights
     of those who were not  Appellants.   The  decision  would  not  be  in
     accordance with law if it infringed the human rights of someone  other
     than the Appellant and there was a duty on the Tribunal, by virtue  of
     section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 not to act in a way  which  was
     incompatible with anyone's ECHR rights. He  supported  that  point  by
     referring to an obiter remark of the Tribunal to that effect in Box  v
     ECO Dhaka [2003] UKIAT 02212.  In addition, he said that Singh  v  IAT
     [1986] 2 All ER 721 HL assisted because it referred to  the  potential
     relevance of the  interests  of  third  parties  in  the  exercise  of
     discretion  in  a  deportation  case.   If  a  relevant  third   party
     consideration were not taken  into  account,  the  decision  could  be
     challenged as not being in accordance with the law.  He contended that
     the Rules should be interpreted so as to make them compatible with the
     ECHR.

 23. Miss  Grey  submitted  that  this  would  mean  that  section  65  was
     unnecessary.  It could not have been intended simply to provide for  a
     human rights appeal in the limited number of  cases  which  would  not
     generate  an  appeal  under  section  59.   It  would  mean  that  the
     restrictions in section 65(1) and (3),  which  confine  the  appellate
     bodies to an examination of human rights of the  Appellant,  would  be
     set aside.  The existence and impact  of  that  restriction  had  been
     noted in Kehinde*, (01/TH/02668) 19th December 2001, by  the  Tribunal
     and confirmed by Jack J in R (AC) v IAT [2002] EWHC 389  Admin.  If  a
     decision on entry clearance interfered  with  the  rights  of  someone
     other than the Appellant, the issue could be tested by way of Judicial
     Review.

 24. We accept Miss Grey's submissions.  Section 65 was introduced so as to
     provide a general right of  appeal  on  the  ground  that  a  decision
     relating to leave to enter or remain  breaches  an  Appellant's  human
     rights and is the sole route for an Appellant to raise that  question.
     It is difficult to see why the provision would have  been  enacted  in
     that general way, if  the  power  had  already  been  available  under
     section 59 for all appeals which lay under that section on  the  basis
     that a breach of human rights would "not [be] in accordance  with  the
     law".

 25. Moreover, section 65 contains  a  clear  limitation  on  what  may  be
     considered in an appeal under it.  There was no real dispute about it;
      in any event it is clear from  Kehinde*.   Section  65(1)  gives  the
     right of appeal to someone who alleges that a  decision  "relating  to
     [his] entitlement" to enter is "in breach of his  human  rights  ...".
     The same language appears in (3).  The appeal may be  allowed  if  the
     authority "acted in breach  of  the  appellant's  human  rights  ...";
     (5)(b);  emphasis added.  The relevant human rights in  a  section  65
     appeal are those of the Appellant  and  not  his  relatives  or  those
     others whose rights may be affected by a decision on  the  Appellant's
     case.  The true understanding of the judgment in AC  is  to  the  like
     effect;  in his conclusion at paragraph 38,  whatever  may  have  been
     said en route, Jack J says:

           "In consideration of this  appeal  I  have  had  regard  to  the
           appellant's rights and entitlements only.   If  the  appellant's
           mother or stepfather  or  any  other  witnesses  considers  that
           exclusion of the appellant would amount to a violation of  their
           rights then they are perfectly at liberty  to  take  proceedings
           under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 themselves."

 26. We also agree with the point made by him  in  paragraph  32  where  he
     points out that the impact of removal, or refusal of entry may have an
     impact on a person other than the Appellant and that  impact  in  turn
     may affect the Appellant; for  example,  the  anxiety  that  the  non-
     Appellant may feel about the absence of the Appellant may in turn make
     the Appellant distressed.  However, it is only in  that  indirect  way
     that the position of someone other than the  Appellant  can  be  taken
     into  account.   The  Tribunal  is  still  examining  the  Appellant's
     position when it allows for the indirect impact  of  the  position  of
     others.  It is right to say  that  there  are  passages  in  Jack  J's
     judgment which suggest that a broader approach was being taken,  which
     appear to contradict what he said elsewhere.  However,  if  a  broader
     approach had been intended, which we doubt, we would not have followed
     it.  We are bound by  Kehinde*,  which  is  correct  as  a  matter  of
     statutory interpretation.

 27. If section 59 were as broad as Mr Seddon suggested, that limitation in
     section 65 would simply be sidestepped.  The obiter suggestion to  the
     contrary in Box is wrong.  The reference in Singh to  considering  all
     relevant factors, including those which affected the position of third
     parties, shows a misunderstanding of what that case was about.  It was
     considering the exercise of a discretionary  power  to  deport.   That
     discretionary power required all relevant matters to be considered and
     in that  broad  consideration,  the  position  of  third  parties  was
     relevant.  That case was not purporting to lay down any rule that  the
     position of third parties is relevant to all  or  any  appeal  in  any
     immigration context.  Both parties in this context  relied  upon  what
     was said in Macdonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice  5th  ed,  para
     8.73.  But what he says is capable of being  read  in  two  ways;   we
     think that what he says agrees with what we think, but if it does not,
     so be it.

 28. We do not accept the suggestion by Miss Grey that  section  65  itself
     incorporated a jurisdiction to decide  that  a  decision  was  not  in
     accordance with the law.  True, section 65 falls within  Part  IV  and
     the provision of Schedule 4 paragraphs 21 and 22 apply to it.  But  it
     is the restriction in paragraph 21  (2)  which  bites  here.   Section
     65(5) contains a clear delineation of the grounds of appeal available;
     there  are  but  two  and  the  more  general   power   is   excluded.
     Accordingly, section 65 does not itself provide a  route  whereby  the
     rights of those other than the Appellant can be part of the decision.

 29. We do not accept that this puts the Tribunal at risk of breaching  the
     obligation in section 6(1) of the HRA 1998.  Section  7  provides  for
     proceedings to be brought in the appropriate court or tribunal.   That
     is the IAT where the statutory right of appeal exists for that person.
      Otherwise remedy is available through Judicial Review.   Two  related
     sets of proceedings in separate fora are of course cumbersome  and  it
     might be thought more sensible if all the relevant  matters  could  be
     dealt with by the one body at one time.  But that is not the statutory
     framework which has been adopted.  Even were the Tribunal to have  the
     power to look more widely than it does at the position of a family, it
     would still be necessary for those  who  were  not  the  Appellant  to
     identify  themselves  as  "victims".   Only  those  who  so   identify
     themselves have the right  to  challenge  decisions  on  human  rights
     grounds  by  section  7  of  the  1998  Act;  it  would  be   entirely
     inappropriate for someone, the Appellant, to seek to advance his  case
     by reliance on the rights which he asserts for others but  which  they
     do not seek  to  vindicate  themselves.   Indeed  it  is  possible  to
     envisage circumstances where those others might either be  unaware  of
     Tribunal proceedings in which they were not parties or hostile to what
     was being asserted.  (We point out that those comments do not apply to
     the dependants of Appellants who are liable to removal with the  named
     Appellant and who are treated as Appellants therefore by reference  to
     specific statutory provisions.)

 30. The suggestion by Mr Seddon that the  Tribunal  had  to  consider  the
     compatibility of the Rules with the ECHR and to use its  powers  under
     section 3 to the 1998 Act so as to achieve a  result  which  reflected
     the human rights of all involved, is misconceived.  It  misunderstands
     the significance of the Rules and hence of the Tribunal's function  in
     relation to them.  Article 8, in  so  far  as  it  is  engaged,  is  a
     qualified right, qualified by the interests of the maintenance  of  an
     effective system of  immigration  control.   Whether  any  immigration
     decision represents a proportionate response to any interference  with
     Article 8(1) rights is a matter, at least in the first  instance,  for
     the Secretary of State.  The Rules represent what the executive,  with
     Parliamentary approval,  consider  to  be  an  appropriate  system  of
     immigration control and a  proportionate  response  to  the  many  and
     varied circumstances which arise.  Those  Rules  are  supplemented  by
     discretionary powers outside the Rules.

 31. We repeat what the Tribunal said in H ECO Addis Ababa TH/22006/2002 at
     paragraph 46:

           "It would normally be the position that the combination  of  the
           provisions of the Immigration Rules and  extra-statutory  policy
           and discretion would  provide  a  proportionate  basis  for  any
           interference with or lack of respect  for  family  life  in  the
           light of the well-established right of a state to control entry,
           whether or not  that  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  free-standing
           restriction on the scope of Article 8 or as failing  within  the
           qualification in Article 8(2).  Those provisions represent  what
           the State, in part with express Parliamentary  approval  and  in
           part through the executive, have thought fit provisions for  the
           entry into the United Kingdom of those who  have  some  form  of
           family life with someone established  here.   As  Edore  v  SSHD
           [2003] EWCA Civ 716, [2003] INLR  361  holds,  the  question  of
           whether an interference or lack of respect is  proportionate  to
           the need for control over immigration and for the maintenance of
           the system for its enforcement, is a matter for the Secretary of
           State's judgment in the first place and it is only reviewable if
           it is outside the range of responses reasonably open to him.  It
           would be the exceptional case where circumstances  fell  outside
           the Rules and the compassionate discretionary  policy,  and  yet
           were such that exclusion was an  unreasonable  response  by  the
           Secretary of State."

 32. For the Tribunal to interpret the Rules so as to make them fit what it
     thought was a proportionate response would be to usurp  the  Secretary
     of State's function.  It is possible where a case  falls  outside  the
     Rules  for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether   the   decision   is
     disproportionate to the interference with Article 8(1)  rights.   That
     is the purpose of the section 65 appeal.  There is  no  need  for  the
     scope of that appeal to be subverted by altering the  role  which  the
     Tribunal performs in relation to the interpretation or application  of
     the Rules in a section 59 appeal.  We see no  incompatibility  between
     ECHR and the  Rules,  especially  as  it  is  supplemented  by  extra-
     statutory discretions, and policies.


Post decision events


 33. The next point raised by Mr Seddon was  that  the  Tribunal,  in  both
     appeals, was entitled to have regard to events  which  happened  after
     the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.   We  accept  that
     the approach in SK [2002] UKIAT 05613* is not applicable here as  both
     parties agreed;  the decision is inapplicable to entry  clearance  and
     revolved around the wording of section 77 relating to  removals.   The
     Rules eg Rule 26, distinguish entry clearance  from  leave  to  enter;
     the rationale for the distinction lies in the ability to make  further
     out of country applications, with fresh evidence, for entry clearance.
     The position in relation to an entry  clearance  appeal  is  that  the
     appeal is considered as a review of the Secretary of State's decision.
      The question of whether that was in accordance with the law is to  be
     determined by the circumstances prevailing at the time  of  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer's decision;  R v IAT ex parte Kotecha [1983]  1  WLR
     487.

 34. Mr Seddon raised  a  broader  point  about  the  relevant  factors  in
     relation to a human rights appeal, submitting that it would always  be
     relevant to examine the current situation for those purposes.

 35. Miss Grey submitted that the same approach should be adopted as for  a
     section 59 appeal, because the language of section 65 was about a past
     decision and there was an opportunity for a  further  application  for
     entry clearance.  We accept that the language of section 65 relates to
     the taking of a past decision by someone who in so deciding has  acted
     in breach of the Appellant's human rights.  But that  language  cannot
     be conclusive  because,  in  removal  cases,  it  is  the  prospective
     removal, albeit pursuant to a past decision  which  would  create  the
     breach of human rights.  On the other  hand,  in  an  entry  clearance
     case, it is the refusal of entry which is a past act which has created
     the breach of human rights.  It is  not  in  any  sense  a  continuing
     decision which has yet to be acted on.  The Appellant is also entitled
     to make a further application and there is no equivalent provision  to
     that in section 77 (3) which can be called in aid so as to lead  to  a
     different result.  We concluded that the reasoning in Kotecha is  also
     the correct reasoning to apply to this section 65 appeal.

 36. It has long been recognised that the decision date did  not  create  a
     clean cut-off point for evidence about post-decision events.  Evidence
     which relates to what had previously happened or to events, which were
     reasonably foreseeable  at  the  date  of  decision  continued  to  be
     admissible.  Evidence which illuminates and shows  in  a  truer  light
     what had previously occurred is  also  admissible.   Here,  there  was
     little debate but that the evidence that the Appellant's  relationship
     with his  girlfriend  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  broken  down  was
     admissible;  the relationship had existed at the date of decision  and
     its uncertain future, in the absence of the Appellant to  nurture  it,
     had been relied on at that time.  The other matter, which  would  have
     advantaged the Appellant, was the evidence of his  mother's  declining
     health, the return of her cancer, the impact which  that  had  on  her
     ability to fly to Malaysia to visit her son  and  the  distress  which
     their separation caused both of them, made the more acute  at  such  a
     time.  As  Miss  Grey  pointed  out,  although  the  mother's  chronic
     depressive illness, which she attributed largely to worrying about her
     children and to her separation from her youngest, the  Appellant,  had
     been part of the circumstances existing at the time of  decision,  the
     then past cancer had not been part of those circumstances.  We do  not
     consider that the return of that earlier cancer is properly related to
     events at the date of  decision  so  as  to  make  evidence  about  it
     admissible on this appeal.  It cannot be said,  merely  because  there
     was a health issue at the time of the decision,  that  all  subsequent
     health-related material is admissible even though the later illness is
     unrelated to the health of the mother at the date of decision;  it has
     not been suggested that  the  return  of  the  cancer  was  reasonably
     foreseeable at that date, nor does it in any way illuminate  what  had
     previously been said to be the position.  In any event, the  relevance
     of the cancer would have been limited to the impact which that had  on
     the Appellant's circumstances.


The substantive merits of the appeals


 37. Mr Seddon made a number of criticisms of  the  Adjudicator's  findings
     and approach in relation to  compassionate  circumstances  and  family
     life.  He said that  she  had  not  drawn  the  necessary  distinction
     between the way in which indigenous Christians were tolerated and  the
     different and  discriminatory  treatment  which  apostates  and  their
     children experienced. She had treated the family separation while  the
     Appellant was at university in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  voluntary
     choice, whereas it was the consequences of the need for the  Appellant
     and his siblings to study abroad because of the  discrimination  which
     they experienced in their  university  applications  in  Malaysia  and
     their stepfather's need to remain at work in Malaysia longer  than  he
     had  intended.   Although  there  were  factors  behind  the  mother's
     depression other than  her  separation  from  her  youngest  son,  the
     refusal of his entry clearance had triggered  a  severe  relapse.  Her
     anxiety for his well-being when separated from him was much more acute
     when he was in Malaysia than when he was safe, living  in  the  family
     house in England. His social isolation there had  been  ignored;   she
     had made insufficient findings about his employment  applications  and
     prospects.

 38. We shall deal with those points as we consider the conclusions of  the
     Adjudicator, starting with the  Rules,  and  the  Section  59  appeal.
     This, as  we  have  said,  is  concerned  only  with  the  Appellant's
     circumstances, as at the date of decision and subject to  the  limited
     scope for evidence as to post-decision events.

 39. We agree with the Adjudicator's assessment that whilst  the  Appellant
     may be living in compassionate circumstances, he is not living in  the
     most exceptional compassionate circumstances as required by the Rules.
      It is a high threshold test.  He has accommodation with  kitchen  and
     bathroom; he has financial support from his stepfather  which  enables
     him to sustain the necessities of life.  He is in the country in which
     he had been brought up and in which he has spent all  his  life  as  a
     Christian.  Although we accept that the  mother  faced  discrimination
     because of her conversion and that there has been an increase  in  the
     state and non  state  discrimination  faced  by  apostates  and  their
     children, including increased difficulties in  entering  universities,
     the decisions which have led to the family being  dispersed,  as  they
     are, cannot be regarded as responses to  persecution.   They  are  the
     choices, albeit difficult,  made  in  response  to  a  combination  of
     circumstances, personal, political and  economic,  which  they  faced.
     There was an expectation perhaps, that they would all eventually  live
     in England, which has been confounded; but that is  not  to  deny  the
     fact that the mother and stepfather decided to live in the UK when the
     Appellant's status here was uncertain, and decided that the separation
     which occurred during university studies  was  one  which  they  would
     accept.  We do not see the latter as indicating  any  indifference  to
     family life;  it is a commonplace for students to leave home,  as  the
     start of their developing adult life, loosening the parental ties.

 40. He has split from his girlfriend and  sadly  for  the  Appellant  that
     relationship  cannot  provide  a  component   of   any   compassionate
     circumstances.  We accept that  he  has  experienced  difficulties  in
     obtaining employment and that  his  mother's  conversion  is  probably
     making that considerably more difficult for him. He has applied for  a
     range of jobs from a variety of firms including  international  firms;
     but there is no updated material as to  how  those  applications  have
     progressed. The Adjudicator was entitled to  take  into  account  that
     there may have been other factors affecting his  prospects,  including
     the type of job he was seeking with the degree which he had. There  is
     now evidence that he has a job with an international company but at  a
     level well below normal graduate employment. That is relevant  to  the
     situation at the time of decision, but even if  he  had  no  job,  the
     balance of circumstances would not have altered significantly.  We  do
     not think that the Adjudicator was obliged to  make  further  findings
     than she did in this matter.

 41. The Adjudicator may not have drawn clearly the distinction between the
     position of a Christian, who was neither a convert from Islam nor  the
     child of such a convert, and one in the position of the Appellant.  It
     is a relevant distinction in that there is a growing hostility to  the
     latter, whereas those who have always been Christian  are  seen  in  a
     different light.  But that does not assist the Appellant  as  much  as
     was contended.  There is no suggestion that any  such  distinction  is
     drawn by the Christian  community  itself.   There  is  a  significant
     Christian community in Malaysia and there is no reason to suppose that
     the Appellant is isolated from it and unable to seek their fellowship.
      It is also legitimate for the Adjudicator to comment that the  family
     lived in Malaysia for many years  while  discrimination  occurred.  We
     would accept however that the issue  was  seen  too  much  as  one  of
     religious   tolerance   as   between   communities,    ignoring    the
     discrimination  suffered  by  apostates  even  though  they  were  not
     directly punished by the government for apostasy. But  that  does  not
     cause us to conclude that he comes within the Rules.

 42. The position in which the Appellant thus finds himself cannot  in  our
     view come within the scope of the high  threshold  test  of  the  most
     exceptional compassionate circumstances.  It must be  remembered  that
     the purpose of the Rule in question is to provide a  basis  for  entry
     for settlement and it is against that purpose that the test has to  be
     judged.

 43. We turn to consider Article 8, and the section  65  appeal,  examining
     the Appellant's position as at the date of decision as for the section
     59 appeal.  We should first say something about the scope  of  section
     65 in relation to the human rights  of  someone  who  is  outside  the
     territory of the United  Kingdom  and  not  a  national  or  otherwise
     entitled to enter the United Kingdom.  It does  not  follow  from  the
     mere fact that there is an  appeal  available  under  section  65  for
     someone who is seeking entry into the country that he has available to
     him all the rights under ECHR as a source of a right  of  entry.   The
     Tribunal considered at some length the nature and source of the rights
     available under the ECHR  to  someone  seeking  entry  to  the  United
     Kingdom but who was outside the territory of the  state,  in  H  UKIAT
     [2004] 00027 Somalia.  In paragraph 42-45 it said:

           "42.  It seems to us that the answer to the existence of Article
                 8 rights for those outside the  United  Kingdom  is  to  be
                 found in the way in which the jurisprudence  of  the  ECtHR
                 has developed over time in relation  to  various  areas  of
                 human experience, here the  entry  of  non-nationals  to  a
                 country.  It is not always possible to trace a  clear  line
                 of reasoning from Article 1 through the  various  decisions
                 which that Court has reached so as  deduce  the  principles
                 which apply.  The decisions are not always  consistent  nor
                 do they deal with some  of  the  problems  which  might  be
                 thought to stand in the way of the result  reached.   Ullah
                 illustrates the  problems  of  some  of  the  reasoning  in
                 Soering v United Kingdom [1989] 11 HRR 439, and  then  with
                 the basis upon which Chahal v United Kingdom [1997] 23 EHRR
                 413 was said to be consistent with  it.   Similar  problems
                 are in respect of the ECtHR approach to entry cases.   But,
                 rather than hunting  for  a  clear  line  of  reasoning  or
                 principle, which deals with the effect of Article 1, a line
                 which seems unlikely to exist, the better solution  is  the
                 more pragmatic one of looking to see what has been  decided
                 by  that  Court  and  domestically  in  relation  to   this
                 particular area.


           43.   The issue was discussed in Ullah in  paragraphs  41-47  as
                 part of the more  general  discussion  of  Article  8.   In
                 particular, the Court was of the belief which we regard  as
                 well-founded, that Article 8 has  been  invoked,  but  only
                 successfully in an immigration case, including  refusal  of
                 entry where that "has impacted on the enjoyment  of  family
                 life of those already established within the jurisdiction".
                  The Court referred to its review of the cases in  Mahmood.
                 It noted that the basis of the ECtHR decision in Abdulaziz,
                 Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom [1985] 7  EHRR  471
                 was  that  the  applicants  were  established  within   the
                 jurisdiction and complained that they were  being  deprived
                 of the company of their husbands who were  not  within  the
                 jurisdiction;  the right of  the  State  to  control  entry
                 acted as a free-standing restriction on  Article  8  rather
                 than being a legitimate aim  within  Article  8(2).   Later
                 ECtHR cases, such as Bensaid v  United  Kingdom  [2001]  33
                 EHRR 10, [2001] INLR  325,  treat  immigration  control  as
                 falling within that qualification.  It appears to have been
                 assumed or decided in both Kugathas and  Ekinci,  that  the
                 effective trigger for the existence of  Article  8  rights,
                 enforceable against the United Kingdom by non-nationals who
                 are outside it, is the existence of family life with  those
                 who are established in the United Kingdom.


           44.   We have already referred to Sen v Netherlands and Ahmut  v
                 Netherlands, both of which are  consistent  with  what  the
                 Court of Appeal said in Ullah about the need for the family
                 relationship, of those relying on Article 8 as a basis  for
                 entry, to be with someone who was established in the United
                 Kingdom in order for them  to  have  Article  8  rights  in
                 respect of family life which are  enforceable  against  the
                 State with which they are seeking entry.


           45.    Accordingly,  we  consider,  on  the   basis   of   ECtHR
                 jurisprudence and Ullah, that the existence of family  life
                 with someone who  is  established  in  the  United  Kingdom
                 provides the basis for the existence of Article  8  rights,
                 enforceable against the United Kingdom and is the basis for
                 the examination of whether that life is interfered with  or
                 shown a lack of respect.  This  may  reflect  a  developing
                 ECtHR jurisprudence from the position in  Abdulaziz.   Such
                 an approach would reflect what the Court  of  Appeal  seems
                 consistently to regard as  the  position.   (We  have  some
                 reservations  about  the  basis  upon  which  Ms   Hanrahan
                 conceded the point because the short comment in Mahmood may
                 have been overtaken by the  greater  consideration  of  the
                 issue  of  jurisdiction  in  Ullah.)   It  does,   however,
                 represent an ad hoc extension of the Convention, but it  is
                 not as wide as that which would arise from full  acceptance
                 of the appellant's submissions.  But  is  also  makes  some
                 sense of the jurisdictional provisions  in  the  1998  Act,
                 with the  Parliamentary  assumption  seen  as  having  some
                 basis."

 44. We have already set out above in a further citation from paragraph  46
     of that case the significance of the  Rules  to  a  case  which  falls
     outside  them  and  outside  any  additional  discretionary  provision
     outside the Rules.  Although there is scope for such a case to involve
     a breach of Article 8 that scope is likely to be very  limited.   Miss
     Grey for the SSHD adopted the conclusions which the Tribunal  had  set
     out.  Mr Seddon sought to emphasise the particular facts of this case.
     It is unnecessary to set out the full reasoning; it is set out in that
     case.

 45. No argument was addressed to us to the effect that Article 9  provided
     any basis for entry. Mr Seddon submitted that the Article 8  right  to
     respect for private life should also be a part of the basis upon which
     someone could assert a right under ECHR to enter the UK. Private  life
     with family life represented a composite right albeit one which varied
     in its precise mix from case to case. He  cited  Nhundu  and  Chiwera,
     (01/TH/0613), 1stJune 2001, and CF v SSHD [2004] EWHC 111 Fam,  [2004]
     All ER (D) 322.  He relied on the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
     girlfriend, his residence and his studies here, his intention to  work
     here, and his isolation, the discrimination  experienced  in  Malaysia
     and the restrictions on his practising his religion there.  Miss  Grey
     was inclined to accept that such components of a private life  as  had
     once been enjoyed in the UK could form  a  basis  for  a  right  under
     Article 8 to enter.  Here,  those  factors  would  be  his  study  and
     residence together with  the  lifestyle  more  broadly  which  he  had
     enjoyed here.

 46. Of course, Article 8 rights include respect  for  a  person's  private
     life as well as his family life. The  two  may  overlap  and  also  be
     distinct. But the question is not how that right should be  approached
     in the context of removal, as arose in Nhundu and Chiwera, but whether
     the effect on  private  life,  as  distinct  from  family  life,  also
     afforded a basis for a contention that refusal of entry  clearance  to
     someone outside the jurisdiction  could  be  a  breach  of  his  human
     rights. As we have said, the  ECHR  rights  do  not  extend  to  those
     outside the jurisdiction. It is by an extension of the Convention that
     the right to a family life has become a basis for a  right  of  entry,
     but it has only become so where the family  life  relied  on  is  with
     someone who is established within the jurisdiction.  We  have  had  no
     authority cited to  us,  domestic  or  ECtHR,  which  holds  that  any
     provisions of the ECHR other than the  right  to  family  life  within
     Article 8 afford a basis for a right of entry. We do  not  regard  any
     further extension as well founded.  Private as  distinct  from  family
     life is not a basis upon which an ECHR right of entry  can  be  based.
     Were it otherwise, the implications for entry  rights  would  be  very
     significant.  Many aspects of private  life  are  restricted  in  less
     happy countries  eg  divorce,  remarriage,  homosexual  relationships,
     religious practices; there is no reason to construe the 1999  Act  nor
     the ECHR as providing rights  of  entry  for  those  whose  Convention
     rights are breached in signatory or non-signatory countries.  Refugees
     have no such rights, yet the logic of extending entry under Article  8
     by  reference  to  factors  other  than  family  life   with   someone
     established here, would mean that Article 3 breaches in  a  Convention
     or non-Convention country would become a basis for a right  of  entry.
     If Parliament chooses so to legislate, that is for Parliament.  It  is
     not for judicial extension of the scope  of  the  ECHR.   Removal  and
     entry are not to be equiparated.  The  relevance  of  a  private  life
     enjoyed while here as a student  also  seems  a  poor  basis  for  the
     distinction which Miss Grey was  prepared  to  accept.  Those  are  no
     longer aspects of his private life; they are in the past and a student
     granted entry to study has no basis in general for supposing  that  he
     can rely on that  to supply the basis for a right of return. It is  to
     the contrary;  his private life  at  that  time  was  subject  to  the
     limitations on his entry.

 47. Mr Seddon submitted that the Appellant enjoyed a family life with  his
     parents who were established in the United Kingdom.  He also relied on
     the  fact  that  the  other  brother  was  living  here  and  on   the
     relationship  with  the  girlfriend.   At  least  he  said  that   the
     Adjudicator had  been  wrong  to  discount  that  relationship  simply
     because they were  not  engaged.   She  had  ignored  the  strong  and
     constant contacts between  the  mother  and  her  youngest  son.   The
     Adjudicator had applied too severe a test in examining  whether  there
     were any "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the  mother  and  stepfather
     returning to Malaysia to live;  it would be correct to ask whether  it
     would be reasonable to expect them to live  there   or  whether  there
     were major obstacles, which on the facts  of  this  case  there  were.
     Apart from the particular difficulties which the mother's  cancer  now
     posed for flying, and the cost, they were established  in  the  United
     Kingdom, they had always intended to retire here and had  their  house
     here;  in Malaysia they would face again the religious  discrimination
     which they had faced before.  It was unrealistic to suggest that  they
     could choose to return to Malaysia.  She had not chosen  to  be  apart
     from him, and would have been less  worried  about  him  when  he  was
     living in England.

 48. The Appellant is now nearing 26.  He was nearing 23  at  the  date  of
     decision. At that age, it is possible  to  have  a  family  life  with
     parents but one would normally  expect  something  stronger  than  the
     normal ties of love and affection and concern for a child or  parent's
     well-being.  There should be evidence of specific emotional dependency
     or a serious lack of maturity. There is no evidence  of  any  especial
     mental or emotional dependency of the Appellant on his parents;  he is
     financially dependant on them.   Although  he  has  had  illnesses  in
     Malaysia, he is in good health  and  is  not  physically  or  mentally
     disabled.  We would accept that he does at present enjoy some form  of
     family life with them but that is inevitably one which  will  diminish
     as the years go by and the normal expectation would  be  that  in  the
     United Kingdom he would set up home away from them in due  course,  as
     have his brother and sister, and that it would be stretching  a  point
     to say that he then enjoyed family life with them.  We accept  that  a
     family life can be constituted by the relationship with adult siblings
     but it is  not  usually  strong  in  the  absence  of  any  particular
     dependencies;  they would normally be regarded  as  separate  families
     who have grown up and gone their separate ways however much the  bonds
     of affection and contact remained.  This evolution reflects the way in
     which the Rules make it fairly easy for children up to 12 years old to
     join their parents, somewhat more difficult for those  under  18,  and
     impose very much more stringent tests for those over 18.

 49. For the present case, we accept that there is a form  of  family  life
     with the brother in  the  United  Kingdom  noting  that  the  former's
     position in the United Kingdom is  certain  only  for  the  relatively
     short term.  It is difficult to see why it is not also  said  that  he
     has a family life with his sister in the USA.

 50. There is force in the suggestion  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
     treated the relationship with the girlfriend  as  constituting  family
     life or an element of his family life.  They described each  other  as
     "partners" although accepting that no decision about marriage had been
     made.  Such a relationship can constitute  family  life  as  Keegan  v
     Ireland [1994] 18 EHRR 342 shows, although the facts of that case were
     rather stronger.  Indeed, the fact that  the  Appellant,  as  a  young
     adult, claims a family life with his girlfriend or  partner  and  also
     with his parents suggests that he was already at the natural stage  of
     development in his  relationships  where  the  family  ties  with  the
     parents were  dissolving  in  favour  of  a  new  adult  relationship.
     However, that relationship is  now  over  and  cannot  constitute  any
     component of family life now, and it would not have been a strong  one
     when the Adjudicator was considering matters even before any issue  of
     proportionality.  It was a relationship formed when his position would
     be uncertain after he ceased to be a student. She might have been able
     to join him in Malaysia.

 51. The Adjudicator concluded that the refusal of  entry  clearance  would
     not interfere or show a lack of positive respect for his family  life.
     She concluded that there was no  real  obstacle  to  his  parents  re-
     establishing their lives in Malaysia.  We consider that the refusal of
     entry clearance would constitute an interference with his family life,
     but we do not consider that it would be a very significant one.   This
     is because of his age and the  lack  of  any  particular  reasons  for
     emotional, mental or physical dependency on his parents.  He is in  at
     least reasonable health and is able to look for work and  has  a  job.
     The financial dependency  does  not  require  entry  into  the  United
     Kingdom in order for it to be met.  His family ties with  his  parents
     will necessarily diminish, indeed will have diminished, over the years
     since the Entry Clearance Officer's decision,  even  though  bonds  of
     affection and love will remain.  It can be expected that he would very
     shortly establish his own family life in this country even  if  for  a
     while he lived with his parents.  He could expect to move out to  live
     with someone else and to start his own family.  He can always  seek  a
     visitor visa.  We know that he has been refused one once on the ground
     that he might not  return.   That  seems  harsh.   He  did  return  to
     Malaysia and the fact that an application for settlement has been made
     does not always mean that a later visitor visa should be refused.

 52. The Adjudicator also said that his parents  could  visit  him,  which,
     ignoring the mother's illness, is true and a part of the picture.  His
     brother can visit him as can his sister.

 53. The Adjudicator also  considered  the  prospects  of  the  Appellant's
     parents rejoining him in  Malaysia.  It  is  a  possibility  that  his
     brother will, but that is essentially speculative, even if the brother
     were unable to stay in the United Kingdom.  The  Adjudicator  did  not
     apply a test as such of whether there were "insurmountable  obstacles"
     to the parents returning to Malaysia.  That was a  consideration.   It
     is the language of Lord Phillips MR in Mahmood v SSHD [2001] INLR 1 at
     paragraph 55.  In Bakir [2002] UKIAT 01176, the then President said at
     paragraph 9 that the real test was "whether in all  the  circumstances
     it was reasonable to require the family members to leave the  country,
     that is  to  say,  whether  the  interference  is  proportional."   He
     commented that the phrase "insurmountable obstacle" in Mahmood was not
     specifically adopted by the  other  two  members  of  the  Court.   It
     depended on what was reasonable in the case and had not been suggested
     as a test which each case had to pass.  Sen v  Netherlands  [2003]  36
     EHRR 7 at paragraph 40, used the phrase "major obstacle" in examining,
     in an entry case, the significance of the obstacles which the  Turkish
     child entrant's family, established in the Netherlands, would face  if
     family life could only be enjoyed by their return to Turkey to be with
     the child.

 54.  We  are  not  sure  that  very  much  is  gained  by  analysing  what
     distinctions the various choices of word were intended to  convey,  if
     indeed there is a difference in  practice.   It  does  not  appear  to
     advance the analysis of whether a decision  is  proportionate  to  say
     that the question is whether  it  was  reasonable  to  require  family
     members to leave the country, because that is but one aspect  of  what
     makes a decision proportionate.  It is unreasonable to expect  someone
     to leave when facing "insurmountable obstacles".   That  phrase,  read
     with the rest of paragraph 55, is not at odds with the  other  Mahmood
     judgments and it should not be discounted as  appearing  in  only  one
     judgment.

 55. The flavour of the relevant language is clear;  there must  be  really
     significant problems which  the  family  could  not  realistically  be
     expected to overcome.

 56. The Adjudicator examined that issue here as a factor in  her  decision
     rather than as the test of proportionality.  We agree with  Mr  Seddon
     that the Adjudicator,  in  her  conclusion  that  there  was  no  real
     obstacle to the Appellant's mother, with  her  husband,  returning  to
     Malaysia to re-establish their family life there, does not  appear  to
     have taken into account the discrimination faced by  apostates  beyond
     saying that the mother had  lived  there  for  many  years  since  her
     conversion.  Nonetheless, although we can understand why she  and  her
     husband much prefer to remain in the United Kingdom, where  they  have
     decided to retire, and have their house, and although we  accept  that
     there has been a growing discrimination against  Christian  apostates,
     the evidence does not show the really significant  problems  which  we
     would expect if real weight is to be attached to the inability of  the
     parents to move, when looking at lack of respect for the son's  family
     life.  The mother was not persecuted nor would she be persecuted.  The
     relevance of the ease of return also seems to us to be likely to be of
     greater significance to an analysis of the human rights of those other
     than the would-be entrant Appellant.

 57. Such interference or lack of respect for the Appellant's family  life,
     as  there  is  in  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer's   decision,   is
     proportionate, in the sense that it lies within the range of responses
     open to the Entry Clearance Officer.  The primary position is that the
     Rules,  supplemented  by  extra-statutory  discretion  and   policies,
     provide what  should  be  seen  as  a  proportionate  basis  for  that
     interference or lack of respect.  There is nothing in this  particular
     case which, exceptionally, shows that the application of the Rules  is
     disproportionate and that a different decision is required.

 58. There is no difficulty in applying Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840  to  the
     Entry Clearance Officer's decision.  The fact that there is a limit on
     the post-decision events which can be taken into account is likely  to
     limit the extent of any unanticipated changes in circumstances.  Here,
     none of the post-decision events are of such a nature as substantially
     to undermine the basis of the ECO decision.  If the decision were  for
     us, it is plain that it falls within the scope of those of  reasonably
     open to the Secretary of State and we would not have  interfered  with
     it.  Our attention was drawn to SSHD v Vujnovic [2003] EWCA Civ  1843,
     but nothing in this case turns upon it though we regard  our  decision
     as consistent with it.

 59. We should add that we would not have reached  a  different  conclusion
     even  if  we  had  taken  into  account  the   mother's   rights   and
     circumstances, including her up to date circumstances.  Nor  were  the
     private life considerations weighty even taken at their highest.

 60. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.  The  decision  is  starred  for
     what we say about the scope of section 59 and 65  in  relation  to  an
     appellant's rights, post-decision events, the relevance of family life
     to entry cases based on ECHR and the significance of the Rules for the
     proportionality of any Article 8 family life  decision  in  any  entry
     case.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT




