
ar               KM (Article 8 - Family Life) Albania [2004] UKIAT 00079



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing: 13 April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               23 April 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Miss J. Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the  respondent  :  Miss  R.  Chowdhury,  Counsel,  instructed  by   TMK
Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  has
      been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
      determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J.  Brennan,  who  allowed  the
      respondent's appeal on human rights grounds.

   2.  It  is  noteworthy  that  at  paragraph  2   of   the   Adjudicator's
      determination the Adjudicator noted as follows:

             'The appellant orally,  by  written  notice  and  through  his
             Counsel admitted that the facts upon which  he  had  made  his
             claim for asylum were not true.  Accordingly  that  aspect  of
             his appeal was withdrawn.  I agreed to that course.'
3.    The respondent is a citizen of Albania and it is appropriate  to  note
      that notwithstanding his date of birth being  described  on  the  Home
      Office documentation as 20 February  1980,  it  was  accepted  by  the
      parties' representatives that the Adjudicator was correct at paragraph
      1.1 of his determination in noting the respondent's date of birth as 4
      April 1977. It  follows  that  at  the  date  of  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator, namely 16 June 2003, the respondent was aged  twenty-six.
      Further, that when the respondent left Albania on  12  September  1997
      the respondent was aged twenty-two years.

4.    In the circumstances, the  parties'  representatives  agreed  with  us
      that  for  the  purposes  of  our  consideration  of  the  appeal  the
      respondent was at all relevant times an adult and not a minor.

5.    In granting the Secretary of State  permission  to  appeal,  the  Vice
      President, Dr H.H. Storey, noted as follows:

             'The grounds contend that the Adjudicator failed to apply  the
             principles set out in Mahmood and Kugathas to the relationship
             existing between the claimant and the Harman family.  It  does
             not appear that this is a case where the  Secretary  of  State
             conducted  a  balancing  Article  8  exercise  to   which   an
             Adjudicator was obliged to  defer,  so  the  issue  is  solely
             whether  the  Adjudicator  properly  approached  and  assessed
             relevant factors under Article 8.


             Whilst all grounds are  arguable,  it  will  be  necessary  of
             course to consider not just whether the Adjudicator  erred  in
             finding  that  there  was  a  family  life  but  whether   the
             Adjudicator  erred  in  considering  that   the   factors   he
             identified as significant - be they family or private elements
             - sufficed to justify his  conclusion  that  the  decision  to
             remove was disproportionate.


             The grounds disclose an arguable error of law.'

6.    It would be as well, for the sake of completeness, if we set  out  the
      grounds:

             '1. It is submitted that the Adjudicator has made an error  in
                 law in applying the  principles  as  laid  out  in  Mahmood
                 (ImmAR 229) in relation  to  the  establishment  of  family
                 life.


             2.  In the case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the proposition
                 that family life exists  between  parent  and  adult  child
                 because of normal emotional ties was examined in depth  and
                 the relevant case law considered.  In that case  the  court
                 found unanimously  that  it  did  not,  without  additional
                 factors - see paragraphs 19, 25 and 31.


             3.  In the present case it is submitted that  such  additional
                 factors do not exist.


             4.  The Harman family with whom the [respondent]  resides  are
                 not family members.


             5.  The [respondent] has a mother and father that  still  live
                 in Albania.


             6.  The Adjudicator has acknowledged that if the  [respondent]
                 were returned to Albania the Harman family would set him up
                 in a business in order to provide the [respondent] with  an
                 income.  They would try and visit him as much as possible.


             7.  The Tribunal is respectfully requested that this appeal be
                 allowed.'

8.    We have decided to allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

9.    The first two grounds go to the question  of  whether  a  family  life
      exists between the respondent and the Harman family.   As Miss  Sigley
      helpfully clarified,  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  there
      clearly existed a degree of private life but that the Adjudicator  had
      determined it as family life  and  erred  in  law  in  so  doing.   We
      entirely agree.

10.   Our starting point is of course that when the respondent left  Albania
      he was an adult. He is now aged twenty-seven.  It follows that he  has
      spent all the formative years of his life in his homeland where indeed
      his natural parents still reside.

11.   It is helpful at this point to set out the  Adjudicator's  summary  of
      the appellant's immigration history  and  family  circumstances  which
      appear at paragraph 6 of his determination as follows:

             'The  [respondent]  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on   23
             September 1997 and made an untruthful application for  asylum.
             On 1 October 1997  he  with  other  Albanians  seeking  asylum
             visited  a  local  church  who   were   sponsoring   'Albanian
             Awareness' in the local community. Here he met Robb and  Fanny
             Harman and an instant rapport was  established.   They  became
             good friends. The relationship with the family deepened and in
             June 1998 he was invited to live with a member of the  family.
             He was treated as a member  of  the  family  and  included  in
             weekends away, birthday parties, meals, days  out  and  trips.
             The Harman's children ... considered him  to  be  their  older
             brother. He became very much involved  in  their  growing  up.
             The effect upon them of any removal to Albania is  graphically
             displayed in their statement.'

                      The [respondent] has lived with the Harman family  for
      five                     years and the  [respondent] claims that  life
      has undergone a                     radical change.   He  is  employed
      working full time as a sheet                     metal  worker  at  Mr
      Harman's company and part of the time                     in  a  local
      restaurant.    He   is   devoted   to   the    Harman    family    and
      their  children.  The  [respondent]   considers  Mr   &   Mrs   Harman
           as his brother and sister although at times they  have  been  his
                    mother and father.

                    He has a brother living in  Italy  and  his  father  and
      mother still                 live in Albania. If  he  is  returned  to
      Albania the  Harman  family                 would  set  him  up  in  a
      business        in        order         to         provide         the
      [respondent]  with  an  income.  They  would  try  to  visit  him   as
               often as possible.'

14.   Miss Sigley,  in  our  view,  rightly  submitted  that  amongst  other
      things, the Adjudicator appears to have failed to take account of  the
      fact that the appellant was at all  times  for  the  purposes  of  the
      appeal,  an  adult.    The  Adjudicator  should  have  recognised  the
      difficulties  in  establishing  an  independent  family  life  between
      adults. We are of the view that on the facts the relationship  enjoyed
      between the respondent and the Harmans cannot  be  described  as  some
      form of quasi-adoptive relationship but one where the Harmans have, as
      the Adjudicator noted, treated the respondent as  a  member  of  their
      family.

15.   Further and on a lesser note, it was the respondent's account  to  the
      Adjudicator that he essentially regarded the Harmans as siblings.   In
      this regard it is accepted law that in circumstances where family life
      is put forward as existing between an adult child and his  parents  or
      an adult sibling and his other sibling,  there  needs  to  be  further
      elements of dependency involving  more  than  normal  emotional  ties.
      This indeed was reaffirmed by the Tribunal recently in a  decision  in
      Salad  [2002]  UKIAT  06698.   Equally,  where  relationships  between
      parents and adult children are concerned, the protection of Article  8
      will not necessarily be engaged without evidence of  further  elements
      of dependency.

16.   In addition to the significant relevance of the respondent's  age,  (a
      factor which does not appear to have been considered  at  all  by  the
      Adjudicator), our view has been reinforced by those observations.

  17. The respondent has natural parents. They are living  in  Albania,  the
      country where the respondent was brought up until leaving in September
      1997 when he was aged twenty.


  18.  Further, we cannot ignore the  respondent's  acknowledgment  that  on
      arrival in the United Kingdom he made an  untruthful  application  for
      asylum.  As Miss Chowdhury very  candidly  acknowledged,  it  was  the
      respondent's close relationship with the Harmans which he  had  formed
      over a period of some six or seven years which caused him to admit  to
      the falsity of his  asylum  application  and  the  withdrawal  of  the
      respondent's asylum appeal before the Adjudicator.

19.   We find that the Adjudicator further erred in  establishing  a  family
      life between the respondent and the Harmans by reference to the  Court
      of Appeal decision in Kugathas.  At paragraph 24 within  the  judgment
      of Lady Justice Arden, there appears the following:

             'There is no presumption that a person has a family life, even
             with the members of the person's immediate family.  The  Court
             has to scrutinise the relevant factors. Such  factors  include
             identifying who are the nearest relatives  of  the  appellant,
             the nature of the link between them and the appellant, the age
             of the appellant, where and with whom he has  resided  in  the
             past and the form of contact he has maintained with the  other
             members of the family with whom he claims  to  have  a  family
             life.'

  19. Applying those factors to the present case, the  respondent's  nearest
      relatives are his parents, living in  his  homeland  in  Albania.  The
      appellant was aged twenty and an adult when he left Albania.


20.   At paragraph 25 of Kugathas, Lady Justice Arden continued:
             'Because there  is  no  presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not  established  between  an  adult
             child and his surviving parent unless more exists than  normal
             emotional ties.  Such ties might exist if the  appellant  were
             dependent on his family or vice  versa.   It  is  however  not
             essential for the member of the  family  to  be  in  the  same
             country.'

21.   We agree with Miss Sigley that  such  considerations  were  especially
      important in the context of  the  appeal  before  us  where  no  blood
      relationship exists between the respondent and the  Harman  family  to
      establish whether a family life exists.

  22. The representations most helpfully  made  by  Miss  Chowdhury  in  her
      skeleton argument, can only refer to circumstances  concerning  adults
      and children such as where, for example, there is an element  of  care
      for a minor child.


  23.   As stated by Lady Justice Arden at paragraph 25 of her  judgment  in
      Kugathas:

             'Further  developments  of  dependency  which   have   to   be
             significant are those which apply  where  one  is  considering
             blood relationships."


 24.     In  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal  the  respondent  has  not
      demonstrated to the level necessary a family life between himself  and
      the Harman family.  We agree with Miss Sigley that in situations where
      there is no blood relationship such ties have to be demonstrated to an
      even higher standard.

25.   Miss Chowdhury, in reminding us that the Secretary of State  had  made
      no decision under Article  8,  referred  us  to  paragraph  9  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination  that  blood  relationships  were  in  the
      Adjudicator's view a starting point but that the Courts had recognised
      that financial and emotional ties were sufficient to establish  family
      life within the meaning of Article 8.

26.   It was  noteworthy  that  most  fairly  and  candidly  Miss  Chowdhury
      acknowledged this was not her 'strongest point'.  She maintained  that
      the respondent had  shown  elements  of  dependency,  as  set  out  in
      Kugathas, in that he lived with the  Harman  family,  was  financially
      dependent upon them and that in her words 'his life  is  based  around
      them'.  She further reminded us that the appellant in Kugathas  was  a
      Sri Lankan adult living in the United Kingdom and in telephone contact
      with his family in Germany.   We reminded Miss Chowdhury that Kugathas
      enjoyed a relationship with his natural mother. It was a  relationship
      with an adult and blood relation and not as in this case a family with
      whom the respondent had no relationship by blood.

27.   We find that the Adjudicator indeed erred in concluding  as  a  matter
      of law that a family life had been established within the  meaning  of
      Article 8 between the respondent and the Harman family.

28.   It follows that the Adjudicator's assessment at paragraph  9  in  that
      regard must be held to be flawed.

29.   As Miss Sigley rightly submitted,  in  such  circumstances  the  issue
      before us was whether a private life was clearly engaged  and  whether
      as a consequence of that private life the removal of the respondent to
      Albania would amount to a disproportionate interference.

30.    Miss  Sigley  rightly  recognised  that  the  respondent  had  indeed
      established a private life which was  relatively  well  developed  and
      well documented. We  were  persuaded  by  her  submissions,  that  the
      decision of the Secretary of State to remove the respondent was in the
      circumstances a proportionate response on his part.

31.   Private life has indeed been established  by  the  respondent  but  we
      bear in mind that as observed by the Adjudicator at paragraph 2 of his
      determination, that the basis upon which the respondent arrived in the
      United Kingdom was his application for asylum which it turned out, was
      without foundation and based upon an untruthful set of facts.

32.   We were referred to the decision  of  the  learned  President  in  the
      recent starred Tribunal case of [2004] UKIAT 00024  M  (Croatia).   It
      would he as well to set out the learned  President's  observations  at
      paragraph 28:

             'The starting point should be that if in the circumstances the
             removal could reasonably be regarded as proportionate, whether
             or not the Secretary of State had actually said so or  applied
             his mind to this, it is lawful.  The Tribunal and Adjudicators
             should regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali  as  providing  clear
             exemplification  of  the  limits  of  what   is   lawful   and
             proportionate. They should normally hold that  a  decision  to
             remove is unlawful only when the  disproportion  is  so  great
             that no reasonable Secretary of State could  remove  in  those
             circumstances.   However, where the Secretary of  State,  e.g.
             through  a  consistent  decision-making  pattern  of  thorough
             decisions in relation to  members  of  the  same  family,  has
             clearly shown where, within the range of reasonable responses,
             his own assessment would lie, it  would  be  inappropriate  to
             assess proportionality  by  reference  to  a  wider  range  of
             responses than he in fact uses. It would otherwise have to  be
             a truly exceptional case, identified and reasoned, which would
             justify the conclusion that the removal decision was  unlawful
             by reference to an assessment  that  removal  was  within  the
             range of reasonable assessments of proportionality.  We cannot
             think of one at present; it is simply that we cannot  rule  it
             out.'

33.    We  cannot  agree  with  Miss  Chowdhury's  submission  that  if  the
      respondent's circumstances did not amount to a truly exceptional case,
      then she did not know what would amount to such a case.

34.   It would be difficult to establish an independent family life  between
      adults unless peculiar or exceptional factors applied.

35.   There is no doubt that the respondent has conducted his life  in  this
      country in an exemplary manner but we do not agree with Miss Chowdhury
      that on  the  facts  he  was  financially  dependent  on  the  Harmans
      particularly in circumstances where it  was  the  appellant's  account
      that he was not only currently employed working full time as  a  sheet
      metal worker at Mr Harman's company but also  part  time  at  a  local
      restaurant.

36.   We had earlier referred Miss Chowdhury to a decision of  the  Tribunal
      in Matia [2002] UKIAT 26134, where a failed asylum seeker had made his
      home in the United Kingdom. The Tribunal held that  the  fact  he  had
      been accepted into the community and was popular with  his  neighbours
      did not make his removal  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
      right to respect for his home.   Indeed  the  converse  would  not  be
      acceptable if a claimant were unpopular with his neighbours,  that  he
      should be allowed to stay.  The appellant's estimable  characteristics
      and talents, as indeed we note in relation to this  respondent,  would
      help him to adjust to life in Kosovo and indeed would be of benefit to
      the Kosovo community from whence he sprang.

37.   It was noteworthy that Miss Chowdhury accepted that  this  was  not  a
      case where the respondent had been left with no option but  to  remain
      in the United Kingdom for these past six or seven years.  Indeed,  she
      rightly accepted that it had at all times been open to the respondent,
      bearing in mind that he acknowledged from the outset that  he  made  a
      false asylum application, to return to his family in Albania.  It  had
      been the respondent's choice to embrace the affection  and  generosity
      of the Harman family in accommodating  him  within  their  family  and
      their own home and providing him with full time  employment  in  their
      business.   Bearing in mind the decision in M,  we  conclude  that  it
      cannot possibly be said, notwithstanding the  estimable  private  life
      that the respondent has established in the United  Kingdom,  that  the
      decision to remove him to  Albania  would  involve  a  breach  of  the
      respondent's human rights.  As Miss Chowdhury candidly accepted, there
      had at all times been 'no physical barrier stopping  [the  respondent]
      from returning to Albania over the past seven years'.

  38. We therefore find the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  remove  the
      respondent,  was  a  proportionate  response  to  the   interests   of
      immigration control.


39.   The respondent's circumstances  and  the  private  life  that  he  has
      established here, cannot be said to demonstrate the truly  exceptional
      case which would justify the conclusion that the removal  decision  of
      the appellant was unlawful.

41.   For the above reasons we have  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the
      Adjudicator must be reversed and the appeal of the Secretary of  State
      allowed.



                               N.H. GOLDSTEIN
                               VICE PRESIDENT















   -----------------------
      1


