
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      | |                                    |
|On 5 July 2004             | |  MS (Grounds of appeal: late       |
|                           | |amendment) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00200  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           08.07.2004                                      |
|Issued:            20.07.2004                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr JG Freeman (vice-president)                                    |
|Ms JA Endersby                                                    |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |appellant                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mrs A Heller, counsel instructed  by  Tann
and Tann
For the respondent:          Mr D W Saville

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is  an  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Iran  from  a  decision  of  an
   adjudicator, Mr Nigel Mylne, QC, sitting at Surbiton on 24 October  2003
   dismissing his appeal on both asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   The
   first ground, on which permission to appeal was given, suggests that the
   adjudicator misunderstood the nature of the appellant's case about being
   forced to play football for the Basij paramilitary security force.


2. Ground 2 refers to a subsidiary ground for the  adjudicator's  decision,
   which was mainly based on his rejection of the  claimant's  credibility.
   This referred to the lack of any Refugee Convention reason for what  the
   claimant said he feared. Grounds 3 to 6 also challenge the adjudicator's
   credibility decision; but not on any basis which  Mrs  Heller  has  been
   able to put forward as potentially amounting to an error of law  on  his
   part in terms of E & R [2003] EWCA  Civ  49.  Although,  as  Mr  Saville
   pointed out,  the  adjudicator  gave  some  very  detailed  reasons  for
   rejecting the appellant's credibility, if Ms Heller could manage to show
   that he had clearly misunderstood the position of the Basij,  then  that
   might arguably amount to an error of law in terms of a decision  of  the
   Court of Appeal in ER.

3. Mrs Heller however, sought to add another completely new  ground,  which
   does not even  appear  in  the  detailed  skeleton  argument  which  she
   produced before us and first made its appearance at our hearing  itself.
    That is based on the claimant having appeared  in  a  vide  film  since
   shown on ITV in this country under the title of "Lions in the Dust".  He
   gave a history of that before the adjudicator, which appears at pages  6
   to 7 of the decision.  [We  should  say  that  we  very  much  hope  the
   adjudicator will in future  adopt  what  is  now  the  almost  universal
   practice of numbering individual paragraphs.]  The relevant  history  is
   as follows:

   In the UK he had joined  his  demonstration  in  front  of  the  Iranian
   Embassy and he had granted an interview explaining his history.   He did
   not know if the film had been shown on satellite television but  it  had
   been shown in the UK.   He believed that it may have been shown in  Iran
   6 months after his flight.

4. The adjudicator dealt with that at page 10 as follows:

   My views as to credibility of the appellant's case have not been altered
   by the videos which he  has  produced.    The  contents  have  not  been
   produced to me in evidence.  I have heard no credible evidence  to  lead
   me to suppose that so long after the event the authorities in Iran  will
   pay any regard to them.

5.  It  is  now  suggested  that  the  claimant  had  produced  before  the
   adjudicator a still  photograph  showing  one  frame  from  that  video.
   There is no trace whatever of this on the adjudicator's  file,  although
   there  is  some  reference  to  videos  in  his  handwritten  record  of
   proceedings.  We  have  been  quite  unable  to  find  any  other  still
   photograph, and we regard as inconceivable that  an  adjudicator  of  Mr
   Mylne's experience who was presented with such a piece of evidence would
   not have made some record of it.

6. If the claimant had wished to  challenge  the  way  in  which  Mr  Mylne
   treated the evidence about the videos, then that is something which very
   much needed to be done in the grounds of appeal to us.    We  understand
   that his solicitors chose to  draft  those  themselves  (despite  having
   instructed experienced specialist counsel - not  on  that  occasion  Mrs
   Heller) to appear for the appellant before the  adjudicator.    If  that
   point had been taken in the grounds of appeal a copy of the  video,  and
   any apparently still in the claimant's hands  of  any  still  photograph
   produced, could have been called for, and arrangements could  have  been
   made for the Tribunal to view them.   A typed copy of the  adjudicator's
   record of proceedings could also have been called for.

7. It follows that if we were to deal with this  point  on  its  merits,  a
   substantial adjournment would have been required, which  is  discouraged
   by r. 40.2 of  the  2003  Procedure  Rules,  unless  the  appeal  cannot
   otherwise be justly determined. To see whether justice does require  the
   very late amendment of the grounds of appeal which this point would need
   if it were to be taken at all, we start by  looking  at  r.  20  of  the
   Procedure Rules:




       1.   A party may vary his grounds of appeal only with the permission
       of the Tribunal.
   2. Where the Tribunal has refused permission to appeal on any ground, it
       must not grant permission to vary the grounds of  appeal  to  include
       that  ground  unless  it  is  satisfied  that,  because  of   special
       circumstances, it would be unjust not to allow the variation.

8. In this case of course, permission was not refused on the basis  of  the
   video, or the still from it, because it was never sought on  that  basis
   in the first place.   We have to ask ourselves: should this claimant  be
   in any stronger position because that was  not  done?  In  our  view  he
   should not be.   No special circumstances have in our  view  been  shown
   why it would be unjust not to allow that amendment.   In  our  view  the
   interests of justice go the other way: the proper administration  of  it
   requires some finality and some order.  If this amendment were  allowed,
   it would in effect be open season for claimants to resurrect features of
   their individual cases which, on the considered judgment of their  legal
   advisers at the adjudicator stage, did not figure at all in  their  case
   for permission to appeal.   It follows  that  we  refuse  the  amendment
   sought. (Different considerations would of course apply to a point which
   had been taken in the original grounds of appeal, but not pronounced  on
   in the grant of permission).

9. That leaves  substantially  ground  1,  relating  to  the  adjudicator's
   claimed misunderstanding of the position of the Basij.    The claimant's
   case is put in more ingenious  terms  by  Mrs  Heller  in  her  skeleton
   argument, on  the  basis  of  what  is  said  to  be  confusion  by  the
   adjudicator between the Basiji Football Team, which we understand to  be
   the adjectival form of the name, and the organisation itself,  which  is
   the  Basij.    That  organisation  is  extremely  well  known   to   all
   adjudicators of any experience, of whom Mr Mylne is one.

10. The point is essentially based on  the  form  of  Mr  Mylne's  decision,
   which is if anything  over-elaborate  in  its  treatment  of  the  case.
   Instead of relating the appellant's case once only (usually the  version
   given in oral evidence at the hearing), and noting any  deviations  from
   that, which we should regard as the best practice, what Mr Mylne did was
   to give a full treatment of the appellant's case at each stage at  which
   it had been presented.

11. Mr Mylne's section 2 deals with the  claimant's  statement  of  evidence
   form of 17 November 2000.    He summarizes it as follows:

   The appellant at this time was a well known football  player  in  Tehran
   and one of the reasons that he was taken by  Spahah-e-Basdaraan  another
   security organisation was that they wanted him to play  for  a  football
   team called Basij for 2 years which count towards his military  service.
    For 4 years the appellant played in the Basij team although  under  the
   law he was only required to do 2 years military service.   One night  in
   June or July 1999 the appellant was asked to guard  a  weapon  depot  of
   Basij.


12. That is as far as we need go on that point, because, even from that,  it
   is clear the adjudicator had no reason to suppose that the Basij was  no
   more than a name of a football  team.  It  would  indeed  be  a  strange
   football team  that  was  in  possession  of  their  own  weapons  depot
   (desirable as that might seem to some, in view of  some  of  the  events
   which have taken place from time to time in western Europe).
13. Going on to section 3, that deals with the appellant's interview  of  20
   December 2000.  Here the claimant is expressly  quoted  as  saying  that
   "Basij were Islamist  militia".    Section  4  deals  with  the  refusal
   letter, where the Secretary of State is quoted as  accepting  that  "the
   appellant had been forced to join the Basij  football  team  instead  of
   completing his military service in the usual way".  It is only necessary
   to refer back to what we have already said about section 2 to show  that
   that  did  not  involve  any  misunderstanding  on  the  part   of   the
   adjudicator.

14. Section 5 deals with the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  adjudicator,  and
   nothing more turns on that.   Section 6 refers to the Basij, and to  the
   claimant saying in oral evidence that the Basij had sworn to kill him if
   he did not play for their football team.   Again,  we  do  not  see  any
   misunderstanding in that.   Section 7, dealing with the  claimant's,  or
   rather his counsel's submissions at the hearing, refers  to  his  having
   been "watched by the Basij" again a term more appropriate to a vigilante
   organisation than a mere football team.     There is a reference in  the
   adjudicator's unnumbered determination section to  "the  Basij  football
   team"; but it is clear  that  the  adjudicator  had  well  in  mind  the
   appellant's account, which he rejected about theft  of  weapons  at  the
   Basij depot; and equally clear that he was very well aware that this was
   far from being just, or even mainly a football team.

15. The final point made turns on the adjudicator's  subsidiary  finding  at
   page 10:

   Even if there  were  truth  in  the  appellant's  story,  his  political
   opinions have never been in issue, neither real  nor  imputed,  and  the
   worst that could be said against  his  failure  properly  to  guard  the
   weapons is one of negligence or of ineptitude.


   This is said to support the adjudicator's  claimed  misunderstanding  of
   the position of the Basij.  It was not however part of the adjudicator's
   credibility findings.  There was no question of  this  appellant  having
   held  political  opinions  of  any  conspicuous  kind,  as  they   would
   ordinarily be understood; but only in  terms  of  the  extended  meaning
   given to them under the Refuge Convention.  Again,  we  see  nothing  in
   that point to suggest that the adjudicator misunderstood the position of
   the Basij, as (at the very least) a semi-official armed body.

It follows that this appeal is dismissed.



                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman

                                      (approved for electronic distribution)


