
H-AF-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 16 June 2004            |        |VJ (Security forces -       |
|                           |        |Paramilitaries - Collusion -|
|                           |        |Informers) Colombia [2004]  |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00210                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|03 August 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein - Vice President                                 |
|Dr A U Chaudhry                                                   |
|Mr A F Sheward                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Ms C Kearney, Legal Representative of Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Ms P Ramachandran, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Colombia, has been granted permission  to
    appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr
    R J Manuell), who in a decision promulgated on 11 August 2003 dismissed
    his appeal on asylum grounds.

2.    In granting permission to appeal, the Vice President His Honour Judge
    N Huskinson, considered that the  grounds  of  appeal  raised  arguable
    matters as to the sustainability of the Adjudicator's  conclusion  that
    the Appellant would not face a real risk of persecution on return.

3.     The  Adjudicator  most  helpfully  and  succinctly  summarised   the
    Appellant's account in paragraphs 12 and 13 of his  determination  that
    we set out below:

         "12.     In summary the Appellant said that he had been  a  member
             of M-19 and  later  of  Corriente  de  Renovaction  Socialista
             ("CRS"), both illegal left-wing opposition groups  which  were
             subsequently rehabilitated and absorbed  into  the  mainstream
             political process.  From 1993 onwards,  the  Appellant  became
             implicated in legal  proceedings  brought  under  the  "Secret
             Justice System", intended to facilitate terrorist trials.   He
             was accused of kidnapping.  In 1995 the Appellant was arrested
             in company with FARC members  and  was  detained  for  a  year
             without charge having provided the police with a  false  name.
             After  he  learned  his  parents   had   been   placed   under
             surveillance and had received anonymous telephone threats,  he
             left Colombia in May 1997 on a false passport.


         13.       The  "Secret  Justice"  proceedings  continued  in   his
             absence, until 7th April 2002, when an Order was issued by the
             High Court in Bogota that the charges  against  the  Appellant
             were revoked and the arrest warrant cancelled.  The  Appellant
             maintains that despite the relevant Order, he  would  continue
             to be at risk from the military who instigated the charges and
             also from the paramilitaries."

4.     It  is  particularly  noteworthy,  that  at  paragraph  14  of   his
    determination the Adjudicator made the following clear observation:

         "The Appellant said that  his  name  still  appeared  in  military
         reports, where it was said that he was  a  member  of  FARC.   The
         situation in Colombia was worse than when he left seven years ago.
          There was no reason for him to feel safer, especially  given  his
         past experiences of state organisations.  He considered  he  would
         be unable to claim state protection.  He believed that he would be
         detained and killed if returned."  (The typed emphasis is ours).

5.    At paragraph 20 of his determination the Adjudicator found  that  the
    Appellant was "an articulate and  well  presented  man.   He  gave  his
    evidence clearly and confidently."  However the  Adjudicator  continued
    at paragraph 21 inter alia as follows:

         "In my  judgment  the  Appellant's  voluntary  disclosure  of  the
         cessation of the "Secret Justice" kidnap proceedings  against  him
         was strongly persuasive in itself to demonstrate the he should  be
         regarded  as  a  credible  witness,  since  that  disclosure   was
         tantamount to a declaration against interest and went to the heart
         of his claim.  Moreover the Appellant's evidence as to past events
         was corroborated by a large number of mainly legal documents whose
         authenticity was not expressly challenged by  the  Respondent  and
         also by evidence of Mrs Hernandez-Castro, who as  the  Appellant's
         former wife and the holder of Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  would
         have had no interest in perjuring herself and would certainly  not
         have wished to imperil her grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain  in
         the process.  The Appellant's testimony was in my  view  coherent,
         detailed and reasonably plausible." (Our emphasis).

6.    Significantly, the Adjudicator continued as follows:

         "I  accept  his  evidence,  as  I  have  summarised  it  above  at
         paragraphs 12 to 16  as  reliable  to  the  required  standard  of
         reasonable likelihood and so find."  (The emphasis is ours).

7.    We have decided to allow the appeal.

8.    It is apparent  that  the  Adjudicator  made  the  clearest  possible
    finding  and  accepted  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  name  still
    appearing in military reports referring to him as  a  member  of  FARC.
    However at paragraph 23 of his determination the Adjudicator made inter
    alia the following observation:

         "The Appellant said that he had been recorded as  a  FARC  member,
         but his fear of future difficulty because of that on his return to
         Colombia  seems  to  me  entirely  fanciful,  since  his  somewhat
         colourful  left-wing  political  past  was   well-known   to   the
         authorities and the Appellant was never charged or prosecuted  for
         FARC membership despite years of  legal  proceedings.   Additional
         charges in the Appellant's absence could have been brought as  the
         fact of the continuation of the other proceedings in  his  absence
         shows.  It is almost inconceivable and certainly  highly  unlikely
         that any such proceedings would now be commenced.   If  they  were
         commenced the Appellant  could  defend  them  as  he  denies  FARC
         membership."

9.    Ms Ramachandran informed us at the outset of the hearing that it  was
    clear that the Adjudicator had made an  error  in  law  by  making  two
    different findings.  She however asked for a remittal not least because
    of what she  described  as  an  "inconsistency"  in  the  Adjudicator's
    findings in this regard.

10.   We were not persuaded that  there  had  been  inconsistent  findings.
    Indeed it was apparent to us that the Adjudicator at paragraph  23  was
    in no sense contradicting his earlier finding that the Appellant's name
    still appeared on military reports where it was  said  that  he  was  a
    member of FARC.  All that the Adjudicator was doing was expressing  his
    view as to the reasons why the Appellant  notwithstanding  his  earlier
    finding, would not be at risk on  return.   Indeed  our  view  in  this
    regard is reinforced by the Adjudicator's observation at the outset  of
    paragraph 22 of his determination that:

         "The conclusions properly to  be  drawn  from  that  evidence  are
         however another matter entirely."

  11. Consistent with the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Oleed  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 1906 the Tribunal are permitted to examine the threat to the
      Appellant after the date of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  where
      there is something wrong with the determination.  We indeed find  the
      Adjudicator was wrong to conclude, not least  in  the  light  of  the
      objective material that was before him as well as his clear findings,
      that the Appellant would not be at risk on  return  in  circumstances
      where his name appeared on military reports showing him  to  a  be  a
      member of FARC.


  12. The Tribunal has this  appeal  before  it  and  must  determine  this
      matter, in the light  of  the  current  available  country  material.
      Indeed, in  [2004]  UKIAT  00032  DD  (Croatia)  a  starred  Tribunal
      decision chaired by the President, it was held that the  Tribunal  is
      not  required  to  find,  in  order  to  allow  an  appeal  that  the
      Adjudicator was plainly or obviously wrong in the  appraisal  of  the
      background material as compared to an appraisal  of  the  Appellant's
      testimony.  The President pointed out that the reference in Oleed was
      the need to show that a decision was plainly or  obviously  wrong  to
      the degree of error necessary for interference with findings of  fact
      in the absence of further evidence which related to  the  credibility
      and personal circumstances of a claimant.  It did not concern  itself
      at all with findings and conclusions in relation to the assessment of
      country conditions and risk  on  return  where  consistency  and  the
      Tribunal's guidance was important.

13.   Ms Kearney vigorously opposed the notion that the  appeal  should  be
    remitted and in so doing  rightly  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  were
    entitled to reach its own findings on the country  information  bearing
    in mind the very clear findings of fact and strong credibility findings
    made by the Adjudicator. She rightly submitted that  someone  perceived
    to be linked to the FARC, such as the Appellant would  be  at  risk  on
    return from the military and indeed paramilitaries.

   14.Ms Kearney rightly rejected the further submission of Ms Ramachandran
   that one purpose of remittal would  be  to  attempt  to  garner  further
   information as to whether or not the Appellant was truly recorded  as  a
   member of FARC,  in  circumstances  when  the  Adjudicator  had  clearly
   accepted that he was so recorded.


   15.We were persuaded by Ms Kearney's submission  that  the  fact  of  no
   legal action having been taken against the Appellant as  a  FARC  member
   whilst he was in Colombia did not in any way undermine the issue of risk
   on return, because as found by the Adjudicator, persecutory legal action
   had already been taken against the Appellant on the very serious  charge
   of kidnapping under the "Secret Justice" system.   The  mere  fact  that
   further charges were not taken against the Appellant did not in any  way
   mean he would not be at such risk on return.


   16.We agree with  Ms  Kearney  that  a  key  point  in  the  Appellant's
   particular circumstances, is that he was subjected to persecutory action
   between 1993 and 2002 which demonstrates clear and  strong  interest  in
   the Appellant even when he was out of the country between 1997 and 2002.




   17.In such circumstances, we agree with Ms Kearney  that  there  are  no
   grounds for believing that interest in the Appellant on the part of  the
   military would simply fall away because those proceedings had collapsed.
    The fact that they had collapsed might, as Ms Kearney submitted,  cause
   the military to take expedited action against the  Appellant  once  they
   were made aware of his return.


   18.Ms Kearney continued there was indeed present  conflict  between  the
   military and left wing groups in Colombia.  Under the current government
   there had been an increased clampdown by the military supported  by  the
   government against those thought to be connected with or members of FARC
   or other guerrilla groups.

19.   Ms Kearney submitted that the reality was that if the Appellant  were
    simply returned to any area within Colombia, questions would be  likely
    to be asked as to  his  identity,  where  he  had  come  from  and  his
    background.  She submitted that there were  currently  in  Colombia,  a
    network of informers working with the paramilitary groups who had clear
    links to the military.

20.   Ms Kearney's submissions in this regard were indeed supported by  the
    objective material to which we were referred.

21.   The BBC News report of 6 May 2004 quoted a local  councillor  in  the
    town of Saravena near Colombia's frontier with Venezuela as stating  as
    follows:

         "And worst of all is the fear.  People  dare  not  even  complain,
         because they know there are informers everywhere."


22.   A member of the local Human Rights Body was quoted as stating:


         "The authorities round people up and then get informers  from  the
         right-wing  paramilitary  groups,  wearing  hoods,   to   identify
         guerrilla sympathisers."


23.   More particularly we note that the Amnesty  International  report  of
    2004  under  the  subheading  "Government  Seeks   Accommodation   with
    Paramilitarism" states as follows:

         "There  was  also  concern  that   many   of   the   'demobilized'
         paramilitaries could be allowed to join  private  security  firms,
         civilian informer networks and the army  of  'peasant  soldiers'."
         (The emphasis is ours).

  24. It follows that in the light of such informer networks, as Ms Kearney
      submitted, information would get back to the police  who  apart  from
      seeking to question the Appellant themselves would be likely to  pass
      on the information to the paramilitaries.


  25. Indeed we note that there was evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  and
      current evidence of strong links between  the  security  forces,  the
      police  and  the  paramilitaries  as  exemplified  by   the   Amnesty
      International report which refers to:

         "Credible  reports  pointing  to  the  ongoing  consolidation   of
         paramilitary forces in heavily militarised  areas  and  indicating
         strong collusion between paramilitaries and the security forces."

  26. The report of the UNHCR of  13  April  2004  states,  "Of  particular
      concern  were  allegations  regarding  the  continuing   relationship
      between public servants and paramilitary groups, as well as continued
      impunity."


  27. We further note that such reports are  reinforced  within  the  April
      CIPU Country Report where in making reference  to  the  strong  links
      between the military and the paramilitary refers  to  such  links  in
      terms of the sharing of information.

28.   The US State Department Report released in 25 February 2004 talks  of
    serious  concerns  on  the  issue  of  such   collaboration   and   the
    consequences in terms of unlawful killings, stating:

         "Despite ceasefires declared  in  the  context  of  demobilisation
         negotiations conducted by the AUC - an  umbrella  organisation  of
         different paramilitary terrorist groups  -  with  the  Government,
         these  terrorists  continued  to  commit  numerous  unlawful   and
         political killings, including of labour leaders, often  kidnapping
         and torturing suspected guerrilla sympathisers prior to  executing
         them."

29.   The April 2004 CIPU Report notes at paragraph 6.2 that  according  to
    the Human Rights Watch  report  of  January  2004,  a  new  legislation
    approved in December 2003 gave:

         "... the military the power to arrest, tap  telephones  and  carry
         out searches without warrants  or  any  previous  judicial  order,
         taking  Colombia  a  significant  step  backwards.   It   directly
         contravenes  Colombia's  international  commitments  as  well   as
         repeated recommendations  made  by  the  office  of  the  UN  High
         Commissioner for Human Rights."

30.   Paragraph 6.3 of the same report CIPU notes that:

         "So far, President Alvaro Uribe has  failed  to  break  continuing
         ties between units of the security forces and  paramilitaries  and
         has failed to  ensure  that  the  perpetrators  of  crime  against
         humanity and  serious  human  rights  violations  are  brought  to
         justice."

31.   We agree with Ms Kearney that in  such  circumstances  the  increased
    powers of the military in  Colombia  are  directly  relevant  to  their
    ability to act against this Appellant in his particular  circumstances.



32.   Ms Ramachandran was most fair in recognising that if, as we are,  the
    Tribunal were unpersuaded by her submissions in  support  of  remittal,
    then she recognised that in the light of the  objective  material,  not
    least that which  was  before  the  Adjudicator,  his  observations  at
    paragraph 23 of his determination were not supported by  the  objective
    material, and that in the light of his earlier findings, the  Appellant
    would, not least to the lower standard, clearly  be  at  real  risk  on
    return.

33.   For the above reasons, we find that the Appellant has discharged  the
    burden laid upon him to the lower standard and has  demonstrated  there
    to be a reasonable chance or a serious possibility  that  he  would  be
    persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason if he  is  now  returned  to
    Colombia.

34.   We therefore reverse the Adjudicator's decision and allow the appeal.
                                                               N H GOLDSTEIN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

Approved for electronic distribution.
