

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 18 June 2004            |        | SJ (no real risk) Jamaica  |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00202          |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21 July 2004                                                      |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Ms V S Street                                                     |
|Mrs S I Hewitt                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us the appellant was represented by Mr G Gill of Counsel,  instructed
by Murria Solicitors and the respondent was represented  y  Mr  J  Jones,  a
Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  He was born on 18 January  1977  and
so is  now  27  years  old.   The  appellant  appeals  the  decision  of  an
Adjudicator, Mr J B McCarthy, who in his  determination  promulgated  on  23
July 2003 dismissed his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State that he is not entitled to refugee status and that removing  him  from
the United Kingdom was  not  contrary  to  his  rights  under  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.


The appellant was given permission to appeal because it  was  arguable  that
there were inconsistencies or contradictions in the Adjudicator's findings.


At paragraph 17 of the determination the  Adjudicator  said  that  from  the
evidence he reviewed  he  concluded  "first,  although  I  accept  that  the
appellant has shown that he has  suffered  discrimination  because  of  this
sexuality, this had not prevented him working.  I conclude that he was  able
to successfully conceal his homosexuality in Jamaica from  the  majority  of
people".


However at paragraph 12 of the determination the Adjudicator accepted  as  a
fact that the appellant had been identified by a homosexual and attacked  by
youths  as  a  consequence  in  December  2000.   At  paragraph  13  of  the
determination the Adjudicator accepted as fact that in  September  2002  the
appellant was identified as a homosexual by police officers who had  stopped
the car in which he was travelling and subjected him to "homophobic  abuse".
 At paragraph 14 of the determination the Adjudicator accepted  that  on  17
December  2002  the  appellant's  partner  was  attacked  in  his  home  and
seriously assaulted before his credit cards and  debit  cards  were  stolen.
The appellant's aunt, who was also his landlady, and his father heard  about
the incident and  realised  that  the  appellant  was  homosexual  and  made
threats.  The appellant's aunt said that  she  would  disclose  him  to  his
workplace and his family.


Additionally at paragraph 15 of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  found
that the appellant had suffered discrimination from many  sources  and  that
he had tried to cover up who is was in order to fit into what  he  described
as an "exclusively homophobic" society.


With respect we understand why it is thought  that  there  was  an  arguable
error in the  determination.   The  claimant's  efforts  at  concealing  his
sexuality had not been entirely successful.  However we  have  come  to  the
conclusion that although his apparent contradiction  does  not  enhance  the
determination it is not a material error of law.


It is clear that the Adjudicator has addressed his mind  to  the  degree  of
disquiet and even contempt that many people  in  Jamaica  feel  and  exhibit
towards homosexual activity.  It is also  clear  that  the  Adjudicator  has
accepted that this  appellant  has  been  the  victim  of  unpleasant  acts,
sometimes very unpleasant acts, that have been  made  worse  because  he  is
homosexual.


However  the  Adjudicator  has  made  clear  findings  of  fact  about   the
particular incidents that the appellant relied on to support his claim.


The first incident  in  time  was  in  December  2000.   The  appellant  was
returning home on a lonely road when he had to stop  to  mend  his  bicycle.
Three men came over to him and said they had heard  a  rumour  that  he  was
gay.  They then attacked the appellant.  A shopkeeper helped him  by  giving
him his taxi fare to the police station.  The  police  were  told  that  the
appellant had been robbed and they responded helpfully.  The  appellant  did
not have the confidence to tell them that he was homosexual.


The next incident was in September  2002  when  the  appellant  was  in  the
company of gay friends returning from a party in  the  early  hours  of  the
morning.  Two members of the police force stopped  the  car  in  which  they
were travelling.  They indicated that the appellant  and  his  friends  were
either gunmen or gay.  The police officers searched them and took out  their
guns and  threatened  the  appellant  and  his  friends  because  they  were
homosexuals.  The threats were nasty.  One of the officers  produced  a  gun
and said that he wanted to kill "batty boys" which is  a  well  known  slang
term for homosexuals in Jamaica.  They were also warned to move out  of  the
area.  We do not minimise how unpleasant this must have been but  we  cannot
accept that this was in any way a serious threat to the appellant.   If  the
officers had wanted to do him harm then they had the opportunity.  They  did
not.  We do not  accept  that  the  appellant  really  thought  that  police
officers were intent on killing him or driving him from the  area  in  which
he lived.


The next incident, which is the one that  prompted  him  to  leave  Jamaica,
happened in December 2002.  A criminal came to the door  and  was  let  into
the home by the appellant's partner whose  credit  cards  were  stolen.   As
indicated above the appellant's  aunt  and  landlady  found  out  about  his
sexual desires and said she would shame him at his work  place  and  to  his
family and the appellant's father said that he would hire a man to kill  the
appellant.  We do realise that this rejection by  his  relatives  must  have
been very hurtful to the appellant but there is no evidence that  there  was
any serious intent on the part of his father do him really serious harm.


We do not understand the Adjudicator's conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
been able  to  hide  his  homosexuality  but  we  do  not  accept  that  the
adjudicator should have concluded that the appellant faces a  real  risk  of
persecution or other serious ill treatment because  of  his  sexuality.   We
were referred to the well know decision of Dawkins [2003] EWHC  373  (Admin)
were the learned Judge  indicated  that  a  citizen  of  Jamaica  would  not
normally be at risk just because of his homosexuality.  We have  been  shown
the section headed "Homosexuals" in the  Jamaica  2004  CIPU  Report.   This
emphasises how there is much popular hostility towards homosexuals  and  how
a Jamaican homosexual pressure group is seeking to have the law  changed  so
that sexual acts between homosexuals are not criminal  offences.   The  same
report shows how attacks on homosexuals are becoming more frequent.  We  are
aware that there have been some examples of homosexual  men  being  savagely
ill treated in conditions reminiscent of the old "hue and cry".


Even so we do not see any reason for the Adjudicator to have concluded  that
homosexuals generally or this appellant in particular faced a real  risk  of
really serious ill treatment.  This appellant has not  been  the  victim  of
any systemised attacks.  He has told  of  only  one  occasion  when  he  was
actually injured and robbed.  There is no evidence before us  to  show  that
the police in  Jamaica  are  disinterested  or  would  not  act  to  help  a
homosexual who looked to them for protection.


We see no basis for concluding that this appellant could not be expected  to
live safely in Jamaica and we dismiss this appeal.







                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                                18 June 2004

