
ar               HO (National Records) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT00038



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing :  4 February  2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                5 March 2004

                                   Before:


                           Mr P R Lane (Chairman)
                              Mr  F T Jamieson







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant : Mr S. Harding, counsel, instructed by Trott &  Gentry
For the respondent : Mr G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals  with  permission  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator,  Miss  F.E.  Barrie,  sitting  at
      Hatton Cross, in which  she  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
      on 22 October 2001 to refuse the appellant leave to enter  the  United
      Kingdom.

2.    The appellant's claim was summarised by the Adjudicator at  paragraphs
      11 to 14  of  her  determination.    The  appellant  came  from  Antep
      province in South East Turkey, where his family owned a  farm.  During
      his childhood, the appellant remembered PKK guerrillas staying at  the
      family home and being given food and clothing. In November 1997,  when
      the appellant  was  eighteen,  he  was  herding  sheep,  when  he  was
      approached by eight armed guerrillas who threatened him and stole  one
      of the sheep. The following month, the same guerrillas approached  him
      and asked him to buy them cigarettes and other items.  The  appellant,
      under duress, went to the village to buy these goods and  returned  to
      the mountains to give them to the guerrillas.

3.    The appellant thought that someone in the village must have seen  them
      do this and told the army. The Adjudicator then notes the  claim  that
      the two brothers  of  the  appellant,  Osman  and  Ibrahim,  had  been
      involved in assisting the PKK and had left  Turkey  in,  respectively,
      1998 and 1999.

4.    The appellant was arrested during the summer of 1998 on  suspicion  of
      assisting the  PKK.  He  was  questioned  about  this  and  about  the
      whereabouts of Osman. During that detention  he  was  ill-treated  but
      released without charge on the following day.

5.    In November or December 1998 the  appellant  was  again  arrested  and
      interrogated about his brother's whereabouts and his own  support  for
      the PKK.  Once again, he was ill-treated but released  without  charge
      on the following day.

6.    In May 1999 the appellant commenced his  military  service,  which  he
      completed  in  November  2000.  He  said  that  he  had   'experienced
      difficulties during his service on account of his  Kurdish  ethnicity'
      (determination, paragraph 13).

7.    On 1 April 2001, the  appellant  was  not  at  home.  Three  gendarmes
      parked their jeep in fields belonging to the appellant's  family.   On
      returning to the vehicle, it exploded, killing two of the officers and
      injuring the third. The authorities were aware that the land was owned
      by the appellant's family, who had previously shown  support  for  the
      PKK.

8.    The appellant was  visiting  his  sister  in  Antep  City.   His  aunt
      informed him about the  explosion.   She  said  his  father  had  been
      arrested, the family home raided and that the army were searching  for
      the appellant.  The appellant's father was released after three  days,
      without charge.

9.    The appellant travelled to Istanbul where  he  stayed  for  1�  months
      before travelling to the United Kingdom  with  the  assistance  of  an
      agent. Whilst expressing willingness to assist  the  authorities  with
      their enquiries regarding the explosion, the appellant considered that
      because  of  his  family's  background,  he  would  be  subjected   to
      persecutory treatment on return.

10.   At paragraph 2 of  her  determination,  the  Adjudicator  set  out  at
      length her consideration of the evidence and findings of fact.

11.   The Adjudicator did not believe the appellant's account of how he  and
      his family had assisted the PKK and how he himself had  been  arrested
      on two occasions (paragraph 22(iii)).  The reason  she  so  found  was
      because the appellant's evidence in  this  respect  was  significantly
      inconsistent. At interview  the  appellant  made  no  mention  of  his
      family's support for the PKK, nor did he indicate that he himself  had
      in any way been threatened by the PKK. In his statement,  however,  he
      referred to the PKK having come and stayed at the family home on 'many
      occasions' and that the PKK had threatened to kill him if he  did  not
      do what they asked, during his encounters with him in 1997.

12.   The appellant was asked in cross-examination  why  he  had  failed  to
      mention in interview that the PKK had regularly stayed  at  his  home.
      He replied to the effect that he had not been asked about this matter.
      The Adjudicator 'did  not  find  the  appellant's  explanation  to  be
      satisfactory and I do not believe that he would have  failed  to  have
      mentioned a fact as significant  as his family's connection  with  the
      PKK and a threat to his life if  indeed  this  were  true'  (paragraph
      22(iii).

13.   The Adjudicator also noted that, although  the  appellant  claimed  to
      have been seen by villagers helping  the  PKK  in  1997,  he  was  not
      arrested until the summer of 1998.   Furthermore,  despite  the  claim
      that the family had been accommodating the PKK for 'many  years,'  the
      appellant had not experienced any difficulties  with  the  authorities
      prior to 1998.

14.   At paragraph 22(iv), the Adjudicator repeated that she 'did  not  find
      the appellant's account to be credible and I do not  believe  that  he
      was involved in assisting the PKK'.  Although the  grounds  of  appeal
      contend that it is unclear whether the Adjudicator has made a  finding
      that the appellant was arrested on two occasions in 1998, the Tribunal
      finds that the only proper reading of the determination  is  that  she
      did not believe the appellant had been so arrested. This is reinforced
      by the remaining passage in paragraph 22(iv),  where  the  Adjudicator
      'irrespective of my findings' goes on to note that the  appellant  had
      only bought cigarettes and food for the PKK on two isolated occasions,
      that he was not a member of any political party, had never taken  part
      in political activities, had not previously come to the  attention  of
      the authorities and was released on both occasions within  twenty-four
      hours, without charge and without any reporting conditions.  Thus,  as
      an alternative finding, the Adjudicator concluded that the  appellant,
      even on his own  evidence  'was  of  no  continuing  interest  to  the
      authorities'.

15.   At paragraph 22(v) the Adjudicator turned to  the  incident  involving
      the jeep on 1 April 2001. The Adjudicator observed that the  appellant
      was not even in the area at the time of  the  explosion  and  that  he
      could therefore have provided  evidence  to  eliminate  him  from  the
      enquiries of the authorities. The Adjudicator further noted  that  the
      appellant's  father,  whom  he  claimed  had  actively  supported  and
      sheltered the PKK on many occasions, was himself released after  three
      days of detention, following the  explosion.   'Although  during  [the
      father's detention] he was apparently kicked and slapped it was not at
      any point  suggested  that  he  was  subjected  to  torture  from  the
      authorities. I further  found  it  significant  that  the  appellant's
      father continues to live in the village  without  apparent  difficulty
      and I note that there was no evidence that the appellant continues  to
      be "wanted" by the authorities or indeed  that  there  is  any  arrest
      warrant outstanding in his name.'

16.   The grounds of appeal contend that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  have
      regard to the appellant's claim that his father is 'old' and that 'his
      father told him that the authorities were looking for him'.

17.   The Tribunal does not consider that these criticisms have  any  merit.
      Whether or not the appellant regards his father as old, it appears  he
      was born in 1946 and was thus 55 at the time of the explosion. In  any
      event, there is an inherent contradiction here  in  the  evidence  put
      forward by the appellant. On the  one  hand,  he  contends  that  even
      slight suspicion that a person is involved with the PKK is  enough  to
      bring  upon  a  person  the  persecutory  attention  of  the   Turkish
      authorities. On the other, he would have had the  Adjudicator  believe
      that, faced with a family headed by the appellant's  father,  who  was
      known to the authorities to have supported the  PKK,  and  upon  whose
      land several gendarmes had been murdered, the authorities would merely
      take the father in for questioning for a brief period and then release
      him without charge. By contrast, however, the Adjudicator was asked to
      believe that those same authorities not only had an  interest  in  the
      immediate aftermath of the explosion in questioning the appellant, but
      would still have an interest in doing  so,  were  he  to  be  returned
      today.  Accordingly, as the Adjudicator  herself  found  at  paragraph
      22(vi), there must be significant doubt as to whether the  authorities
      would wish to question the appellant about the jeep incident, assuming
      he was today returned to Turkey.

18.   At paragraph 22(viii), the Adjudicator reiterated  that  she  did  not
      believe the centrepiece of the appellant's evidence but, rather  'that
      he has  substantially  exaggerated  and  embellished  his  account  on
      matters which go to the core of his claim.'

19.   At paragraph 22(ix) the Adjudicator  began  her  analysis  of  whether
      'irrespective of my findings on credibility' the appellant's  position
      on return to Turkey would be such as to place him  at  real  risk.  In
      particular, she observed the constitutional reforms  approved  by  the
      Turkish Parliament on 3 August 2002 and  the  General  Election  of  3
      November 2002, together with the reported inactivity of the PKK during
      2000 and its reconstitution as KADEK in April 2002.

20.   At paragraph 22(xiii), having again set out the salient evidence,  the
      Adjudicator concluded 'that the appellant is not  someone  who  is  of
      interest to the authorities on  suspicion  of  terrorist  activities',
      notwithstanding the jeep incident. She did  not  'accept  that  he  is
      suspected of involvement in the explosion because of his perceived PKK
      sympathies'. At the  most,  if  the  authorities  did  still  want  to
      question him about the jeep, given that the family owned the  land  on
      which the incident occurred, 'his father's release  after  three  days
      and the absence of  any  ongoing  difficulties  are,  in  my  opinion,
      indicative of the fact that the  authorities  would  have  no  adverse
      interest in the appellant once he had given them his  account  of  his
      whereabouts'.

21.   Mr  Harding  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's  adverse  credibility
      finding in  relation  to  the  family's  PKK  involvement  was  flawed
      because, at page A11  of  the  interview  record,  the  appellant  had
      indicated that his brothers came to  the  United  Kingdom  because  of
      'pressure', having been  repeatedly  detained  and  beaten.  This,  he
      contended, was an allusion to their political involvement. He  further
      contended that it was an obligation on  the  interviewing  officer  to
      pursue the matter, so as to elicit a full and fair account.

22.   The Tribunal does not  accept  that  the  appellant's  assertion  that
      pressure  was  put  on  his  brothers  necessarily  implies  that  the
      appellant was contending that those brothers were  involved  with  the
      PKK.  The appellant was attended by  his  own  representative  at  the
      interview.   As  the  record  makes  plain,  the  appellant  had   the
      opportunity of saying anything  further  which  he  considered  to  be
      relevant.

23.   Mr Harding's second submission was that there was no clear finding  by
      the Adjudicator as to whether she believed that  the  1998  detentions
      had occurred. As we have already stated, however, it  appears  to  the
      Tribunal to be axiomatic that the Adjudicator's  primary  finding  was
      that the Adjudicator did not believe the account of the detentions  in
      1998.

24.   As for the 2001 incident involving the  jeep,  the  treatment  of  the
      appellant's father,  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  terrorist
      incident, is plainly relevant in assessing what  would  be  reasonably
      likely to happen to the appellant today, were he to return to his home
      area. If the authorities had had any significant ongoing  interest  in
      the appellant, it is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  would  have
      initiated   some   form   of    formal    investigative    procedures.
      Notwithstanding that the appellant was in touch with his father  after
      leaving home, there is no evidence that the authorities have taken out
      an arrest warrant or served any summons on the appellant at  his  last
      known address, namely, the family home.

25.   Against this background, and having regard  to  the  findings  of  the
      Tribunal in ACDOG [2003] UKIAT 00034, there would plainly be  no  risk
      today, were the appellant to be returned to Turkey. He has never  been
      detained by the authorities. Those authorities are not looking for him
      in connection with the  jeep  incident.  Although  he  is  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity and is likely to be identified by the immigration  officials
      at Istanbul Airport as a  returning  failed  asylum  seeker  from  the
      United Kingdom (assuming that he is not in  possession  of  a  Turkish
      passport, on return) a reading of the CIPU Assessment, in the form  in
      which it was before the Tribunal in ACDOG,  and  as  analysed  by  the
      Tribunal at paragraphs 42 to 46 of their determination, makes it plain
      that the likelihood of the appellant's finding himself in the hands of
      the Anti-Terror Branch of the police (where persecutory  treatment  is
      likely) falls well short of anything that can be categorised as a real
      risk.

26.   By the same token, the appellant's return to his home is today  highly
      unlikely to result in his being detained and subjected to treatment of
      such a serious kind as to constitute persecution or treatment contrary
      to Article 3 of the ECHR.

27.   Let us, however, assume that we are wrong, both  in  our  findings  in
      relation to the appellant's detentions in 1998 and the  relative  lack
      of interest that would be shown by the authorities  in  the  appellant
      regarding the jeep incident of 2001, were the authorities in his  home
      area to discover that he had returned there today.

28.   In recent years, the focus of enquiry in relation to  risk  on  return
      has, in Turkish cases, focused on what is reasonably likely to  happen
      to a Turkish citizen removed from the United Kingdom, upon his or  her
      arrival at  Istanbul  Airport.  In  paragraph  23  of  the  Tribunal's
      determination in  ACDOG,  Mr  Grieves,  counsel  for  certain  of  the
      claimants in that case

             'argued that this was the essential point at which if problems
             were going to occur they would occur. He based this  upon  the
             existence  of  the   Central   Information   System,   usually
             abbreviated as GBTS, which is available to the Turkish  state.
             This is described at paragraph 5.62 of the CIPU report  [April
             2003].  It is said that the  system  stores  various  personal
             data, including information on  outstanding  arrest  warrants,
             previous arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,  possible
             draft evasion or refusal to perform military service  and  tax
             arrears.  Sentences which have been served  are  in  principle
             removed  from  the  system  and  entered  into  the   national
             accessible Judicial Records'.

29.   At paragraph 42 of ACDOG the Tribunal stated that 'it  will  be  clear
      from our assessment of the general issues above  that  we  agree  that
      there is a real risk of any history a person has of previous  arrests,
      outstanding arrest warrants, criminal records or judicial  preliminary
      enquiries  or  investigations  by  the  police  or  gendarme  will  be
      contained on the GBTS computer system'.

30.   Paragraph 5.39 of the October 2003 CIPU tells us about the GBTS:

            '5.39 Turkey has a central information  system,  known  as  the
                 Genel Bilgi Toplama Sistemi (General Information  Gathering
                 System), usually abbreviated as GBTS.   The  system  stores
                 various  personal   data.   For   instance,   it   contains
                 information  on  outstanding  arrest   warrants,   previous
                 arrests, restrictions  on  travel  abroad,  possible  draft
                 evasion or refusal to  perform  military  service  and  tax
                 arrears.    Sentences  which  have  been  served   are   in
                 principle removed from the  system  and  entered  into  the
                 national accessible Judicial Records (Adli Sicil)'.

31.   The source for this  information  is  stated  to  be  the  Netherlands
      Ministry of Foreign Affairs Report of July  2001  on  'Turkey/Military
      Service'.

32.   The last sentence of paragraph 5.39 states that the GBTS  is  operated
      by 'the Smuggling Intelligence and Data Collection Department'  within
      the Ministry of Interior'.

33.   The source for that sentence, and  for  paragraphs  5.40  to  5.43  is
      recorded in Annex I to the CIPU Report as 'Message 23 December 2003'.

34.   Mr Saunders, for the  respondent,  placed  before  the  Tribunal  copy
      documents which explain what  the 'message' in question  actually  is.
      The first document is a copy of a letter of 21 August  2003  from  the
      Home Office Country Information and Policy Unit to the British Embassy
      in Ankara.  The writer  of  the  letter  states  that  he  or  she  is
      currently in the process of writing the Country Report on  Turkey  and
      requires further information on the GBTS computer system. The specific
      questions put to the Embassy were these:

             '(i)      What exactly is recorded on the GBTS system?


             (ii)      How long does this information stay on the system?


             (iii)     If a person has  served  their  sentence  are  their
                 details still recorded on the system?


             (iv)      Does it list  previous  arrests/convictions  or  any
                 outstanding arrest warrants?


             (v) In Turkey  there  is  a  distinction  between  arrest  and
                 detain, which of these is recorded on the GBTS system?'

35.   The reply from the Embassy on 3 September 2003 reads as follows:

         'In Turkey the GBT (Genel Bilgi Toplama  -  General  Data  or  Info
         Collection) is operated by the  'Smuggling  Intelligence  and  Data
         Collection Department' within the Ministry of Interior.


         1.  Cases registered in the GBT are as follows:
Persons who have committed a crime and are being sought but  who  remain  at
large;


Persons who  have  committed  a  serious  crime  such  as  organised  crime,
smuggling, narcotics related crime, terrorism, murder, fraud


Persons who are sought  and in respect of whom an 'in absentia' warrant  for
their arrest or detention is held;


Persons of responsibility within political parties who have  been  convicted
of crimes defined in the Political Parties Law No. 2908, article 4/4;


Stolen,  lost,  appropriated  motor   vehicles,   firearms,   identification
documents


         2.      Data  are  erased  from  the  system  under  the  following
           circumstances :


Upon the death of a person convicted of a crime by a court;


As soon as a court decision of non-pursuit,  acquittal  or  expiry  of  time
limitation reaches the TNP regarding a person who was previously  registered
with the GBT;


In case of a crime other  than  those  listed  above,  when  the  person  is
caught;


In case of stolen/lost/appropriated property, when the property in  question
is found.


         3.      The  data  of  persons  who  have  committed  the    above-
              mentioned serious crimes  are  retained  even  if  they  have
              already served their sentences.


         4.    Only the latest warrant of arrest is held on file. The others
              are cancelled.


         5.   In Turkey, information about convicted persons  is  stored  at
              the Judicial Registry Office (Adli Sicil Mudurlukleri) rather
              than the GBT.


         6.     In Turkey, law enforcement agents can detain,  but  a  court
              decision is needed to arrest  somebody.  In  some  cases  law
              enforcement agencies can,  ex  officio,  take  somebody  into
              custody but in these cases they are under  an  obligation  to
              inform the Prosecutor within 24 hours.


         7.     In cases where there is  an  ongoing  investigation  by  the
              judicial authorities or a court  case,  the  data  about  the
              persons involved are also  kept.  Records  are  not  kept  of
              persons who are taken into custody but who  are  subsequently
              released by the law enforcement agency.'


36.   The remaining documents supplied by Mr Saunders concern the source  of
      the Reply from the Embassy.  That source is a letter dated 3 September
      2003 from Omer Dayan a '2 Class Commissioner' writing on behalf of the
      'Head of the Department Deputy for Anti-Smuggling and Organised Crimes
      Department'. The heading at the top of  the  letter  is  'REPUBLIC  OF
      TURKEY, MINISTRY OF INTERIOR TURKISH NATIONAL POLICE, KCM,  DEPARTMENT
      OF ANTI-SMUGGLING AND ORGANISED CRIME'.

37.   The quotations in the preceding paragraph, taken from the letter,  are
      drawn from the English translation thereof, supplied by  Mr  Saunders,
      along with the Turkish original. As translated, the substance  of  the
      letter is as follows:

             'In our country, the GBT (GIG-General  Information  Gathering)
             system has been operated by  the  Anti-Smuggling  Intelligence
             and Information Department under the Ministry of Interior.'

             Regarding your questions:

             1.   In the GBT system records of following are being kept  as
                 a general Record of people who committed crime but has  not
                 been caught;  those who  committed  crimes  like  organised
                 crimes,  smuggling  crimes,  drug  related  crimes,  terror
                 related crimes, unlawful seizure, murder, fraudulent trade,
                 people who have search warrants about or arrest warrants in
                 their default;  people who are barred from public services,
                 missing persons; association management  committee  members
                 who are found  guilty  according  to  the  Article  4/4  of
                 Association Law, 2908;  records of motor vehicles which are
                 stolen or missed or unlawfully seized; records  related  to
                 fire arms and records of documents which prove identity.


             2.  Records of people who are found guilty  and  sentenced  of
                 above crimes are kept until their death.  Likewise, records
                 of people who are acquitted  or  places  against  them  are
                 being abated as a result of decision made not to  prosecute
                 or time limitations, are  erased  as  soon  as  a  decision
                 reaches to the security forces.  In other crimes  in  which
                 the  records  of  criminals  being  kept  are  erased,  the
                 person's capture and the records of stolen or missed  goods
                 are deleted after the items are being found.


             3. Records of people who committed crimes mentioned in  clause
                 1 are kept even if they spend their time.


             4.  In the GBT system, only the most  recent  arrest  warrants
                 are taken into board and the rest are avoided.


             5.  Information about people who  are  convicted  is  kept  by
                 Judicial Record Directorate which  is  different  than  GBT
                 system.


             6.   In our country detention is  being  carried  out  by  the
                 security  forces  whereas  arrest  is  a  court   decision.
                 Nonetheless  the  police  can  detain  a  person  on  their
                 initiative but has to  inform  Public  Prosecutor's  Office
                 within 24 hours.


             7.  Only records of people who are under judicial  proceedings
                 are judicial examination by the judiciary are being kept in
                 the GBT system. No records of people are being kept in  the
                 system who  are  detained  and  released  by  the  security
                 forces.'

38.   As will be apparent, the key feature of this new information  is  that
      the GBTS, contrary to what had  previously  been  generally  supposed,
      does not in fact contain records of persons who are  detained  by  the
      security forces but subsequently released without charge  and  without
      any warrant being involved.

39.   Paragraphs 6.95 and 6.96 of the October 2003 CIPU Assessment reads  as
      follows:

           '6.95 The criminal records of Turkish-Kurdish asylum seekers who
                 are returned to Turkey are checked on entry just like those
                 of  other  Turkish  nationals.  The  records  may   concern
                 criminal convictions by a Turkish court, but  can  also  be
                 related  to  official  judicial  preliminary  enquiries  or
                 investigations by the police of  gendarme.   Draft  evaders
                 and deserters are also on record at the border posts.


           6.96   If a person  is  found  to  have  a  criminal  record  or
                 incorrect border-crossing documents, to  have  left  Turkey
                 illegally  in  the  past  or  been  expelled  from  another
                 country, the Turkish border authorities  often  interrogate
                 the person concerned.  Questioning  is  often  intended  to
                 establish or check personal particulars,  reasons  for  and
                 time of departure from Turkey, grounds for seeking  asylum,
                 reasons why the  application  was  rejected,  any  criminal
                 records  at  home  and  abroad,  including   (drug-related)
                 offences and possible contacts with  illegal  organisations
                 abroad. If, however, there is no definite suspicion,  as  a
                 rule a person is released after an average of six  to  nine
                 hours' detention.'

40.   Paragraph 6.97 of the assessment then tells us that 'anyone  suspected
      of having committed criminal offences is transferred to  the  relevant
      investigatory authority. In Istanbul  this  is  generally  the  Police
      Headquarters, which is  located  in  Pkikoy,  not  far  from  airport.
      Persons  suspected  of  membership  of  the  PKK,  left-wing   radical
      organisations such as the DHKP-C or TKP-ML, militant  Islamic  groups,
      or anyone suspected of giving support  of  shelter  to  one  of  those
      organisation is handed over to the Anti-Terror Branch, which is housed
      in the police HQ mentioned above. Torture or ill treatment of suspects
      at the Police Anti-Terror Branch cannot be ruled out'.

41.   The source for paragraphs 6.95 to 6.97 of  the  CIPU  is  the  January
      2002 Report of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs.   Plainly,
      what is said in these paragraphs needs to be read in the light of  the
      more detailed information which has now been  obtained  regarding  the
      GBTS computer system.

42.   In the light of the latest information, what is reasonably  likely  to
      happen to this appellant upon  return  to  Istanbul  Airport?   It  is
      common ground that he will return with some  form  of  Turkish  travel
      document.  If he does not already possess a valid Turkish passport, he
      could apply  for  one  from  the  Embassy  in  London.  Failing  that,
      paragraph 6.103 of the CIPU Assessment indicates  that  the  appellant
      would be returned on one-way emergency travel documentation issued  by
      the Turkish Consul General in London.

43.   Whether or not it emerges from the fact that he is returning from  the
      United  Kingdom  with  such  documentation,  we  accept  that  it   is
      reasonably likely that the Turkish authorities  will  infer  that  the
      appellant is a returning failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,
      who has been expelled from this country. Accordingly, he is likely  to
      find himself in the position described at paragraph 6.96 of  the  CIPU
      assessment, that is to say, being questioned  about  his  reasons  for
      leaving Turkey, criminal records at home and abroad, possible contacts
      with illegal organisations abroad, and so forth.

44.   When the authorities examine the  GBTS  records,  however,  they  will
      discover nothing on the appellant.  Even if he was briefly detained on
      two occasions in 1998 and released without charge, this  will  not  be
      recorded on the system. Furthermore, whether or not the authorities in
      his home area would be interested in asking him questions, were he  to
      reappear there, there is  no  evidence  that  those  authorities  have
      instituted  any  formal  (and,  thus,  recorded)  procedure  for   his
      apprehension.

45.   It is no part of the appellant's case that he has, since being in  the
      United  Kingdom,  involved  himself  in  the   activities   of   exile
      organisations (or, indeed, any organisations) that would be  perceived
      as hostile to the Turkish state.

46.   In ACDOG, the  Tribunal  considered  whether,  during  the  period  of
      detention described in (what is now) paragraph 6.96 of CIPU, there was
      a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  other  serious  ill-treatment.  At
      paragraph 34 of their determination, the Tribunal concluded that there
      was no such real risk. This was to be contrasted with the position  in
      the case of those  persons  suspected  of  membership  or  support  of
      terrorist or radical organisations, who find themselves handed over to
      the Anti-Terror Branch (paragraph 45).

47.   In the case of this appellant, there is, given the  circumstances  set
      out above, no real risk whatsoever that he will  find  himself  handed
      over to  the  Anti-Terror  Branch.  Everything  points  to  his  being
      released after 'an average 6 to 9 hours detention' (paragraph 6.96).

48.   For the appellant, Mr  Harding  candidly  acknowledged  that  the  new
      information on the GBTS, set out at paragraphs 5.40  to  5.43  of  the
      October 2003 CIPU, was damaging to  his client's case to be in need of
      international protection, were that information  to  be  accepted.  Mr
      Harding submitted, however, that the information should not be  relied
      upon.

49.   Mr Harding based that  submission  upon  various  matters.  First,  he
      submitted that the 'message' referred to in CIPU had not been properly
      translated. This is,  however,  met  by  the  fact  that  Mr  Saunders
      supplied Mr Harding and the Tribunal  with  the  English  translation,
      which we have set out above.

50.   Mr Harding submitted that, given that the latest  information  on  the
      GBTS appeared to run counter to what had been obtained in  the  course
      of compiling the Netherlands Report, it was  possible  that  the  GBTS
      system was not, in fact, the one to  which  immigration  officials  in
      Istanbul Airport have access.  Alternatively, he  suggested  that  the
      Smuggling  Intelligence  and  Data  Collection  Department  under  the
      Ministry of Interior may have only limited access to  the  information
      stored on the GBTS system and that the immigration  officials  at  the
      airport may have greater access, in particular, to records  of  'mere'
      detention.

51.   The Tribunal does not accept either  of  these  submissions.  Although
      the appellant in this  case  was  not,  of  course,  a  party  to  the
      proceedings in ACDOG, it is not without significance that counsel  who
      appeared for certain of the claimants in that case accepted  that  the
      GBTS system was  the  one  used  at  Istanbul  Airport.   Indeed,  the
      Tribunal is unaware of any case arising that before publication of the
      latest CIPU Assessment in which it has been seriously  contended  that
      some computerised system other  than  the  GBTS  is  employed  by  the
      immigration officials. In  the  absence  of  cogent  evidence  to  the
      contrary, the Tribunal concludes that it must  proceed  on  the  basis
      that the computer system in question is that known as the GBTS.

52.   Likewise, the Tribunal can see no merit in  the  submission  that  the
      very body which operates the GBTS system has less extensive access  to
      its contents than those responsible for  controlling  immigration.  On
      the contrary, it would frankly make no sense for officials engaged  in
      combating smuggling and organised crime to have  anything  other  than
      the fullest access to the GBTS.

53.   Mr Harding submitted that,  because  the  information  gained  in  the
      latest CIPU comes from the Turkish authorities, it  should  be  viewed
      with considerable circumspection.

  54. As a general rule, statements as to the attitudes or intentions  of  a
      particular state towards those who claim to be  in  fear  of  it  will
      plainly need to be approached with caution, when  the  statements  are
      made directly on behalf of the state in question.  That said, however,
      the information at issue here is of a purely factual nature.   It  is,
      furthermore, difficult to see why the fact that a particular piece  of
      information is, or is not, held on a  central  computer  system  would
      cause the government of the United Kingdom or, for that matter, anyone
      else, to view the Turkish government in a more sympathetic  light.  It
      is, in our view,  going  too  far  to  suggest  that  the  information
      recorded in paragraphs 5.39 to 5.43 of the October 2003 CIPU has  been
      placed  there  as  a  result  of  the  machinations  of  the   Turkish
      authorities in an effort  to  secure  the  return  of  Kurdish  asylum
      seekers

  55.   There is, it must be said, a somewhat curious  relationship  between
      paragraphs 6.95 and 6.96 of the CIPU Assessment, on the one hand  (see
      paragraph 39 above), and paragraph 6.104,  on  the  other.   Paragraph
      6.104 states that 'a returnee without a valid Turkish travel  document
      is likely to be given an in-depth questioning by  the  Turkish  border
      police, and this is to be  distinguished  from  the  routine  identity
      check on arrival'.  The source for paragraph 6.104 is a letter of July
      1999 from the German Federal Office  of  the  Recognition  of  Foreign
      Refugees. The paragraph  goes  on  to  state  that  'as  a  rule,  the
      questions refer to personal data, date of and  reasons  for  departing
      Turkey, possible criminal record in Germany and contacts with  illegal
      Turkish organisations.  In some cases further enquiries will  be  made
      by other offices (e.g. prosecutor's office, registrar's office at  the
      last Turkish residence of the returnee) in order to find  out  if  the
      returnee is liable  to  prosecution  for  a  criminal  offence.  These
      enquiries can take several hours to several days,  during  which  time
      the returnee will be kept in custody. The German authorities  observed
      that available information as of July 1999 indicated that undocumented
      returnees were generally not being  maltreated  while  being  kept  in
      custody.  However, ill treatment could not be ruled out in cases where
      returnees were suspected separatists'.

56.   It is, in the Tribunal's view, very probable that paragraph  6.96  is,
      in essence, describing the same sort of procedure as  is  set  out  in
      paragraph 6.104: namely, the investigation of persons who are not 'run
      of the mill' returning Turkish citizens.  The  matter  is  not  clear,
      however, particularly since paragraph 6.104 expressly applies only  to
      returnees without valid Turkish travel documents. As we  have  already
      noted, those Turkish citizens  who  are  repatriated  by  the  British
      government will arrive at Istanbul in possession of  travel  documents
      issued by the Turkish government.

57.   In any event, however, paragraph 6.104 does  not,  in  the  Tribunal's
      view,  assist  the  appellant  in  the  present  case.   The  'further
      enquiries' referred to in that paragraph, whilst involving checks at a
      local level, are expressly said  to  be  carried  out  only  'in  some
      cases'.  The inescapable implication is that such checks are far  from
      routine and will only be instigated  if  there  is  something  in  the
      returnee's background that suggests to the immigration authorities   a
      further investigation is necessary.  In the case of this appellant, it
      is difficult to see what that might be. In most cases, it is  probable
      that such  local  investigations  would  be  made  only  if  something
      relevant is held on the returnee in the  GBTS  computer  system.  But,
      since paragraph 6.104 makes it plain  that the purpose  of  any  local
      enquiries is 'to find out if the returnee is liable to prosecution for
      a criminal offence,' that information is, as we have seen, going to be
      found on the GBTS system.

58.   In short,  paragraph 6.104 would appear to be of little relevance,  in
      the light of paragraphs 5.39 to 5.43 and 6.94  to  6.96  of  the  CIPU
      Assessment.

59.   The position then, so far as this  appellant  is  concerned,  is  that
      there is no real risk of his being persecuted or subjected  to  either
      inhuman or degrading treatment, on return to Istanbul.

60.   Despite the  emphasis  laid  by  counsel  for  the  claimant  and  the
      Tribunal in ACDOG upon the situation at the point of return to Turkey,
      it is necessary to consider whether there is a real risk  of  relevant
      harm to the appellant, after he has made his way out of the airport at
      Istanbul.

61.   At paragraphs 26  and  27  of  ACDOG,  the  Tribunal  records  certain
      anecdotal evidence concerning particular individuals who were said  to
      have got through immigration control without serious incident, only to
      be ill-used by the Turkish authorities, once the individuals had  made
      their way to  their  respective  homes.   As  the  Tribunal  noted  at
      paragraph 27 'these examples also sit somewhat inconveniently with the
      argument set before  us  that  in  the  light  of  the  extensive  and
      effective computer system operating in Turkey that a person's  history
      would be obtained ether from the central computer  or  by  information
      being obtained from their own local area, to enable the authorities to
      come to a view concerning them.'

62.   In the light of what we now know about the nature  and  scope  of  the
      GBTS system, the experiences of the individuals referred to  in  ACDOG
      is easier to understand.  A person may be detained at the local police
      station, for example,  following  a  demonstration,  beaten  up  as  a
      warning and/or as what the police regard as a form of summary justice,
      and then released without charge.  Given that, according to the latest
      information, the police need to inform the Public Prosecutor's  office
      within twenty-four hours of a person's being detained, such a practice
      upon the part of the police would most  likely  be  seen  by  them  as
      having the advantage of avoiding the formal machinery  that  would  be
      set in motion by involving the Public Prosecutor.

63.   Accordingly, a person of whom the local police in his  home  area  may
      have a recollection of having detained, is likely to be able  to  pass
      safely through Istanbul Airport  but  might,  nevertheless,  run  into
      problems if he once again encounters the police in his home  area  and
      they realise who he is.

64.   In the present case,  the  Adjudicator  believed  that,  even  if  the
      appellant went home and the police wished to question  him  about  the
      jeep explosion in 2001, he would have a ready alibi.

65.   Mr Harding, however, submitted that, given  what  we  know  about  the
      methods of the Turkish police, the  appellant  could  well  experience
      Article 3 ill treatment, whilst he was seeking to establish his alibi.



66.   We do not find that the Adjudicator  was  precluded  on  the  evidence
      before her from making the finding she did. The situation is, in fact,
      closely analogous to the distinction drawn by the Tribunal in ACDOG at
      paragraphs 44 and 45 between, on the  one  hand,  being  detained  for
      several hours to investigate a person's background upon return and, on
      the other hand, being held by the Anti-Terror Branch, where  there  is
      real reason to suspect  involvement  with  radical  organisations.  We
      accept, of course, that the precise line of enquiry  which  the  local
      police would wish to pursue in the case of the appellant, were  he  to
      return home, is about alleged complicity with the PKK in  the  bombing
      of the jeep.  The point is, however, that the jeep incident  was  some
      three years ago and the appellant has a complete and provable  defence
      to any accusation of involvement.

67.   Even if the Adjudicator was wrong in her finding, however,  the  issue
      of internal relocation arises.

68.   Because of the emphasis laid upon risk on  return  in  Turkish  cases,
      the issue of internal relocation has not usually tended to arise.   If
      any detention by the police anywhere in Turkey, unaccompanied  by  any
      further  prosecutory  action,  would  be  known  to  the   immigration
      officials at Istanbul Airport, what might  happen  to  the  person  in
      question upon return to  his  locality  has  often  been  regarded  as
      irrelevant; by the time that person got home he may well have suffered
      treatment that violates the Refugee Convention.

69.   As the facts  of  the  present  case  demonstrate,  however,  internal
      relocation is now likely  to  assume  importance  in  cases  involving
      Turkish citizens.

70.   Even if both the Adjudicator and the Tribunal are wrong to  find  that
      the appellant in the present case could return to his home, it has not
      been shown that it would be unreasonable for him to relocate elsewhere
      in  Turkey,  rather  than  seeking  to  invoke  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligation's under  the  Refugee  Convention.  According  to  his  own
      evidence, the appellant lived in Istanbul for some 1� months, prior to
      travelling to the United Kingdom. He is a young man of twenty-four who
      does not appear to suffer from any ill health. Whilst he would plainly
      not be able to carry  on  his  former  occupation  as  a  shepherd  in
      Istanbul, other forms of livelihood are open to him.

71.   A final word needs to be said about the appellant's relatives  in  the
      United Kingdom. In the bundle of papers submitted  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant in connection with the appeal to  the  Tribunal,  there  are
      letters from the Home Office to certain individuals.  At  page  28  we
      find a letter of 7 February 2001 to Mr Ibrahim Ozsayan,  granting  him
      indefinite leave to remain as a  refugee.  This  is  said  to  be  the
      appellant's brother. At page 30 we find a letter which is undated  but
      stamped 13 February 2002.  This is addressed  to  'Yusuf  Recber'.  It
      states that he has  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  enter  as  a
      refugee.  At page 32 there is a photocopy page of what purports to  be
      a British passport belonging to Mehmet Ozsayan, who is said to be  the
      appellant's cousin.  Finally, at page 33, there is a letter  dated  22
      June 2002 to Elif Konas, granting her indefinite leave  to  enter  the
      United Kingdom as a refugee. Elif Konas is said to be the  appellant's
      sister-in-law.

72.   Before the Tribunal, Mr Harding did not seek to advance  any  argument
      regarding risk on return, by reference to these persons.   Mr  Harding
      was, in the Tribunal's view, right not to do so. Apart  from  what  is
      stated in the index to the bundle, we  are  unaware  of  any  evidence
      going to show that these persons are related, as claimed. We also note
      that at paragraph 22(xiv) of her determination, the Adjudicator  noted
      that 'none of [the appellant's] five brothers now living in the United
      Kingdom gave evidence  in  his  appeal,  including  Ibrahim,  who  has
      apparently been granted exceptional leave to remain.  Whether  or  not
      Ibrahim has exceptional or indefinite leave is beside the point.   The
      Adjudicator  was  not  presented  with  evidence  as  to  the  precise
      circumstances in which Ibrahim and the other family members  (if  they
      be such) received recognition as refugees.

73.   Nor has any evidence been advanced before the Tribunal  to  show  that
      the GBTS computer system  (a)  is  likely  to  show  something  of  an
      adverse nature relating to Ibrahim or the other  family  members,  and
      (b) is likely to enable the immigration  authorities  at  Istanbul  to
      make a connection with the appellant, even if it did.

74.   This appeal is dismissed.





                                             P.R. LANE

                                       VICE PRESIDENT











