
H-VB-V3


|Heard at Field House       |        |KS (Minority Clans - Bajuni |
|                           |        |- ability to speak Kibajuni |
|                           |        |) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT   |
|                           |        |00271                       |
|On 11 May 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 September 2004                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey - Vice President                                    |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                  |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr W Fran-Bell of Counsel
For the Respondent:          Mr Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellant, who claims to be a national of Somalia and  an  ethnic
    Bajuni, appeals against the determination of an  Adjudicator,  Mr  D  S
    Corke, who dismissed his appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds
    against the decision made on 19 July 2002  giving  directions  for  his
    removal.

2.    The appellant claims to have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  using  a
    passport provided by an agent on 30 April 2002.  He applied for  asylum
    the same day but this was refused for the reasons set out in the letter
    dated 15 July 2002.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  he
    was a Somali or that he was from the Chanda, a sub-clan of  the  Bajuni
    clan.


The Secretary of State's decision

3.    It was the Secretary of State's view that the Bajuni were not divided
    into sub-groups.  When interviewed the appellant  had  been  unable  to
    give any detailed answers about his clan or  its  history.   He  stated
    that he had worked as a fisherman and sold his fish on Koyama.  He  had
    never visited Kismayo, the  nearest  large  town.   In  the  Report  on
    Minority Groups the Bajuni elders  described  how  communities  on  the
    islands  maintained  close  links  with  each  other  and  with  Bajuni
    communities along the coast and in Kismayo.  Bajuni  from  the  islands
    would usually spend a large part of the year in Kismayo.  The appellant
    had claimed that his brother was killed during fighting on  the  island
    in 1992.  In view of the position of the Bajuni at that time  it  would
    have been reasonable to expect the appellant to  have  left  for  Kenya
    along with other Bajuni people.  There was  no  reasonable  explanation
    why he had not left after the death of his brother.  The appellant said
    that there had been attacks on him and his family during 2001 and 2002.



4.    He had experienced no real difficulties between 1992 after the  death
    of his brother until February 2001 when he claimed that his father  was
    killed.  He had left  Somalia  after  his  house  was  burned  down  in
    February or March 2002 when he and his elder son were out  looking  for
    food.  His uncle had made arrangements for his  journey  and  paid  the
    agent a sum which the appellant had inherited from his father after his
    death although he had not been aware of the amount.  The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that his father would have been able to leave  any
    money in view of the appellant's claims that the island was occupied by
    majority clans who raided and looted their property.  He would not have
    been ignorant about how much money would have been received.   Although
    he claimed that he had never been to school and  was  ignorant  of  how
    much money it was, he had been a fisherman who on his own  account  had
    sold fish on Koyama.  He claimed to have been taken by his uncle to  an
    unknown place by boat where he remained for a month.  The Secretary  of
    State did not accept that he would be somewhere  for  a  month  without
    knowing where it was.  In summary he did not believe the account  given
    by the appellant and the application was refused.

The Adjudicator's findings

5.    The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on 25 November
    2002.  The Appellant gave evidence through a Kibajuni interpreter.  His
    evidence can briefly be summarised as follows.  The appellant came from
    the Wachanda tribe, part of the Bajuni clan and had lived on  Koyama  a
    small island, part of Somalia.  His tribe  was  regularly  attacked  by
    other tribes.  His father was killed in an attack in February  2001,  a
    brother having been killed in about 1992.  At that stage  he  had  been
    too young to leave and had no money.  He was not educated.  There  were
    four further attacks on the village in 2001.  His mother died  and  his
    brother and sister moved away.  In March 2002 he left the village  with
    his elder son to find food and when  he  returned  he  found  that  the
    village had been attacked. His home and several others had been burned.
    His wife and younger son were missing.  He  left  with  his  uncle  and
    travelled to Mombasa.  He acknowledged he had said at interview that he
    did not know where he had gone.  He had given an  agent  58,000  Kenyan
    shillings converted by his uncle from Somali shillings.  This  was  all
    he had from selling fish  and  from  his  late  father's  savings.   He
    travelled by air to the United Kingdom.

6.    At the hearing the Adjudicator was told by the interpreter  that  the
    questions had been put in Kibajuni but the replies were all in Swahili.
     The appeal had previously been adjourned to get a Kibajuni interpreter
    but in fact the appellant had spoken in Swahili.  In  paragraph  15  of
    his determination, the  Adjudicator  commented  that  the  key  to  the
    question of whether this particular applicant was Bajuni was  language.
    Swahili was spoken in much of eastern Africa from north to south.   One
    of the dialects spoken in Somalia was Kibajuni.  The fact that Kibajuni
    was a dialect of Swahili  did  not  stop  it  from  being  a  different
    language.  In the Report on Minority Groups the Bajuni elders said that
    their language Kibajuni was related to Swahili but was  very  different
    from the Swahili dialect spoken in the areas of Kenya immediately below
    the border although there were some common words.  In the light of  the
    fact that the appellant answered questions in Swahili, the  Adjudicator
    was not satisfied that his claim to speak a mixture of both Swahili and
    Kibajuni was demonstrated.   He  commented  that  he  expected  someone
    claiming to be a Bajuni to be able  to  speak  Kibajuni  and  in  these
    circumstances he simply did  not  believe  that  the  appellant  was  a
    Bajuni.  The appeal was dismissed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

The grounds of appeal

7.    In the grounds of appeal the Appellant challenges  the  Adjudicator's
    finding that he could not  speak  Kibajuni.   It  is  argued  that  his
    representative was given no opportunity to question the interpreter  as
    to his credentials  or  qualifications.   Permission  was  subsequently
    granted for both the appellant and an expert witness, Mr Brian Allen to
    give oral evidence.

The appellant's oral evidence

8.    At the hearing before the Tribunal the appellant gave evidence.   The
    Tribunal confirmed from the interpreter that she spoke  and  understood
    both Swahili and Kibajuni.  Mr Fran-Bell indicated that  the  appellant
    would give his evidence in Kibajuni. In the light of the matters raised
    in the grounds  of  appeal,  the  Tribunal  asked  the  interpreter  to
    indicate at any stage if the Appellant spoke in  Swahili  so  that  the
    issue could be addressed if appropriate by the representatives.

9.    The appellant confirmed that he had lived  in  Koyama  which  was  an
    island off the coast of Somalia.  He did not know how far it  was  away
    from the mainland.  He spoke Kibajuni and Kiswahili.  It  would  depend
    upon each family which language was spoken.  On his island  people  did
    not use Somali although a few people did come to the island who did not
    speak Kibajuni.  He had been a fisherman until he left.   At this point
    the interpreter interrupted to say that the appellant had used the word
    "fisherman" firstly  in  Swahili  and  then  in  Kibajuni.   They  were
    different words.

10.   In cross-examination the Appellant said that he did not know in depth
    about his clan history.   He thought they were  originally  slaves  who
    had been brought to the area.  People referred to them  as  the  Bajuni
    people and this is how he knew that he was Bajuni.  His only  knowledge
    came from his father.  He had not been told about the  origins  of  the
    Bajuni save that they had come from  Africa  and  were  descended  from
    slaves.  The appellant was  asked  whether  Kiemboni  was  the  nearest
    island to Koyama.  He replied that this was what he had heard.  He  was
    asked about his answers when interviewed by Mr Allen. He  had  referred
    to three other islands as Chula, Chovai and Mdoa.   He  said  that  the
    question had been to name islands close  to  Koyama  and  he  gave  the
    islands he knew.  He had not been asked about the nearest islands.   He
    had heard of the town of Ras Kiemboni but he had been referring to  the
    island.

11.   He was a fisherman.  He had not been to Kismayo.  He did not have any
    needs there.  He sold his fish in Koyama.  The language he  spoke  when
    doing this depended on who he was selling to.  The Appellant was  asked
    about the language test carried out by Mr Allen.  He had not been  able
    to identify a number of words in Kibajuni including the word for money.
     The appellant said that the word was "fetha".  He  did  not  know  the
    word "senchi".

The expert evidence of Mr Brian Allen

12.   Mr Brian Allen then gave evidence.  His evidence  is  set  out  in  a
    report dated 7 December 2003.  There is a separate  sheet  showing  the
    language test.  Mr Allen's CV and a statement on the Report on Minority
    Groups report appears at pages 6-8 of Schedule  3  of  the  appellant's
    documents.

13.   In his report Mr Allen confirms that the Appellant claims to be  from
    Koyama an island off the coast  of  Southern  Somalia.   The  appellant
    described his island as being quite small with a population  of  around
    400 to 500 people.  He named three other  islands,  Chula,  Chovai  and
    Mdoa and named the small town of Ras Kiemboni near the  Kenyan  border.
    He described two areas on the island and its trees and  livestock.   He
    named some of the fish he caught and the type of boats that were  used.
    It was  Mr  Allen's  view  that  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  the
    appellant's descriptions  of  the  island  were  accurate  but  equally
    importantly the manner in which those descriptions were given indicated
    that he had seen and experienced what he was describing.

14    The appellant's physical features strongly suggested that he was from
    the Mchanda clan.  He had questioned the appellant about Bajuni customs
    including marriage,  the  use  of  a  special  drink  used  on  festive
    occasions and the use of protective charms.   The  appellant  had  been
    able to describe in detail the garments worn.  It was Mr  Allen's  view
    that these descriptions were very much in keeping  with  normal  Bajuni
    custom.  He had tested the appellant's knowledge of the Bajuni  dialect
    known locally as Kibajuni.  The Bajuni people  vary  greatly  in  their
    knowledge of this dialect from very little  to  fluency.   Kibajuni  is
    dying out.  The older generation are more familiar with it. The younger
    generation prefer coastal Swahili which is an  international  language.
    Swahili is the language used in most Bajuni homes.  If there are  older
    people in the home, they would  at  times  use  Kibajuni  exposing  the
    younger generation to the dialect which  they  would  understand  to  a
    certain degree although may not need to speak it.   He  had  asked  the
    appellant the meaning of fourteen randomly chosen Bajuni words  and  he
    had known nine of them.  The words were not included in the context  of
    a Kibajuni sentence as that would have made them easier to recognise.

15.   It was Mr Allen's conclusion that  the  appellant  displayed  a  good
    knowledge of the local geography, currency, Bajuni customs and language
    of his home area as claimed. His answers could not possibly  have  been
    prepared in advance.  He found that there was no reason for  saying  he
    could come from elsewhere or that he belonged to another tribe.

16.   In his evidence in chief Mr Allen confirmed that he had worked with a
    number of different tribes in the Lama area of Kenya.  He spoke Swahili
    but not Kibajuni.  He had collected a list of words.  The extent of his
    understanding of Kibajuni depended on how strong the  dialect  was.  He
    understood that the Bajuni were a mixture of Arab and Yemeni stock  who
    had traded and settled on the islands intermarrying  with  local  Bantu
    people.  It was possible there might be some link with  former  slaves.
    The Bajuni were not regarded by Somali tribes as  proper  Somalis.   He
    could not say how many Bajunis there were in Kenya save to confirm that
    there had been an  influx  of  Somali  Bajunis  from  Kismayo  and  the
    islands.  Some Bajunis did not speak Kibajuni.  If, for example, in the
    family the father was Bajuni and the mother Barawa, it was likely  that
    Kiswahili would be spoken.  Most Bajuni did have some  Kibajuni.    The
    main language in Kismayo was Kiswahili.  Kibajuni was  dying  out.   It
    was spoken by the older  generation  but  was  now  looked  on  as  the
    language of the uneducated.  The younger generation preferred to  speak
    Swahili.

17.   Mr Allen was asked whether the appellant could have been  coached  in
    his answers about the customs and geography  of  Kismayo.   He  replied
    that he did not look so much for the information as the  way  in  which
    the information was conveyed.  He was satisfied that the appellant  had
    been describing things that he had experienced and  that it was obvious
    he had lived on an island.  He could recognise the appellant  as  being
    from the Mchanda tribe.   They tended to be fairly  short  having  dark
    skin and round facial features.  These  three  elements  were  easy  to
    spot.  He would not regard that as determinative but it  confirmed  his
    other findings.

18.   The Appellant had been able to describe Bajuni  marriage  ceremonies.
    There were differences in dress between Somali and Kenyan Bajunis.   On
    the language  issue  he  confirmed  that  the  older  generation  spoke
    Kibajuni.  Swahili was the main  inter  tribal  language.   Most  homes
    would mix Swahili and Kibajuni.  A knowledge of  Somali  was  very  low
    amongst most Bajuni. There would not be  the  need  or  opportunity  to
    speak Somali.  There was an increasing isolation  of  Swahili  speakers
    from Somali speakers.  He would accept that on the  Appellant's  island
    he would have used the word "senti" rather "senchi".  It would be  easy
    to recognise a Kenyan accent as opposed to a Somali accent.  There  was
    a lot of confusion about Ras Kiemboni.  Although this was on the coast,
    depending on the tide part of the town  was  surrounded  by  water  and
    might be regarded as an island.  Koyama was an island well to the south
    of Kismayo and only a small number of traders would make the journey to
    Kismayo.

19.   In cross-examination Mr Allen accepted he had never been to  Somalia.
    He held a Diploma in Anthropology which had been a  subsidiary  subject
    when studying for a Diploma of Theology.  He would regard Kibajuni as a
    dialect of Kiswahili although it was quite different.  He did not speak
    Kibajuni.  He was asked why his views on language should  be  preferred
    to that expressed by the elders as recorded in the Report  on  Minority
    Groups.  He replied that his information  came  from  a  greater  cross
    section of society.  The Appellant's features indicated that he  was  a
    Bajuni but they confirmed rather then led to  his  conclusions.   There
    were many small islands which were uninhabited  and  local  people  had
    their own names for them.  He could not be sure whether  the  appellant
    when referring to Kiemboni meant an island or the town.

20.   The Bantu people were descendants of slaves. Most Bajuni  had  little
    knowledge of their backgrounds.  It was  possible  that  the  appellant
    would have heard that there was some slavery element  in  his  origins.
    The Somali language had not been imposed. There were several groups who
    did not speak that language.  He did not think the appellant was from a
    Kenyan island.  This was because the account he gave of his customs and
    also his own physical features.   He displayed none of the things  that
    he would have looked for in a Bajuni from  Kenya.   Each  island  would
    have some people who travelled.  The hearing before the Adjudicator had
    been in December 2002. His report was prepared in  December  2003.   He
    doubted whether the Appellant would have been able to learn  up  Bajuni
    in that period.

The submissions

21.   Mr Fran-Bell submitted that the appellant was a Bajuni from  Somalia.
    He did have a good knowledge of Kibajuni.  During the oral evidence  it
    had only been on one occasion that the interpreter had  indicated  that
    the appellant had used a Swahili word.  Although there  had  been  some
    confusion about the word for money the fact remained that it was  clear
    that the appellant was comfortable speaking Kibajuni.  Even if  he  had
    not spoken Kibajuni this would not necessarily indicate that he was not
    Bajuni.  He referred to the Tribunal  determination  in  AJH  (Somalia)
    [2003] UKIAT 00094.  The appellant had been able  to  answer  questions
    about his life on Koyama and had dealt in detail with  issues  relating
    to marriage and dress.  The  determination  in  Suleiman  [2002]  UKIAT
    00416 did not  discount  the  possibility  of  a  Bajuni  not  speaking
    Kibajuni.  He also referred  to  the  Tribunal  determination  in  Omar
    [2002] UKIAT 06844.   The fact that the appellant did not speak  Somali
    did not affect the position.

22.   Mr Sheikh accepted that if the appellant was a Bajuni from Somalia he
    would qualify for asylum assuming his account  of  past  events  to  be
    true.  The Adjudicator had followed the approach in AJH.  There was  no
    explanation why the appellant had not  responded  in  Kibajuni  at  the
    hearing before the Adjudicator.  Mr Allen had never  been  to  Somalia.
    More weight should be placed on the evidence set out in the  Report  on
    Minority Groups.  In the appellant's asylum interview he had  showed  a
    wholly inadequate understanding of his background.  He said  he  was  a
    fisherman but had never been to Kismayo.   This did not square with the
    objective evidence.  There was nothing to suggest that the Bajuni  were
    descended from slaves.  It was odd that the appellant had been involved
    in trading and bartering and had not known the Kibajuni word for money.
     Looking at the evidence as a whole, even though the Appellant appeared
    to have knowledge of Kibajuni, his knowledge of other matters which  he
    could be expected to  know  about  had  been  very  minimal  both  when
    interviewed and at the hearing before the Adjudicator.

The background situation in Somalia

23.   Before assessing the Appellant's own circumstances, the Tribunal will
    deal with the background situation in Somalia.  The history of  Somalia
    following its independence in 1960 is set out in paragraphs 4.1-106  of
    the CIPU Report  October  2003.  Somali  society  is  characterised  by
    membership of clan families which are sub-divided into clans  and  sub-
    clans.  In addition there are a number of minority groups also  divided
    into sub-groups.   Since the fall of the Siad  Barre  regime  in  1991,
    Somalia has to all intents and  purposes  remained  without  a  central
    functioning  or  internationally  recognised  government.   Clan  based
    factions and traditional leaders of the militia in different  areas  of
    the country have  established  various  local  administrations  but  no
    single group controls more then a fraction of the country's  territory.



24.   In some areas notably Puntland and Somaliland  local  administrations
    function effectively in lieu of a central government.  There have  been
    attempts to reunify the country and to set up a  Transitional  National
    Government (TNG) but those opposed to the TNG have set  up  the  Somali
    Reconciliation and Restoration Council (SRRC).  In  March  2002  a  new
    regional administration was set up  called  the  South  West  State  of
    Somalia by  the  RRA,  a  member  of  the  SRRC.   This  gave  rise  to
    speculation that this would lead to the demise of the  SRRC.   However,
    the RRA governor of Biadoa announced that  the  RRA  would  attend  the
    peace talks but under the SRRC umbrella.  In July  2003  at  the  peace
    conference it was reported  that  delegates  had  signed  a  "historic"
    agreement to set up a  federal  government.   There  has  been  a  rift
    between the TNG President and Prime Minister.  The Prime  Minister  has
    said that the TNG's mandate would expire but the President that the TNG
    would continue until new institutions were formed through free and fair
    elections.

25.   It is against this  chaotic  ethnic  and  political  background  that
    asylum and article 3 claims must be assessed.  There are areas  of  the
    country where the situation is relatively stable.  In 2002  there  were
    reports that the security situation had improved in many areas but  the
    situation particularly in southern Somalia was very fluid and liable to
    change.  Mogadishu has enjoyed some periods of relative  stability  but
    it has a  complex  political  landscape  and  could  experience  sudden
    changes  in  security  conditions.   Somali  nationals  have  generally
    ensured their safety by residing in the home areas of  their  clan  but
    some politically weak social groups  were  less  able  to  secure  such
    protection.  Nonetheless, basic law and order is in fact  the  norm  in
    most locations.  The dominant clan in any particular area has generally
    excluded other clans and minorities from  participation  in  power  but
    there are exceptions. The Majerteen dominated Puntland authorities have
    been willing  to  allow  thousands  of  people  from  other  clans  and
    minorities to live in the  territory  they  administer  and  the  Isaaq
    dominated Somaliland has been tolerant of non Isaaq clan members.   The
    authorities in central Hiran and  Galgudud  regions  have  also  proved
    tolerant of Somalis from other clans and regions travelling into  their
    territories.  In  south  and  central  Somalia  rival  Hawiye  factions
    control much of the territory but rival members of other clans such  as
    the Digil and Dir also  live  in  these  areas  but  are  not  directly
    involved in the conflict.

26.   It is the minority groups who do not have their own armed militia  to
    protect them  who  are  amongst  the  most  vulnerable  and  victimised
    following the fall of the Said Barre regime.   When  dealing  with  the
    general security position of minority groups, the CIPU Report  confirms
    that they remain unarmed and have limited  access  to  whatever  social
    services are available.  They are generally excluded from participation
    in the political system although  some  are  represented  in  the  TNA.
    Politically weak social groups are less able to secure protection  from
    extortion, rape and human rights abuses by the armed militia of various
    factions and remain vulnerable wherever  they  reside.   Some  minority
    groups may risk harassment by clans in rural  areas  but  they  do  not
    necessarily find themselves facing particular human rights or  security
    problems in Mogadishu.  Although minorities have usually been  able  to
    avoid involvement in clan disputes,  they  have  sometimes  come  under
    pressure to participate in the fighting in areas  of  conflict.   While
    many displaced minority groups would not necessarily  face  persecution
    on the basis of clan membership or ethnicity were  they  to  return  to
    their home areas, they may face difficulty in regaining their homes  or
    land seized by clan militia when taking control of  their  territories.
    Persecution on the basis of clan membership or ethnicity is now said to
    be very unlikely in most areas of Somalia: CIPU Report paragraphs  6.89
    - 91.

The UNHCR position paper January 2004

27.    A  summary  of  the  political  situation  and  human   rights   and
    humanitarian situation in Somalia is set  out  in  the  UNHCR  position
    paper of January 2004 on the  return  of  rejected  asylum  seekers  to
    Somalia.  This confirms that twelve years after the dissolution of  the
    central government and more  then  a  dozen  failed  peace  initiatives
    later, the situation remains extremely complex.   Hopes  were  high  in
    2003 that the efforts by Somali leaders to turn the  former  republic's
    fluid mix of political,  economic  and  clan  interest  groups  into  a
    national state would bear fruit but despite some notable progress there
    continued to be uncertainty with the commitment of several key  leaders
    to the agreement still in question and many intractable issues  yet  to
    be resolved.

28.   The northern  zones  of  Somalia  have  moved  closer  to  political,
    economic and social reconstruction but the position  in  the  south  is
    more difficult to assess.  Most of the  central  and  southern  regions
    continue to exhibit chronic symptoms of complex emergencies: little  or
    no authoritative government, high levels of criminality, sporadic armed
    conflicts, lack  of  economic  recovery,  endemic  humanitarian  needs,
    minimal health care and education and population  displacement.   There
    are pockets of stability in the south but they  remain  susceptible  to
    sudden set backs due to armed clashes and threats.  The combination  of
    factors has threatened the Somali traditional livelihood and  this  has
    forced thousands to migrate to urban areas as they can no  longer  meet
    the minimal requirements for life in their home communities.

29.    Remittances from more then one million Somalis  living  abroad  have
    been crucial in mitigating the effects of poverty.  This  income  forms
    the backbone of the commercial and service sectors  and  of  individual
    and household purchasing power.  Ten years ago at  the  height  of  the
    crisis in Somalia it was estimated that close to  two  million  people,
    just under one third of the Somali  population  were  displaced  either
    internally or in exile.  Voluntary repatriation has reduced the  number
    of internally displaced to 350,000 and  of  Somali  refugees  still  in
    exile to 400,000.  450,000 Somali refugees have returned home with some
    form of international assistance.

30.   Under the heading Somali Policy at paragraph 4,  it  is  the  UNHCR's
    view that given the  complex  insecurity  and  lawlessness  that  still
    dominate the situation in southern Somalia, asylum seekers  originating
    from this area remain eligible for refugee status under Article 1(2) of
    the 1969 OAU Convention.  In addition many asylum seekers  may  have  a
    well-founded  fear  of  persecution  under  Article  1  of   the   1951
    Convention.  When considering the return of rejected asylum seekers the
    report says that although the levels of faction and larger scale  inter
    clan  conflicts  may  have  reduced  in  southern  Somalia,  insecurity
    continues to be a significant  problem.   Militia  loyal  to  different
    strongmen succeed one another  in  a  perpetual  move  to  establish  a
    sustainable control on certain areas.  There  is  a  constant  fear  of
    abrupt changes in clan balance shaking  up  fragile  territorial  power
    bases.

The current Home Office position

31.   The latest Home Office position in Somali cases is  set  out  by  the
    Secretary of State in his letter dated 25 July  2003.   This  indicates
    that claims by Somali  nationals  should  not  be  assessed  solely  by
    reference to their clan membership.  In respect of Bajuni and  Benadiri
    applications the author of the letter, Andrew Fleming, Somalia  Country
    Officer said:

      "As you will be aware Somali asylum applications  -  as  with  asylum
        applications  from  all  other  nationalities  -   are   considered
        individually and on  the  merits  of  the  particular  case.   This
        includes asylum applications from members of minority groups  being
        considered on a case by case basis.  Although we accept that  based
        on the available country  information  bona  fide  members  of  the
        Bajuni and Benadiri minority  groups  are  likely  to  be  able  to
        establish a need for international protection, it does  not  follow
        that all asylum applicants who base their claim  in  membership  of
        the Bajuni  or  Benadiri  will  automatically  be  granted  refugee
        status.  A decision will be made on the individual circumstances of
        each case."

The position of the Bajuni

32.   The position of the Bajuni is considered in paragraph 6.92-4  of  the
    CIPU report.  There is a small population numbering some 3,000 to 4,000
    and possibly as many as 11,000 who are  mainly  sailors  and  fisherman
    living in the small communities on the coastal south of Kismayo and  on
    the islands between Kismayo and the border with Kenya.  Their principal
    language is Kibajuni.  It  is  reported  relying  on  information  from
    Bajuni elders that most Bajuni also speak Somali.  Younger  Bajuni  who
    live mainly in exile might only have a limited knowledge of Somali  but
    they should at least know some  words,  as  family  elders  would  have
    taught them.  In the early 1990's the Bajuni were attacked by groups of
    Somali militia who wanted to force them off the islands.  Many left for
    Kenya, the majority having fled during 1992.  They went  to  the  Jombo
    refugee camp in Mombasa but when that camp  was  closed  in  1997  many
    Bajuni were returned by the UNHCR to the islands  which  at  that  time
    were considered safe.  With the fall of Kismayo in 1999 to  the  allied
    forces of the Somalian National Front and  Aideed's  Somalian  National
    Alliance and following attacks  from  the  Bajuni  islands,  the  UNHCR
    suspended returns.

33.   There was a visit by UN officials to the Bajuni Islands in early 2002
    which found 3,000 Bajuni families living on  the  islands  compared  to
    only 50 in 1994.  They had been able to return  to  their  home  areas.
    They were still not able to own boats with  engines,  only  traditional
    sailing boats.  Recent Marehan settlers  still  had  effective  control
    over the islands.  The Bajuni had worked for them  as  paid  labourers.
    This was at least some improvement on the period when General  Morgan's
    forces controlled Kismayo and the islands and the Bajuni  were  treated
    as little more then slave labour.

         34.     The Tribunal has  in  evidence  a  report  entitled  Human
    Rights and Security in Central and Southern Somalia  made  following  a
    joint Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and British  Fact-Finding  Mission  to
    Nairobi in March 2004.  The  information  recorded  comes  from  Bakari
    Abdalla Bakari a representative of  the  Bajuni  refugee  community  in
    Nairobi.  He said that 50% of the Bajuni could  speak  Somali  but  the
    vast majority of these were from the mainland rather then the  islands.
    The island based population tended not to speak  Somali  due  to  their
    social isolation from the mainland.  It was his view that around  6,000
    Bajuni continued to reside on the Kismayo coastline  and  on  the  four
    main islands.  Life for the Bajuni on the islands had  not  changed  or
    improved in any way in the past  few  years.  Clan  militias  routinely
    occupied parts of the islands and forced the Bajuni to  work  for  them
    demanding 50% of the revenue

Discussion

35.   In our judgment  the  background  evidence  now  available  does  not
    support the argument which is often put  in  Somali  appeals  that  all
    members of minority groups or clans are on that sole basis at  risk  of
    persecution on return.  Equally  the  background  evidence  shows  that
    members of certain clans or groups such as the Bajuni are likely to  be
    able to demonstrate such a risk.  In J. (Somalia) [2003]  UKIAT  00147,
    which dealt with a claim by a member of the Tunni  clan,  the  Tribunal
    said in paragraphs 14 and 15:


         "from this complex background it is clear  that  the  risks  faced
         particular clans or sub-clans can only be  broad  generalisations.
         The Tribunal in Hanaf appears to have proceeded on the basis  that
         the Tunni are a subgroup of the Brava clan  without  reference  to
         their linkage with the Digil. In the light  of  the  complex  clan
         structure in Somalia and the intermixing of the groups leading  to
         what the minorities report describes as process of federation,  in
         our view it is impossible to say  that  membership  alone  of  the
         Tunni clan is sufficient without more show a well founded fear  of
         persecution on return.


         Each appeal must be considered on it own merits.  Clan  membership
         will normally be an important consideration but must be taken into
         account with the appellant's own history and profile."

36.   Plainly in J. (Somalia) the Tribunal did not  accept  that  the  clan
    under consideration, the Tunni, was one  where  it  appeared  from  the
    background evidence that  there  was  a  general  risk  of  persecution
    arising from clan membership and what was said in that case has  to  be
    considered in that context. This case exemplifies the need  at  present
    for a distinction to be maintained between:

      (i) membership of a clan  where  the  background  evidence  does  not
         support a conclusion that there is generally a risk of persecution
         arising from membership of that clan even though on the particular
         facts of the case an individual claimant may be able to  establish
         a claim on the basis of his own particular background and profile,
         and
      (ii) membership of a minority clan where  membership  generally  does
         give rise to real risk subject to the particular circumstances  of
         the  claimant.  In  such  a  case,  while  each  claim   must   be
         individually considered, the claim will normally depend on whether
         in fact the claimant is genuinely a member of that minority clan.

37.   In the first category, clan membership will be a significant  element
    in assessing whether there  is  a  risk  on  return  but  will  not  be
    determinative. Although the point  is  not  in  issue  in  the  present
    appeal, the reality of the situation in many cases from Somalia is that
    the risks now faced by those who have fled does not  arise  because  of
    clan membership or any other Convention reason: hence  the  distinction
    made in the UNHCR paper between those eligible for relief under the OAU
    Convention and those who might be entitled to refugee status under  the
    1951 Convention.  The OAU definition is a much broader  than  the  1951
    Convention and provides in article 1 (2) as follows:


         "The term shall also apply to every person who, owing to  external
         aggression, occupation, foreign  domination  or  events  seriously
         disturbing public order in either part or the whole of his country
         of origin or nationality  is  compelled  to  leave  his  place  of
         habitual residence in  order  to  seek  refuge  in  another  place
         outside his country of origin or nationality."


38.   In the second category clan membership will normally be determinative
    but may not be in individual cases where  there  are  features  in  the
    claimant's  background  and  circumstances  which  indicate  that   the
    claimant is not in fact at the same risk as  that  faced  generally  by
    other clan members. By way of example where a female member of  such  a
    clan marries into a majority clan, she may  have  protection  from  her
    husband's clan.  Therefore, subject to the qualifications we  have  set
    out, the Tribunal agree with the approach set out in the  Secretary  of
    State's letter of 25 July 2003.

39    The present appeal falls within the second  category.  The  issue  is
    whether  the  appellant  is  genuinely  a  Bajuni.  Mr  Sheikh  in  his
    submissions has accepted has accepted that if the appellant  is  Bajuni
    and if his account of events in Somalia is correct, then he is entitled
    to asylum. When assessing a claim to be a member of  the  Bajuni  clan,
    the issue of language is of considerable  importance.  The  Adjudicator
    clearly regarded the language spoken by the  appellant  as  a  critical
    indicator of his credibility.


40.   It is accepted on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  if  the
    appellant is Bajuni and if his account of events in Somalia is correct,
    then he is entitled to asylum.  The Adjudicator  clearly  regarded  the
    language spoken by  the  appellant  as  a  critical  indicator  of  his
    credibility.  The issue of the language  spoken  by  Bajunis  has  been
    considered by the Tribunal in a number of determinations.

41.   In Suleiman the Tribunal, after reviewing the issue  of  language  in
    the context of the fact that the  claimant  in  that  case  spoke  only
    Swahili despite claiming to be Bajuni, commented that there may well be
    young Bajuni who have grown up  in  refugee  camps  in  Kenya  speaking
    Swahili  but  that  was  not  the  claimant's  history.   The  Tribunal
    expressed the view that Adjudicators should approach any case involving
    someone who claimed to be a Bajuni resident of Somalia  who  could  not
    speak Kibajuni let alone Somali with great caution.  The  Tribunal  did
    not say that if a claimant could not speak Kibajuni, it  followed  that
    he was not a Bajuni. The point the Tribunal was making was that in  the
    light  of  the  objective  evidence  that  Kibajuni  was  the  Bajuni's
    principal language, an explanation was required if a claimant  did  not
    speak Kibajuni.


42.   In Omar, an appeal by the Secretary of State against an Adjudicator's
    determination was dismissed on the basis that there was no error in the
    Adjudicator's findings on the facts  of  that  particular  appeal.   In
    paragraphs 13 and 14 the Tribunal wrote:

      "Mr Buckley refers us  to  the  Tribunal  determination  in  Suleiman
         [2002] UKIAT 00416 where this issue was considered  comprehensively
         by that Tribunal.  The relevant part of the determination  for  the
         purposes of this appeal can be found in paragraph 14 where,  having
         considered this issue of whether a Bajuni would speak  Kibajuni  or
         Swahili, the Tribunal commented as follows:  "While  there  may  be
         young Bajuni who have grown up in refugee camps in  Kenya  speaking
         Swahili that is not this asylum seeker's history.  We shall  decide
         what view will be taken of her case when we have dealt with all the
         evidence; but we think Adjudicators should  approach  any  (appeal)
         involving someone who claims to be a Bajuni resident of Somalia but
         who cannot speak Kibajuni let alone Somali with great caution."


         The Tribunal were not saying that an appeal could not succeed if  a
         claimant only spoke Swahili.  It was sounding  a  note  of  warning
         that such cases should be considered with  great  caution.   It  is
         clear that the Adjudicator in this appeal was  well  aware  of  the
         language issue.  It was for him to decide what weight to attach  to
         the fact that the claimant  could  not  speak  Kibajuni  but  spoke
         Swahili.   He  heard  an  explanation  and  it  appears  from   his
         determination that he accepted that explanation.   He  found  as  a
         fact that the claimant had only been eight or nine years  old  when
         he left Somalia and also that he had lived in a  village  near  the
         border.  It was for the Adjudicator to decide what weight to attach
         to that explanation as to why the claimant did not speak Kibajuni."


43.   In AJH when dealing with an  assessment  of  whether  a  Claimant  is
      Bajuni, the Tribunal wrote in paragraph 33 as follows:

      "What is needed therefore in cases  in  which  claims  to  be  Somali
         nationals and Bajuni clan identity are made is first of all:
      (i)   an assessment which examines at least three different factors:
      (a)   knowledge of Kibajuni;
       (b)    knowledge  of  Somali  depending  on  the  person's  personal
         history;
      (c)   knowledge of matters to do  with  life  in  Somali  for  Bajuni
         (geography, customs, occupations etc.).
      But what is also needed is
      (ii)  an assessment which  does not treat  any  one  of  these  three
         factors as decisive: as the Tribunal noted in Omar ...It  is  even
         possible albeit unusual that a person who does not speak  Kibajuni
         or Somali could be a Bajuni."

44.   We see no reason to amend or vary  the  analyses  set  out  in  these
      cases. They are a working out in Bajuni cases of the general principle
      that each case must be determined on its  own  specific  facts  whilst
      keeping in mind the need to give due weight to the objective  evidence
      which may indicate that certain clans such as the Bajuni  continue  to
      be at a general risk of persecution. In every case whether or  not  it
      appears to present as a case where a general risk of serious  harm  is
      shown to a particular group or class of people such as  members  of  a
      clan or sub-clan, it remains important that the evidence as a whole is
      considered. This includes an assessment of the claimant's  account  of
      events set against the relevant background in  the  light  of  factors
      such as the circumstances of  his  departure,  the  route  taken,  the
      evidence about how his travel is financed,  whether  opportunities  to
      claim asylum in intervening countries have been taken, any explanation
      for such failure and whether there has  been  any  delay  in  claiming
      asylum in arrival. It is only such an approach which can  ensure  that
      credibility both as to past events and clan membership can properly be
      assessed. None of these factors are determinative of  credibility  but
      they are part of the overall picture  to  be  taken  into  account  in
      assessing whether in fact flight  is  motivated  by  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or some other reason falling outside the Convention.

Conclusions

45.   The Tribunal now turns to the  facts  of  the  present  appeal.   The
    Adjudicator did not believe that the appellant was  Bajuni  because  he
    was not  satisfied  that  he  was  able  to  speak  Kibajuni:  although
    questions were asked in that language the appellant replied in Swahili.
     Even on that basis the appellant must have  been  able  to  understand
    Kibajuni if he was able to answer in Swahili.  At  the  hearing  before
    the Tribunal the appellant gave his evidence  in  Kibajuni.   The  only
    time the interpreter identified the use of Swahili words was  when  the
    Appellant said that he was a fisherman.

46.   In addition to the appellant's own evidence the Tribunal  heard  from
    Mr Allen.  On the language issue the Appellant was able to identify  to
    Mr Allen most of the Kibajuni words put to him where there was a  clear
    difference from Swahili.  This certainly indicates  some  knowledge  of
    Kibajuni.  We accept Mr Allen's evidence that  the  younger  generation
    generally prefer speaking  Swahili  rather  then  Kibajuni.   This  may
    explain what happened before the Adjudicator: the  Appellant  was  more
    comfortable speaking Swahili even though he understood the questions in
    Kibajuni.  At the hearing before the Tribunal the  appellant  confirmed
    that he preferred to speak Swahili.  He speaks little  if  any  Somali.
    We draw no adverse influence from  this.   His  lack  of  knowledge  of
    Somali is consistent with the evidence in the 2004  Report  that  those
    living on the islands are less likely to speak Somali then those on the
    coastline.

47.   The  information  the  Appellant  gave  about  his  wedding  and  the
    particulars of the Bajuni customs associated with it  provides  further
    evidence of his knowledge of Bajuni customs.  We attach less weight but
    still take into account  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
    describe features of the island.  We note the fact that Mr  Allen  does
    not appear to have relied on the accuracy of  the  answers  but  rather
    formed an assessment on the basis that  the  appellant  was  describing
    matters which he had seen and experienced.  Mr Allen's conclusions were
    that the appellant displayed a good knowledge of the  local  geography,
    currency, Bajuni customs and language of the area he  claimed  to  come
    from.  Although Mr Allen has not been to Somalia, his expertise derives
    from living in East Africa for 21 years which led to his  knowledge  of
    the sub-groupings of many of  the  tribes.   He  has  lived  among  the
    coastal tribes  and  has  acquired  the  ability  to  recognise  tribal
    groupings.  He accepts that the main source of  his  information  about
    the Bajunis comes from the many Bajunis  he  has  met  and  interviewed
    coming from Kismayo and the islands.

48.   The first reason relied on by the Secretary of State  for  contesting
    the Appellant's clan membership is that the Bajuni are a united  people
    who are not divided into sub-groups.  The Tribunal accept that this  is
    incorrect if this is taken to mean that there are  no  sub-clans.   The
    Bajuni sub-clans such as the Khazaragia, Wafailia, Wachanda  and  Ausia
    are well-known.  The Tribunal has dealt with the issue of  whether  the
    failure to speak Somali indicates that the Appellant is not  a  Bajuni.
    It was argued in the reasons for refusal letter that it was implausible
    that the appellant as a fisherman would not have travelled to  Kismayo.
    On the maps produced to the Tribunal it is clear that  Koyama  is  well
    south of Kismayo.  The Tribunal accept that  not  all  fishermen  would
    necessarily travel to Kismayo on a regular basis or even at all.  There
    is some force in the point that the Appellant's account of experiencing
    no real difficulties between 1992  and  2001  sits  uneasily  with  the
    background evidence although it is not impossible  that  the  appellant
    having avoided trouble for a number of years found himself  the  victim
    of an incursion on to the island by  a  clan  militia.   The  delay  in
    leaving and the financing of  the  trip  do  give  rise  to  reasonable
    concerns about the credibility  of  the  account.  However,  we  remind
    ourselves that there will be very few asylum claims  where  there  will
    not be areas of doubt and uncertainty. The standard of  proof  is  low.
    The evidence must be evaluated as whole when assessing whether there is
    a real risk of persecution for a Convention reason on return.

Decision

49.   Balancing the various considerations which we  have  outlined  above,
    the evidence does show that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood
    firstly that he is a Bajuni from Somalia and secondly that his  account
    of what has happened to him and his family  in  Somalia  is  true.   It
    follows that he would be at a real risk of  persecution  and  treatment
    contrary to article 3 on return.

50.   On this basis, this appeal is allowed.




                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT






Approved for electronic distribution
