
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |       |                                                  |
|                  |       |                                                  |


  KK (GBTS - other information systems - McDowall) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT
00177
|                  |            |                                            |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:|                  |
|Heard on:         |14th June 2004        |Appeal number:  |                  |
|Date typed:       |17th June 2004                                           |
|Date promulgated: | 29th June 2004                                          |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS D K GILL (VICE PRESIDENT)                                                |
|MR. C. J. HODGKINSON                                                        |
|MRS. L. R. SCHMITT                                                          |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M. Thirumaney, of Counsel, instructed  by  Trott
                    & Gentry Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms. K. Evans, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

1.1   The Appellant (a national of Turkey, who claimed asylum in the  United
     Kingdom on 13th November 2001) has appealed, with  permission,  against
     the determination of Mr. N. J. Blandy, an Adjudicator, who (following a
     hearing on 19th August 2003 at Hatton Cross) dismissed  his  appeal  on
     asylum and human rights grounds against the  Respondent's  decision  of
     27th May 2003 to  refuse  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.   The
     Appellant's appeal to the Adjudicator was brought under  Section  82(1)
     of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

1.2   This Determination  is  reported  because  we  consider  new  evidence
     relating to information systems/registers in Turkey and the  report  of
     Mr. David McDowall of 19th March 2004  in  which  he  comments  on  the
     Tribunal's  Determination  in  [2004]  UKIAT  00038  O  (Turkey).   Our
     consideration of these documents is  set  out  at  paragraph  23,  sub-
     paragraphs (a) to (k) below.

2.1   The issue: Given the terms of the grant of permission  to  appeal  and
     the grounds of application dated 13th September 2003, the issue  before
     us is whether, if removed to Turkey, the Appellant  would  be  at  real
     risk of persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3.

2.2   In the  grounds  of  application  and  the  decision  granting  leave,
     reference is made to the Tribunal's Determination  [2003]  UKIAT  00034
     ACDOG. It is also asserted that the Adjudicator had failed to take into
     account the heightened risk to the Appellant due to the fact  that  the
     HADEP organisation, which the Appellant supported, was banned in  March
     2003 (i.e. following the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom). In
     [2003] UKIAT 00034 ACDOG, the Tribunal set out guidelines for assessing
     whether individuals would be  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to
     persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 in  Turkey.  Since  the
     grant of permission to appeal, the Tribunal's Determination  in  [2004]
     UKIAT 00038 O (Turkey) has been promulgated.

4.1   Basis of claim: The Appellant is an Alevi Kurd. He has  performed  his
     military service. He supported HADEP (Halkin  Demokrasi  Partisi)  from
     early 1999 in Umraniye. He never  officially  joined  HADEP  (paragraph
     3.10 of the  Determination).  He  was  detained  on  a  total  of  four
     occasions as follows:

      (a)   On 21st  May  1999,  during  a  raid  on  a  HADEP  building  in
           Umraniye. He was held for one day. Whilst being  questioned,  he
           was hit with a sandbag. He was released without charge but  with
           a warning not to attend  the  HADEP  building.  He  nevertheless
           continued his activities.

      (b)   In August 1999, during a raid on a HADEP building  in  Umraniye.
           He was  questioned  and  repeatedly  punched.  He  was  released
           without charge the following day, and told that the police would
           not just warn him the next time. He decided not to go  to  HADEP
           any  longer   (last   sentence   of   paragraph   3.4   of   the
           Determination).

      (c)   On 21st December 2000 during a  raid  on  a  HADEP  building  in
           Sarigazi. He was taken with 15 or 16 people. He was held for two
           days, denied  food  and  water,  interrogated  and  beaten  with
           truncheons on his  knees  and  back.  He  was  released  without
           charge. He resolved not to attend any more  HADEP  meetings.  He
           said  he  had  had  enough  of  it   (paragraph   3.6   of   the
           Determination).

      (d)   On 21st March 2001 from a Newroz celebration. About  200  /  250
           people were arrested. He was released the same day. He  did  not
           mention any ill-treatment on this occasion.

4.2   The Appellant  also  says  that,  in  the  latter  part  of  2001,  he
     experienced problems from Sunni extremists / Hezebollah. This  happened
     after he had questioned an Imam's preaching at the Central Mosque about
     Muslim  support  for  Bin  Laden's  organisation,   giving   his   (the
     Appellant's) opinion that innocents had been killed in America on  11th
     September 2001 and that the preaching  was  wrong.  He  said  that  the
     police also went looking for him. He thought that  this  was  connected
     with the "Hezebollah incident" (paragraph 3.9 of the Determination).

4.3   His parents and two younger siblings live in  Istanbul.  However,  the
     Appellant was born in Karakuyu in the  Sivas  province.  When  he  last
     spoke to his parents, they told him that the police have  raided  their
     house and that there is a warrant for his arrest.

4.4   Page F1 of the statutory appeal bundle shows that  the  Appellant  has
     with him in the United Kingdom  a  Turkish  driving  licence.  He  left
     Turkey on 30th October 2001 (page A1 of the statutory  appeal  bundle).
     According to page A2 of the statutory appeal bundle, he used  a  forged
     passport to travel to the United Kingdom.  He  destroyed  the  passport
     before arriving in the  United  Kingdom.  On  13th  November  2001,  he
     entered the United Kingdom by train from France.

4.5   Since his arrival in the United Kingdom, the Appellant has  married  a
     naturalised British Citizen who is of Turkish origin. The marriage took
     place on 12th August 2002. His wife had a  baby about  3  weeks  before
     the hearing before the Adjudicator took place.

5.1   The Adjudicator's Determination: The Adjudicator stated  that  he  was
     able to  accept  the  core  of  the  Appellant's  accounts,  with  some
     reservations. He made the following findings:

      (a)   (paragraph 6.2) He accepted that the Appellant was  detained  on
           3 occasions from various HADEP buildings.  His  detentions  were
           brief and he was released on each occasion without  charge.  The
           Adjudicator noted that the Appellant complained of a  degree  of
           ill-treatment during his detentions which the Adjudicator stated
           did not seem to him (the Adjudicator) to  be  very  severe  when
           compared to some of  the  objective  evidence.  The  Adjudicator
           stated that the Appellant was detained on each occasion  for  "a
           very short time and that, on  looking  at  the  facts  of  these
           episodes", it was clear that the Appellant was not thought to be
           a separatist but that he was  merely  regarded  as  a  low-level
           HADEP  sympathiser.  The   Adjudicator   considered   that   the
           detentions had the desired effect, in that,  the  Appellant  did
           decide to stop his political activities. It  was  apparent  that
           the authorities took no further interest in him. The Adjudicator
           found that it was not reasonably  likely  that  the  authorities
           actually kept a record of the Appellant's detentions at all  and
           that it  was  considerably  more  likely  that  the  Appellant's
           treatment was simply informal bullying.

      (b)   (paragraph 6.6) The Adjudicator noted the Appellant's  detention
           following the Newroz celebration, that many  people  were  taken
           with the Appellant and that the Appellant was released  after  a
           few hours. The Adjudicator noted that the Appellant was not ill-
           treated and had not mentioned whether his name was taken.

      (c)   (paragraph 6.3) The Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's  claims
           concerning the speech he said he had given at the Central Mosque
           and the alleged subsequent problems from the Hezebollah /  Sunni
           extremists and the police.

      (d)   (paragraph 6.4) The Adjudicator rejected the  Appellant's  claim
           that an arrest warrant had been issued against him.

      (e)   (paragraph 6.5) The Adjudicator noted  that  the  Appellant  had
           not suggested having had any difficulties during  his  youth  or
           during his military service as a result of his Kurdish ethnicity
           or his Alevi faith, that he speaks Turkish and that  his  family
           lives in Istanbul. He found that the Appellant is clearly a Kurd
           who  has  been  successfully  assimilated   into   the   Turkish
           community. The Appellant has not suggested that his family  have
           in any way been involved in separatist activities or  that  they
           have suffered any degree of persecution for any reason.

5.2   The Adjudicator found that the Appellant's removal  would  not  be  in
     breach Article 8. This has not been challenged.

6.1   At the commencement of the hearing, we asked the  parties  to  address
     us on whether the Appellant would have a viable internal flight option,
     in case this becomes relevant. At paragraphs 67 and 69 of the No. 38  O
     case, the Tribunal suggested that the internal relocation was likely to
     assume importance in cases involving Turkish citizens.

6.2   It was accepted and agreed between the parties  that  the  Appellant's
     first and second detentions took place in Umraniye  and  his  third  in
     Sarigazi. It was also accepted and agreed that (as  the  Appellant  had
     said in his statement) Umraniye is in Istanbul and that Sarigazi is one
     hour's drive away from Istanbul.

6.3   Miss Thirumaney contended that  the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  the
     Appellant was not thought by the Turkish authorities to be a separatist
     was challenged in the grounds of application. In support of  this,  she
     relied on the following extract  of  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds  of
     application:

            The Adjudicator considers that the  Appellant  is  not  at  risk
           because "it is clear that the Appellant was not thought to be  a
           separatist but he was  merely  regarded  as  a  low-level  HADEP
           sympathiser" (para 6.2).

      However, this paragraph goes on to state:

            Yet, the Tribunal in [ ACDOG ] has found that  a  returnee  will
           face a real risk on return if he  is  suspected  [sic]  being  a
           supporter of HADEP. In concluding that only those thought to  be
           actual separatists are at risk, the Adjudicator has applied  the
           Polat standard to the  assessment  of  the  risk  on  return,  a
           standard rejected by both the Tribunal and Court of Appeal.  For
           the foregoing reasons it is  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's
           approach to the assessment of  the  risk  to  the  Appellant  if
           returned to Turkey is inconsistent with  that  dictated  by  the
           Tribunal in [ACDOG].

6.4   We considered that it was clear, from the remainder of paragraph 6  of
     the grounds of application, that the assertion in paragraph  6  of  the
     grounds of application is that the  Adjudicator  erred  in  considering
     that only separatists are at  risk;  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
     Adjudicator's finding that the  Appellant  was  not  thought  to  be  a
     separatist. This is further supported by the heading of Ground 1, which
     refers to "the Adjudicator's assessment of the risk to the Appellant on
     return in the light of the facts as found" (our emphasis). We therefore
     ruled that it  was  not  open  to  Miss  Thirumaney  to  challenge  the
     Adjudicator's finding that the  Appellant  was  not  thought  to  be  a
     separatist.

6.5   With regard to the Adjudicator's  finding  that  the  degree  of  ill-
     treatment the Appellant had experienced  in  detention  was  "not  very
     severe when  compared  with  some  of  the  objective  evidence",  Miss
     Thirumaney agreed that the Adjudicator had not rejected the Appellant's
     claims as to the way in which he had been ill-treated.  However, it  is
     asserted in the grounds of application that such  ill-treatment  should
     be regarded as "severe" and that the Adjudicator erred in opining  that
     it was "not very severe".

6.6   We then proceeded to hear submissions.

      Oral submissions

7.1   Miss Thirumaney referred us to:

      (a)   paragraph 5.56 and 5.57 of the CIPU  report  dated  April  2004.
           She was not able to give us  any  information  about  the  Swiss
           Organisation for Refugees (SWOR) but submitted that,  by  virtue
           of the fact that this  information  is  contained  in  the  CIPU
           Report,  we  should  place  reliance  on   it,   notwithstanding
           paragraph 1.2 of the CIPU report. In her  submission,  the  CIPU
           Report has consistently been relied upon before the Tribunal  as
           reliable evidence. In Miss Thirumaney's submission, the last two
           sentences of paragraph 5.57 leads  to  the  inference  that  the
           other information systems would be available at Istanbul airport
           and would be linked to the GBTS system.

      (b)   paragraphs 6.241 and 6.242 of the CIPU Report, which  deal  with
           the treatment of failed asylum  seekers.  There  is  a  list  of
           factors at paragraph 6.242.

      (c)   the "Zaman On-Line" article  at  page  245  of  the  Appellant's
           Bundle B and the final page of the  same  bundle.  Although  the
           former refers to criminal records, the latter  states  that  the
           Police Computer Network and Information  System  is  in  service
           through all city centres and border gates of Turkey  - airports,
           harbours and land borders.

      (d)   paragraphs 6.162 and 6.165 of  the  CIPU  Report,  which  states
           that, in April 2002, a former HADEP leader was sentenced  to  10
           month's   imprisonment   for   "challenging   Turkey's   unitary
           structure" during speeches at a 2000 HADEP convention. A lawsuit
           has been filed to close down DEHAP (Democratic People's  Party),
           the successor of HADEP.

      (e)   paragraph 4 of Mr.  David  McDowall's  report  of  October  2002
           (page 44  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  B)  which  states  that,
           although HADEP was a legal party at that time,  those  belonging
           to it  or  supporting  it  are  considered  separatists  by  the
           security forces ad treated accordingly.

7.2   Accordingly, bearing in mind paragraph 6.242 of the  CIPU  Report  and
     the fact that checks will be made of the local gendarmerie station, the
     Appellant's 4 detentions would emerge, as would the fact that he was  a
     HADEP supporter. There would then be a  real  risk  that  he  would  be
     subjected to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

7.3   In Miss Thirumaney's submission, the Adjudicator had  failed  to  give
     any consideration at all to the  heightened  risk  on  account  of  the
     banning of HADEP on 31st March 2003, after  the  Appellant's  departure
     from Turkey.  In ACDOG, the  Tribunal  stated  that  HADEP  was  banned
     because of its connections with the PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party).

7.4   In Miss Thirumaney's submission, we should apply the guidance  of  the
     Tribunal in ACDOG in order to determine whether the Appellant would  be
     at risk at Istanbul airport.  This  is  because  ACDOG  was  a  country
     guidance case, whereas No. 38 O case is not. Furthermore, the No. 38  O
     case only deals with the GBTS system. She relied on the response of Mr.
     McDowall dated 19th March 2004 to the No. 38 O case at pages 232 to 244
     of the Appellant's bundle B.  Although his comments on the  third  page
     of his report (page 234 of the Appellant's bundle B) were not  sourced,
     Miss Thirumaney submitted that we ought to rely  on  whatever  he  says
     because he is an expert  and  has  been  acknowledged  to  be  so.  Our
     attention was also drawn to the first sentence on page 8 of the  report
     (page 240 of bundle B) and the first sentence of the full paragraph  on
     page 9  of  the  report.  Furthermore,  the  instant  appeal  could  be
     distinguished from the No. 38 O case in that  the  Adjudicator  in  the
     instant appeal had accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  detained  on  4
     occasions.

7.5   At paragraph 6.7 of the Determination, the Adjudicator  had  indicated
     that he had considered the guidance  in  ACDOG.  However,  he  had  not
     indicated  what  factors  he  had  considered.  In  Miss   Thirumaney's
     submission, the Appellant satisfied the  following  factors  listed  at
     paragraph 46 of the Determination in ACDOG - (a), (b), (e),  (g),  (h),
     (i), (j) and (k). She accepted that he did not  satisfy  the  remaining
     factors. As the Tribunal stated in ACDOG, there is no minimum number of
     factors which had to be satisfied for  there  to  be  a  real  risk  of
     persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

7.6   Accordingly, Miss Thirumaney asked us to allow the appeal. If we  were
     not with her this, she asked us to remit the appeal to  an  Adjudicator
     so that the risk on return could be assessed.  We  could  not  see  any
     basis for the request to remit the appeal, since it was  tantamount  to
     saying that, if the Appellant lost his case before the Tribunal on  the
     issue of the risk on return, then he ought to be given a chance  before
     an Adjudicator on the same issue.

8.1   Ms. Evans informed us that  she  would  not  object  to  the  Tribunal
     commencing the assessment of the risk on return on  the  basis  of  the
     guidance in ACDOG, although she asked us to bear in mind the conclusion
     of the Tribunal in No. 38 O case as to what amounts to  an  arrest  and
     what is a detention in assessing some of the criteria set out in ACDOG.
     In Ms. Evans' submission, since the Appellant did have a passport which
     he  gave  to  his  agent,  there  would  be  no  problem  obtaining   a
     replacement passport from the Turkish Embassy.

8.2   The only information about SWOR  is  that  it  is  a  non-governmental
     organisation (NGO). Ms. Evans relied  on  paragraph  1.2  of  the  CIPU
     report, which makes clear that the CPU report does not  represent  Home
     Office policy or opinion. With  regard  to  the  "treatment  of  failed
     asylum  seekers"  section  from  paragraph  6.240  onwards,  Ms.  Evans
     questioned how the Turkish authorities would know that the Appellant is
     a failed asylum seeker, unless he chooses to tell them. He has  a  wife
     in the United Kingdom. There was no reason for the Turkish  authorities
     to be told that he is a failed asylum seeker. The Zaman-On-line article
     refers to criminal records, whereas the Appellant  does  not  have  any
     criminal records. The report states that the reason for the new  online
     system is to bring standards up to EU standards.  Paragraph  4  of  Mr.
     McDowall's report of October 2002 (page 44 of the Appellant's bundle B)
     is irrelevant because the Adjudicator had found that the Appellant  was
     not thought to be a separatist. That finding had not  been  challenged.
     Page 3 of Mr. McDowall's report of 19th March 2004 (on page 235 of  the
     Appellant's bundle B) states that  "the  result  is  that  we  are  all
     guessing". With regard to page 8 of he report, the source for the  text
     to footnote 13 is an ex-para legal with Baker & Co. There is nothing to
     indicate what makes this individual a person with sufficient  expertise
     to comment  on  the  GBTS  system  or  Mr.  McDowall  to  rely  on  his
     "expertise". In Ms. Evans'  submission,  this  was  not  a  report  the
     Tribunal could rely on. The document on the  final  page  of  bundle  B
     refers to a project for the future.  The  system  is  not  operational.
     There is no information about who would be listed on this system. There
     is no reason to suppose that the Appellant would be on any such system.



8.3   In Ms. Evans' submission, the internal flight option was not  relevant
     in this case. Ms. Evans asked us to dismiss the appeal.  There  was  no
     need for the appeal to be remitted.

9.    In response Miss Thirumaney submitted that the final page of Bundle  B
     indicates that the computer system is in service at all  border  gates.
     This corresponds with paragraph 5.56 and  5.57   of  the  CIPU  report,
     which states that records of all detentions are kept. Even  if  we  did
     not take into account the report of Mr. McDowall dated 19th March 2004,
     she urged us to rely on paragraph 5.56 and 5.57  of  the  CIPU  report.
     The internal flight option would not be  available  to  the  Appellant,
     because, at page 70 of the Appellant's bundle B,  Mr.  McDowall  states
     that the requirement of registration with "mukhtars" would give rise to
     problems. Furthermore, if the Appellant fears the state authorities  in
     his home area, he would not  be  able  to  avoid  state-persecution  by
     internally relocating.

10.   We asked Miss Thirumaney whether she could help us understand why,  if
     Mr. McDowall is the expert he is being, or has been, portrayed  to  be,
     he had no knowledge of the information contained on the GBTS until that
     evidence was adduced to the Tribunal in No. 38 O case. Miss  Thirumaney
     submitted that it was only  after  the  evidence  about  the  GBTS  was
     adduced to the Tribunal that the evidence became known.

11.   We reserved our Determination.

      Determination and reasons

12.   We have decided to dismiss this appeal. We now give  our  reasons  for
     doing so.

13.   We  have  already  given  our  reasons  in  paragraph  6.4  above  for
     concluding that there was no challenge in the grounds of application to
     the Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant was not thought  to  be  a
     separatist by the Turkish authorities but that he was  merely  regarded
     as a low-level sympathiser.

14.   With regard to the Adjudicator's opinion that  the  ill-treatment  the
     Appellant described he experienced in detention was "not very  severe",
     we have stated in paragraph 6.5 above that Miss Thirumaney agreed  that
     the Adjudicator had not rejected the Appellant's claims as to  the  way
     in which he was ill-treated in detention. The  grounds  of  application
     assert that the Appellant's ill-treatment was such that the Adjudicator
     erred in opining that it was "no very  severe".  In  other  words,  the
     challenge is not to the Adjudicator's assessment of credibility but  to
     the description of the ill-treatment as being "not  very  severe".  The
     Adjudicator said that the  ill-treatment  was  "not  very  severe  when
     compared with the some of the objective evidence". That is the  context
     in which his opinion should be considered.  Paragraph 6.1 of  the  CIPU
     report dated April 204 states that they have been numerous  reports  by
     human rights organisations of systematic use  of  torture  by  security
     forces, deaths in  police  custody,  disappearances  and  extrajudicial
     executions. It states  that  details  of  commonly  reported  types  of
     torture  can  be  found  in  the  US  State  Department  Reports.   The
     Appellant's Bundle B contains the US State Department Report for Turkey
     dated 31st March 2004. The fifth paragraph of Section 1.c  (page  5  of
     the report) states:

            Human rights observers and medical experts  said  that  security
           officials often used methods that did not leave physical traces,
           such as beating detainees with weighted bags instead of clubs or
           fists, or applying electric shocks to a metal  chair  where  the
           detainee sits,  rather  than  directly  on  the  body.  Commonly
           employed methods  of  torture  reported  by  AI  and  the  HRF's
           treatment centers included:  repeated  beatings;  stripping  and
           blindfolding; exposure to extreme  cold  or  high-pressure  cold
           water hoses; electric shocks; beatings on the soles of the  feet
           (falaka) and genitalia; hanging by  the  arms;  food  and  sleep
           deprivation; heavy weights hung on the body; water dripped  onto
           the head; burns; hanging sandbags on the neck;  near-suffocation
           by placing bags over  the  head;  vaginal  and  anal  rape  with
           truncheons and, in some instances, gun  barrels;  squeezing  and
           twisting of testicles; and other forms of sexual abuse. In  some
           cases, multiple  torture  methods  (e.g.  hanging  and  electric
           shocks) were employed at the same time. Other methods used  were
           forced prolonged standing, isolation, loud music, witnessing  or
           hearing incidents of torture, being driven  to  the  countryside
           for a mock execution, and threats to detainees or  their  family
           members.

           15.   The Appellant has described  the  following  ill-treatment
           during his detention:

      (a)   During his first detention, he was hit with a sandbag for 10  to
           15 minutes. He was interrogated. He describes the officers being
           aggressive. He was told that "they" would "fix" him with a crime
           (paragraph 7 of his statement at page 61 of Bundle A).

      (b)   During his second detention, his face  was  punched,  whilst  he
           was questioned (paragraph 9 of the statement, pages 63 and 64 of
           Bundle A). He was again told that  he  would  be  fixed  with  a
           crime.

      (c)   During his third detention, he  was  handcuffed  and  told  that
           "orders  had  been  received  from  above"  -  as  a   form   of
           psychological pressure. He was deprived of food  and  drink  and
           had to sleep on the floor. On the second day of  his  detention,
           he was beaten with truncheons, including on his knees  and  back
           (paragraphs 12 and 13 on pages 65 and 66 of Bundle A).

      (d)   He has not  mentioned  any  physical  ill-treatment  during  his
           fourth detention (paragraph 11 on pages 64 and 65 of Bundle A).

16.   Whilst we fully appreciate that the  ill-treatment  he  received  must
     have been frightening for him and whilst we stress that we  do  not  in
     any way condone the ill-treatment, we agree with the Adjudicator  that,
     when seen in the context of the  objective  evidence  as  to  the  ill-
     treatment of detainees  in  Turkey,  the  ill-treatment  the  Appellant
     suffered "was not very severe".

17.   The thrust of Miss Thirumaney's submissions is that,  if  we  were  to
     apply the guidance in ACDOG, the Appellant would be  at  real  risk  of
     persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on arrival at Istanbul  airport.
     We do not agree. Miss Thirumaney accepted that the factors mentioned at
     paragraph 46 c), d), f) l), m), n) and o) of  the  ACDOG  Determination
     were not satisfied. We  do  not  agree  with  her  that  the  Appellant
     satisfies all of the remaining factors. We observe on  the  factors  in
     paragraph 46 as follows:

      a)    the Adjudicator found that the Appellant was not thought  to  be
           a separatist but was merely regarded by the Turkish  authorities
           as a low-level HADEP sympathiser.

      b)    The Appellant was  detained  on  4  occasions.  Three  of  those
           detentions took place as a result of raids on  HADEP  buildings.
           All of these detentions were short. With regard  to  his  fourth
           detention, he was taken from a Newroz celebration;  200  or  250
           people were detained at the same time. He was  released  on  the
           same day.

      e)    The ill-treatment during his first 3 detentions  was  "not  very
           severe". He did not mention any  physical  ill-treatment  during
           his final detention.

      f)    He has not suggested that  his  family  have  in  any  way  been
           involved in separatist activities or that they have suffered any
           degree of persecution for any reason.

      g)    Seven months  elapsed  between  the  fourth  detention  and  the
           Appellant's departure. However, that detention  related  to  the
           Appellant's  attendance  at  a  Newroz  celebration.  The   last
           detention which was in connection with his presence in  a  HADEP
           building was in December 2000 - which was about 10 months before
           his departure from Turkey. According  to  paragraph  16  of  the
           Appellant's statement (page  67  of  Bundle  A),  the  Appellant
           continued  to work after his fourth  and  final  detention.  The
           Adjudicator  rejected  his  claims   about   the   problems   he
           experienced following his fourth detention. It follows  that  he
           was able to work without any problems from anyone.

      h)    There is no credible evidence of the Appellant being  under  any
           surveillance or that he was monitored. As we  have  said  above,
           the Adjudicator rejected his claims as to events  following  his
           fourth and last detention.

      i)    He is a Kurd by ethnic origin. However, it is also  relevant  to
           take into account the  fact  that  he  speaks  Turkish  and  the
           Adjudicator's finding that he is a  Kurd  who  has  successfully
           assimilated into the Turkish community.

      k)    We do not agree with  Ms.  Evans'  submission  on  paragraph  k)
           because the  Appellant's  account  is  that  he  used  a  forged
           passport to travel to the United  Kingdom.  However,  he  has  a
           Turkish driving licence, which will assist him  in  the  way  of
           evidence of identity. In any event, he would be returned with  a
           Turkish emergency travel document.

      (The remaining factors do not apply).

18.   We are of course mindful that there is no minimum  number  of  factors
     which  must  be  satisfied  before  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
     persecution or Article 3. In addition to  our  observations  above,  we
     note that he was never arrested from home. Between his first  detention
     and second detention, there was a period of 4 months during which  time
     he experienced no problems. Between  his  second  detention  and  third
     detention, there was a period of 1 year 4 months, during which time  he
     experienced no problems. These were the HADEP-related  detentions.  The
     lack of  any  problems  during  these  periods  does  not  support  the
     contention that he was of adverse interest to the Turkish  authorities.
     We agree with the Adjudicator's finding that the Appellant's detentions
     were no more than a form of informal bullying. Considering all  of  the
     circumstances as a whole and bearing  in   mind  the  low  standard  of
     proof, we are satisfied that, even if we were to determine the risk  on
     return by applying the guidance in ACDOG, it is not  reasonably  likely
     that there would be any record of the Appellant's detentions either  on
     the GBTS or any other information  systems  (even  assuming  that  such
     other info systems are available at Istanbul and are linked in some way
     to the GBTS system).

19.   As paragraph 6.242 of the CIPU report states, persons  who  arrive  in
     Turkey on an emergency travel document would be questioned. There is no
     need for the Appellant to inform the Turkish authorities  that  he  had
     claimed asylum in the United Kingdom. He has a wife and  child  in  the
     United Kingdom. He has a Turkish driving licence which would assist him
     in establishing his identity. Having regard to all of the circumstances
     of this case, we are satisfied that it is not  reasonably  likely  that
     any suspicions would be  raised  about  the  Appellant  on  arrival  at
     Istanbul airport. We are satisfied that he would be  allowed  to  leave
     the airport after routine questioning and  identity  checks  have  been
     carried out. On average, this takes between 6 hours and 9 hours.

20.   After leaving the airport,  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
     Appellant would experience any problems at the  hands  of  the  Turkish
     authorities if he were to return to live in Istanbul  or  in  his  home
     province of Sivas. Accordingly, the internal flight option is therefore
     not relevant.  Accordingly, we agree with the Adjudicator's finding the
     Appellant's removal would not be in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
     obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Appellant's  rights
     under Article 3. We can see no good reason to remit  this  appeal.  The
     assertion that we should remit the appeal for the risk on return to  be
     assessed if we were to decide  that  the  Appellant  is   not  at  risk
     amounts to no more than saying that, if the Appellant fails before  us,
     he ought to be allowed to try his luck before another Adjudicator.

21.   We acknowledge that, since  the  Appellant's  departure  from  Turkey,
     HADEP has been banned. With regard to Miss Thirumaney's submission that
     this means that there is a heightened risk for the  Appellant,  we  are
     satisfied that there would only be a heightened  risk  if  there  is  a
     record of his detentions in the first place. Since it is not reasonably
     likely that there would  be any record of his detentions,  the  banning
     of HADEP since his departure from Turkey does not add to  the  risk  in
     his particular case.

22.   Accordingly, the Appellant's asylum and Article 3 claims fail.

23.   Strictly speaking therefore, it is not necessary for us to  deal  with
     Miss Thirumaney's submissions as to the reasons why the No. 38  O  case
     should not be followed, nor is it necessary for us  to  deal  with  the
     documents referred to at paragraphs 7.1 or  Mr.  McDowall's  report  of
     19th March 2004. However, we take the opportunity to make the following
     observations:

      (a)   The fact that paragraphs 5.48 to 5.57 of the  CIPU  report  sets
           out extracts of a  report  from  SWOR  (Swiss  Organisation  for
           Refugees) does not  mean  that  this  information  is  reliable.
           Paragraph 1.2 of the CPU Report makes it  clear  that  the  CIPU
           report is a collation of extracts of reports. We do not have any
           information about SWOR other than that it is an NGO. We  do  not
           know what methodology SWOR has used to gather  its  information,
           or the reliability of the sources of its information.

      (b)   Whilst it may well be  that  various  bodies  (the  police,  the
           gendarmerie, the army, etc.) within the Turkish government  have
           their own information systems or registers and it  may  even  be
           that such information systems/registers may contain  information
           about persons who have been detained but not formally  arrested,
           we are of the view that the last two sentences of paragraph 5.57
           of the CIPU Report dated April 2004 should be treated with great
           caution. If taken literally, these two sentences would mean that
           every single individual who has ever been detained in  the  past
           (for however short a period of time  and  for  whatever  reason)
           would be listed on an information  system.  Information  systems
           which include all such persons would be rendered of little  use,
           given (from what we know about Turkey) that the numbers of  such
           individuals would be very large indeed - unless, of course,  the
           body  which  operates  the  information  system/register   makes
           entries  of  an  adverse  nature  against  the  names  of  those
           individuals  who  are  of   continuing   adverse   interest   to
           distinguish them from the generality. Accordingly, even if other
           information systems / registers exist, the guidance set  out  in
           the ACDOG case would have to  be  used  in  order  to  determine
           whether it would be reasonably likely that an  individual  would
           be subjected to treatment amounting to persecution or in  breach
           of Article 3 on account of any information about the  individual
           on any such systems or registers if the individual were to  come
           into contact  with  the  body  which  operates  the  systems  or
           register. In other words, the  ACDOG  guidance  would  determine
           whether an individual is at real risk of such  ill-treatment  in
           his home area or the area where his detentions took place.

      (c)   Even if (applying the guidance in ACDOG) it would be  reasonably
           likely that an individual would be at real risk  of  persecution
           or treatment in breach of Article 3 in his home area or the area
           in which his detentions took place, he would  only  be  at  real
           risk of such treatment on arrival at Istanbul airport if  it  is
           shown:

            (i)  that the other information  system/register  on  which  the
                 individual  is  adversely  recorded  is  available  to  the
                 immigration or security officials at Istanbul airport; and

            (ii) that there is some way of  linking  the  other  information
                 system/register with the GBTS.

      (d)   SWOR does not say that other information  systems/registers  are
           available to the security  officials  at  Istanbul  airport.  It
           suggests the existence of multiple information systems/registers
           in Turkey but makes no mention of any initiative by the  Turkish
           authorities to put in place a single computer system to  replace
           records held by police departments in Turkey (see (e),  (f)  and
           (g) below).

      (e)   The Zaman On-Line article dated 1st February 2004 (page  245  of
           the Appellant's Bundle B) refers to  a  single  computer  system
           which  will  replace  all  records  kept  by  the   police   and
           gendarmerie. This article  gives  the  name  of  the  system  as
           "Information Collection System". This article states that, under
           the single on-line system, all records of police and gendarmerie
           in the provinces will be abolished and the  new  on-line  system
           will  be  used.  The  document  entitled  "Project  for   Police
           Information Systems" dated April 2002 on the final page  of  the
           Appellant's Bundle B also makes reference to a  police  computer
           network but it gives a different name - the name given  in  this
           article is "Police Computer  Network  and  Information  System".
           Both documents must be referring to one and  the  same  computer
           system - since both articles refer to one system  to  cover  the
           police departments. If this is the case, then the Zaman  On-Line
           article makes it clear  that  only  criminal  records  would  be
           collected into the single system.  The  inference  therefore  is
           that mere detentions would not be collected into the single  on-
           line system.

      (f)   It is also clear from the Zaman On-Line  article  that  not  all
           police departments are already covered  by  the  single  on-line
           computer system. This article specifically refers to the  Ankara
           Police Department having already destroyed all of  its  records.
           Accordingly, anyone who was previously detained  by  the  Ankara
           police and who did not have any  criminal  record  will  not  be
           named on the single on-line  system,  even  if  that  system  is
           available to security officials at Istanbul  airport.  The  fact
           that records of the Ankara Police Department have been destroyed
           means that anyone with a  history of detentions in Ankara  would
           not now experience problems in Ankara, unless they can show that
           the individual officers would remember him and would continue to
           have an adverse interest in him.

      (g)   Furthermore, the Zaman On-line article states that the  previous
           record keeping system  sometimes  led  to  violations  in  human
           rights and  freedoms.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  regard  the
           initiative to eventually abolish all records held by the  police
           and gendarmerie and to collate criminal records into one on-line
           system as a positive development.  Furthermore,  if  only  those
           with criminal records will be named on  the  single  system  (as
           this Zaman On-line article states) and records in  local  police
           stations will be or have been destroyed, then the inference from
           this article is that fewer people will their human rights abused
           even in their former home areas.

      (h)   Mr. McDowall (at page 3 of his report of March  2004,  page  235
           of the Appellant's bundle B) specifically states  that  "we  are
           all guessing". Accordingly, he is speculating in  commenting  on
           the evidence placed before the Tribunal in the No. 38 O case. On
           the same page, he states that  "the  central  question  here  is
           whether the filter as applied by the GBTS as described  [in  his
           report] is in  itself  sufficient  to  serve  Turkey's  security
           needs". He opines that it is not. He proceeds to move from  this
           opinion to the assumption  that  the  Turkish  authorities  must
           therefore be using a better system which does serve its security
           needs. There is no basis for that assumption, which is based  on
           speculation. The evidence we have is that, whether  adequate  or
           not, it is the GBTS which is used at Istanbul airport.

      (i)   At page 8 of his report (page 240 of the Appellant's Bundle  B),
           Mr. McDowall states that "Where the person detained  is  alleged
           to have been politically active or is otherwise perceived as  an
           opponent of the State, it is practice for their detentions to be
           recorded on the GBT. The records can be accessed by the police".
           Footnote 13 indicates that the source for this  is  Hayri  Zafer
           Korkmaz, who is described as an ex-para legal of Baker & Co. Who
           is Mr. Korkmaz? What expertise does he have in this  area?  What
           does  he  base  his  information  on?  How   reliable   is   his
           information?  These  questions  are  not  dealt  with   in   Mr.
           McDowall's report. Furthermore, the contention that  it  is  the
           practice  for  detentions  to  be   recorded   contradicts   Mr.
           McDowall's previous report of November 2002 (see paragraph  5.42
           of the CIPU Report) in which he stated that a  large  proportion
           of detentions at police stations appear to go  unrecorded  in  a
           formal sense.

      (j)   We do not accept that Mr. McDowall's report of 19th  March  2004
           should be accepted by the Tribunal, even though his opinions are
           based, in part, on speculation and, in part, on information from
           parties about whom we are given very little information. It  may
           be that the Tribunal has, to date, given too  much  credence  to
           Mr. McDowall's opinions. If he is the expert he is professed  to
           be, then serious questions are raised as to why, as  an  expert,
           he had no prior knowledge of  the  information  about  the  GBTS
           which was placed before the Tribunal in the No. 38 O  case.  The
           suggestion that it was only at  that  time  that   the  evidence
           about the GBTS came forth does not  address  the  issue  we  are
           raising here. Mr. McDowall has,  for  some  time  now,  produced
           reports opining that the Turkish  authorities  hold  records  of
           detentions which would be available to the security officers  at
           Istanbul airport because they would be on the GBTS. The argument
           he advances in the report of 19th March 2004 (that the practical
           application of the GBTS goes beyond official rules covering  it)
           is not one which he has previously  advanced  -  which  is  very
           surprising, if he is an "expert" and given the  length  of  time
           this particular debate has been going on for. We infer, from Mr.
           McDowall's failure to mention  previously  such  a  distinction,
           that he was, quite simply, unaware of any such distinction until
           the No. 38 O case. It is  also  interesting  to  note  that  the
           information contained in the  "Project  for  Police  Information
           Systems" document dated April 2002 and the information contained
           in the Zaman On-Line article dated 1st February  2004  (both  of
           which pre-date the report of Mr. McDowall dated 19th March 2004)
           is not mentioned in his report. The time may now have come  when
           the Tribunal may wish to  reconsider  what  credence  should  be
           given to Mr. McDowall's opinions.

      (k)   We do not agree that  the  No.  38  O  case  is  not  a  country
           guidance case. It was clearly meant to provide guidance  on  the
           new evidence adduced to the Tribunal in that case about the GBTS
           system.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
VICE PRESIDENT                               Date: 24th June 2004


Approved for electronic distribution
