
                          JZ (Procedure - Adjudicators - No Hearing) Ivory
Coast [2004] 00102
                                                                         | |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 13th January 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 14 May 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Mr A Jordan (Vice President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

For the Appellant:           Ms C M Fielden, instructed by Roelens
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Ivory Coast, appeals, with permission,
     against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M  A  Clements,
     dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Respondent to direct
     his removal as an illegal entrant, having refused asylum.  This appeal
     has a remarkable and, we trust, unusual procedural history, which  has
     caused us to decide to remit it  for  reconsideration  at  Adjudicator
     level.

  2. The Appellant claims that he arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  13th
     November 2000 using a French travel  document  to  which  he  was  not
     entitled.  That, at any rate, was the day on which he sought asylum at
     Croydon.  He was given a form to complete.  He completed  it  on  24th
     November, indicating that  he  had  a  fear  of  persecution  for  his
     political opinion or perceived political opinion arising  out  of  his
     membership of the RDR.  The Appellant made a further statement on 26th
     April 2001 and was interviewed on 17th July 2001.   On  the  following
     day, 18th July, a letter was written refusing the Appellant's claim to
     asylum.  Two months later, on 21st September 2001, the Respondent made
     the decision to direct the Appellant's removal as an illegal  entrant.
     The Appellant appealed against that decision forthwith, that is to say
     on 1st October 2001.

  3. On receiving the notice of appeal, the Respondent was obliged  by  the
     2000 Procedure Rules to send the relevant documents, all of which were
     in his  possession,  to  the  Appellate  Authority  "forthwith".   The
     Respondent's interpretation of that word  apparently  allowed  him  to
     retain the documents for over a year before  forwarding  them  to  the
     Appellate Authority on 12th  December  2002.   In  the  meantime,  the
     Appellant had written to the Secretary of State with further  evidence
     which he said supported his claim.  The result of that  was  that  the
     Secretary of State issued a supplementary letter saying that he  still
     refused the claim to asylum and, rather surprisingly, a new notice  of
     decision to issue removal  directions.   That  notice  is  dated  28th
     October 2002 and there has been no separate appeal against  it.   Also
     in the meantime, the Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  the  Appellant's
     solicitors, Irving & Co, on 16th  October  2002  indicating  that  the
     Secretary of State was satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  removal,  as
     anticipated in the decision of September 2001, would not infringe  the
     United Kingdom's obligations under the European  Convention  on  Human
     Rights:  that was, apparently, something he had forgotten  to  say  in
     the first letter of refusal.

  4. When the Appellant's appeal bundle arrived at the Appellate Authority,
     it was dealt with in the usual way.  A  notice,  entitled  'Notice  of
     First Hearing and Full Hearing' (form ADJ61) was sent to  the  parties
     and the Appellant's representative.  It was issued on 17th March 2003.
      It listed dates for the first hearing on Thursday 10th April 2003 and
     for the full hearing on Friday 13th May 2003.  There was  a  direction
     (again in usual form) as follows:

           "DIRECTION
           EITHER    1.     The Appellant or representative must return the
                       attached  Reply  to  Directions  to  the  Immigration
                       Appellate Authority  at  the  correspondence  address
                       given below before Tuesday, 01 April 2003.   Boxes  A
                       and D must be completed.
           OR              2.      The  Appellant  or  representative  must
                       attend the First Hearing on the date given above.


           Failure to attend  the  First  Hearing  without  a  satisfactory
           explanation, or to return the Reply to Directions will lead to A
           DETERMINATION OF THE APPEAL IN THE APPELLANT'S  ABSENCE  AT  THE
           FIRST HEARING.


                    3. IF  the  appeal  proceeds  to  a  Full  Hearing,  the
                       Appellant must attend.  The appeal will be determined
                       in the  Appellant's  absence  unless  a  satisfactory
                       explanation is furnished.

           The Directions for filling documents must  be  complied  with  7
           days before the date of the Full Hearing."


      The directions for filing documents were enclosed, as was  a  copy  of
      the Reply to Directions form.


  5. That form was not sent to the  Appellate  Authority  within  the  time
     limited by the direction.  Roelens Solicitors, who were  by  then  the
     Appellant's representative, sent  it  only  on  9th  April  2003.   Of
     course, they knew when they sent it that it was late.  They knew  that
     either they or the Appellant  needed  to  attend  the  First  Hearing:
     having failed to comply with direction 1, they needed to  comply  with
     direction 2.  However, there was no appearance at the  First  Hearing.
     In due course, the Appellant and Roelens  received  the  determination
     dismissing the appeal.

  6. The appeal to the Tribunal is based on the fact that the form had been
     returned, although not in time.  It is fair to say that Ms Fielden did
     not press this matter very hard  before  us.   On  the  contrary,  she
     conceded that the solicitors were entirely wrong to assume that it was
     satisfactory to return the form late;  and she said "if the solicitors
     had had any sense they  or  the  Appellant  would  have  gone  to  the
     hearing".  We entirely agree.  The Appellate Authority deals  with  an
     enormous number of appeals and the interval between the  closing  date
     for return of the Reply to  Directions  form  and  the  First  Hearing
     itself  is  fixed  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  form   reaches   the
     Adjudicator's file before the First Hearing takes place.  It is not an
     arbitrary interval, intended to make things difficult for  appellants,
     but the minimum time  that  is  necessary  to  allow  the  Adjudicator
     hearing system to be run efficiently.  It is  quite  unacceptable  for
     appellants or their solicitors to claim that, provided that  the  form
     is returned before the hearing, that  suffices.   An  appellant  or  a
     solicitor who does not return the form so as to comply with  direction
     1, needs to comply with direction 2, in  other  words  to  attend  the
     hearing.  He knows, from the terms of the direction, that if  he  does
     not attend the hearing the matter will be determined in  his  absence.
     An  appellant  or  a  solicitor  who  returns  the  form  late   (thus
     acknowledging receipt of the directions) but does not attend the First
     Hearing must, in our view, be taken to have  deliberately  decided  to
     allow the appeal to proceed in his absence, whatever be  the  standard
     terms of the reply to directions which he has submitted late.

  7. If that were the end of the matter, therefore, we should probably have
     dismissed  this  appeal.   Although  it  is  right  to  say  that  the
     Adjudicator's treatment  of  the  substance  of  the  case  is  rather
     summary, he does say that he has considered the  papers  on  file  and
     that he agrees with the Secretary of State's conclusions.  Bearing  in
     mind the lack of any real or substantive challenge by the Appellant to
     the decision that the Respondent had made and the  detailed  reasoning
     which the Respondent had given, that, in  the  circumstances  of  this
     case, would have been an adequate determination.

  8. Whilst we were in court, however, and were checking the papers on  the
     file in order to be certain of the history  of  the  case,  a  further
     remarkable feature came to light.  This was that Mr Clements, who,  as
     we have said, prepared the determination of  the  Appellant's  appeal,
     was not the Adjudicator who heard the appeal  (insofar  as  there  was
     anything to hear at the First Hearing on 10th  April  2003).   On  the
     file is a record of proceedings of  that  date,  indicating  that  the
     appeal was before Mr M H F Clarke.  There was  no  Presenting  Officer
     and no appearance by or on behalf of the  Appellant.   Mr  Clarke  has
     written "I direct Paper Determination" and has signed it.  Of  course,
     the Appellant and his representative, not having been present on  that
     occasion, were not aware that Mr  Clarke  was  the  Adjudicator.   The
     determination issued by Mr Clements does not indicate that  Mr  Clarke
     was the Adjudicator.   The  determination  is  headed  "Determined  at
     Taylor House on 15.04.03" and "Determination Promulgated Date 23 April
     2003" and then occur the words "Before: M A Clements Esq".  The  parts
     of the determination that deal with the procedural history before  the
     Appellate Authority are as follows:

           "2.   The Appellant was not present at the hearing on  the  10th
           April 2003.


           3.    The Respondent was not represented.
           ...
           7.    I was satisfied that the parties had been properly  served
                 with the Notices of Hearing.  No explanation has  been  put
                 before  me  for  the  Appellant's  absence.   I   therefore
                 proceeded with the hearing.


           8.    Neither the Appellant nor the Respondent appeared or where
                 [sic] represented.  I am satisfied from the court file that
                 the papers were properly served and in time.  I decided  to
                 proceed in the absence of the parties as  provided  for  by
                 Rule 44 of the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
                 Rules 2003."


      At the end, the determination is signed and is dated 15.4.03.


  9. We have the gravest concerns about the form of the determination.   It
     appears to be intended to be read as indicating that Mr  Clements  was
     the Adjudicator on 10th April.  He says "I  therefore  proceeded  with
     the hearing".  But there does not appear to have been any  hearing  at
     which Mr Clements was present.  He says "I decided to proceed  in  the
     absence of the parties", but he does not appear to have given them any
     opportunity to appear before him on 15th April, which  was  apparently
     when he received and dealt with  this  file.   What  appears  to  have
     happened is that after Mr Clarke held the First Hearing, and  recorded
     that there was no  appearance,  he  put  the  file  aside,  making  it
     available  to  any  other  Adjudicator  who  had  time  to   write   a
     determination on it.  Mr Clements was  that  Adjudicator,  and  it  is
     clear that so far as he was concerned, he was determining  the  appeal
     without a hearing.

 10. The processes of determining an appeal by (or at) a hearing  at  which
     the parties may or may not be present, and of  determining  an  appeal
     without a hearing, are  dealt  with  separately  by  the  2003  Rules.
     (Those Rules came into force on 1st April 2003 and apply to procedures
     taking place after that date.)  Rules 44 and 45 are as follows:

           "Hearing of appeal in absence of a party
           44(1) An adjudicator or the Tribunal must hear an appeal in  the
           absence of a party or his representative, if satisfied that  the
           party or his representative

                 (a) has been given notice of the date, time  and  place  of
                 the hearing; and
                 (b) has given no satisfactory explanation for his absence.

           (2) Where paragraph (1) does not apply, an  adjudicator  or  the
           Tribunal may hear an  appeal  in  the  absence  of  a  party  if
           satisfied that

                 (a) a  representative  of  the  party  is  present  at  the
                 hearing;
                  (b) the party is outside the United Kingdom;
                  (c) the party is suffering from a communicable disease  or
                 there is a risk of him behaving in a violent or  disorderly
                 manner;
                  (d) the party is unable to attend the hearing  because  of
                 illness, accident or some other good reason;
                  (e) the party is unrepresented and it is impracticable  to
                 give him notice of the hearing; or
                 (f) the party has notified the appellate authority that  he
                 does not wish to attend the hearing.

           Determining the appeal without a hearing
            45(1) An adjudicator or the Tribunal may, subject to paragraphs
           (2) and (3) of this rule, determine an appeal without a hearing
           if

                 (a) all the parties to the appeal consent;
                  (b) the party appealing against  a  relevant  decision  is
                 outside the United Kingdom or it is impracticable  to  give
                 him notice  of  a  hearing  and,  in  either  case,  he  is
                 unrepresented;
                 (c) a party has failed to comply with a provision of  these
                 rules or a direction of the appellate  authority,  and  the
                 adjudicator or  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  in  all  the
                 circumstances, including the extent of the failure and  any
                 reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine  the  appeal
                 without a hearing; or
                  (d) the  adjudicator  or  Tribunal  is  satisfied,  having
                 regard to the material before him or it and the  nature  of
                 the issues raised, that the appeal can be justly determined
                 without a hearing.

           (2) Where paragraph (1)(c) applies  and  the  appellant  is  the
           party in default, the adjudicator or Tribunal  may  dismiss  the
           appeal without substantive consideration, if satisfied  that  it
           is appropriate to do so.
            (3) Where paragraph (1)(d) applies, the adjudicator or Tribunal
           must not determine the appeal without a  hearing  without  first
           giving the parties notice of his or its intention to do so,  and
           an opportunity to make written  representations  as  to  whether
           there should be a hearing."


 11. When there is to be a hearing, notices of hearing are sent  out  (Rule
     39) and the Adjudicator who is hearing the  appeal  makes  a  decision
     about whether to proceed to determine the appeal in the absence of the
     parties.  If the appeal is determined as a result of that hearing,  it
     must obviously be determined by the Adjudicator who was conducting the
     hearing.  In the case of a "First Hearing", we would not wish  to  say
     that that Adjudicator is seised of the appeal to such an  extent  that
     no other Adjudicator can determine it without a Transfer  Order  being
     executed under Rule 52, but if some other Adjudicator does  deal  with
     the matter after the First Hearing it must  be  recognised  that  that
     Adjudicator is not dealing with it because he was the Adjudicator that
     heard it, but for some other reason.

 12. It may well be that, in an appropriate case,  the  second  Adjudicator
     decides to determine the appeal without a  hearing,  that  is  to  say
     without any further hearing.  Rule 45 indicates the  circumstances  in
     which that may happen.  The Appellant's failure to attend  himself  or
     send any representative to the First Hearing, or to return  the  Reply
     to Directions, may cause  the  second  Adjudicator  to  reach  certain
     conclusions about the Appellant's  interest  in  the  appeal  and  the
     matters which he wishes an Adjudicator to determine, and as  a  result
     he  may  conclude  that  determination  without  a  hearing   is   now
     appropriate.  But that is an  exercise  of  the  second  Adjudicator's
     discretion, not the first Adjudicator's discretion.   And  the  second
     Adjudicator is not acting under Rule 44, but under Rule 45.  He  needs
     to be aware of the provisions of Rule 45(3) unless he can  identify  a
     breach of the Rules or directions, which would open the possibility of
     proceeding under Rule 45(1)(c).

 13. All this applies  entirely  generally.   But  we  would  emphasise  in
     addition  that,  if  this  procedure  is  adopted,  it  must  be  both
     recognised and openly acknowledged that the date when  the  appeal  is
     being determined is not the date of the hearing but the date when  the
     second Adjudicator proceeds to determine the appeal without a hearing.
      That aspect of the procedure means that it is equally important  that
     the second Adjudicator reviews the  facts  upon  which  he  bases  the
     exercise of his discretion on that date and does not merely proceed as
     if the facts were the same as they were  at  the  time  of  the  First
     Hearing.  In particular, we should  have  thought  that  it  would  be
     essential to see whether it was still  the  case  that  the  Reply  to
     Directions had not been submitted or was not available.  Although,  as
     we have indicated, there is clear  justification  for  requiring  that
     reply to be submitted a suitable period before the First Hearing, when
     the appeal is not  in  fact  determined  at  that  hearing  but  at  a
     previously unspecified date after the First Hearing, it  becomes  very
     much more difficult to justify the  rigorous  application  of  a  Rule
     requiring a reply to be submitted by a particular date.

 14. To summarise, there is nothing objectionable  in  an  Adjudicator  who
     conducts the First Hearing passing the file to another Adjudicator  to
     determine.  If the second  Adjudicator  is  to  determine  the  appeal
     without  a  further  hearing,  however,  he  must  do  so  within  the
     parameters of Rule 45, considering whether, at the date  on  which  he
     determines the appeal it is appropriate to do so  without  a  hearing,
     and indicating in his determination the basis upon which he  exercises
     his discretion and the result of that exercise.

 15. For the foregoing reasons, we are  satisfied  that  the  determination
     issued by Mr Clements in this appeal  was  not  lawful.   Further,  we
     cannot say whether he would have determined the appeal in  the  manner
     he did if he had appreciated that he had a discretion of  his  own  to
     exercise under Rule 45, and that he ought to have considered  whether,
     at the time he determined the appeal, the fact that the form  had  now
     been submitted was something which he ought to take into account.

 16. In these circumstances, this appeal to the Tribunal is allowed and  we
     direct  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  be  considered  again  by   an
     Adjudicator other than Mr Clarke or Mr Clements.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
