
   XH (Art 8 - Role of HOPO) Serbia and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT 00058


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                   Date heard: 10 April and 9 September 2003
                                       Date notified: 29 March 2004

                                  Before:-


                          DR H H STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MRS J HARRIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                                                  Respondent

Presenting Officer role in Art 8 appeals - not a "decision-updater"
Evaluation  of  medical  evidence   asserting   serious   deterioration   of
claimant's psychological condition on return

Representatives:
Miss A Green on the first occasion and Mr M Blundell on the second  occasion
appeared for the appellant.
Mr E Grieves of Counsel instructed by Tuckers Solicitors for the respondent


                     DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AND REASONS

1.    This case is reported primarily to clarify a point about the  role  of
Presenting Officers in Art 8 appeals where the adjudicator is faced  with  a
Secretary of State decision which has not addressed  Art  8  considerations.
The appellant, the Secretary of  State,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr C M  Phillips,  allowing
the appeal of the respondent, a national of Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia,
against the decision to give directions for removal having  refused  asylum.
This case was heard on two separate dates, 10 April  2003  and  9  September
2003.  To avoid confusion the respondent is hereafter referred  to  as  "the
claimant".  We apologise for the delay in promulgating  this  case,  largely
caused by our desire to await the outcome of an appeal being  heard  by  the
President dealing with the issue of proportionality in the light  of  Razgar
[2003] EWCA Civ 840, [2003]  INLR  543  and  Djali  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1371.
However, the approach taken in that case, which is now  reported  as  [2004]
UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia)*, does not significantly differ from  our  own;  and
so we did not consider it was  necessary  to  invite  the  parties  to  make
further submissions addressing points dealt with in that case.

2.    We have decided to allow this appeal.

3.    The adjudicator dismissed the appeal under the Refugee Convention  and
under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  However, he allowed it  under  Art  8.   He
found that removal would adversely affect the mental health of the  claimant
and his wife and therefore their moral and physical integrity.  He wrote:

      "The appellant and his wife had been subjected to  treatment  of  such
    severity that  the  appellant  currently  suffers  from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and  depression  and  his  wife  suffers  from  chronic
    depression requiring a  high  level  of  medication.   There  is  clear
    medical evidence that the return of the appellant  and  his  wife  will
    adversely affect their  mental  health.   Removal  will  be  clinically
    regressive.   There  is  no  realistic  prospect  of  either  receiving
    appropriate medical treatment in Kosovo.  The appellant  and  his  wife
    fall into the categories identified by the UNHCR as requiring continued
    international protection on humanitarian grounds".

4.    The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal were twofold.  Firstly,  it  was
submitted that, having dismissed the appeal on Art 3  grounds,  it  was  not
open to the adjudicator to find a breach on  Art  8  private  life  grounds.
Reliance was placed on the case of  Berkani  [2002]  UKIAT  01704.   In  the
course of elaborating on this ground Mr Blundell contended that this  was  a
case in which, following the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Blessings  Edore
[2003] EWCA Civ 716, the adjudicator was only  entitled  to  decide  whether
the decision of the Secretary of State was "within the range  of  reasonable
responses".  Whereas, submitted Mr Blundell,  the  adjudicator's  assessment
had gone beyond that, in effectively conducting the balancing act under  Art
8 for himself.  Secondly, the grounds contended that  the  medical  evidence
did not justify a finding that return would breach Art  8.   Originally  the
grounds had also alleged that Dr Turner's  diagnosis  was  unsound,  but  Mr
Blundell withdrew that allegation.  He still maintained, however, that  even
if the claimant and his wife did suffer  from  depression  and  PTSD,  there
were adequate medical facilities for the treatment of  these  conditions  in
Kosovo.  Reliance was placed on the case of Thaqi [2002] UKIAT 03520 and  on
objective country materials.

The issue of whether this was a "mixed case"
5.    These grounds were drafted before the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
in Razgar and Djali.  In light of these judgments we have no  hesitation  in
rejecting  the  argument  that  having  dismissed  the  Art  3   claim   the
adjudicator did not have jurisdiction to find  a  breach  of  the  right  to
physical and moral integrity protected by Art 8.  He would only have  lacked
jurisdiction if the case had been one in which the sole or exclusive  ground
on which the Art 8 claim was based concerned  conditions  in  the  receiving
country: see Razgar paragraph 17.   This,  by  contrast,  was  (to  use  the
terminology adopted in Razgar) a "mixed case".   Before  explaining  why  it
is, it is salient to refer in detail to the guidance given by the  Court  of
Appeal on this issue:

      "18.  ...Where the claim is that an expulsion will  interfere  with  a
      person's family life in the deporting state, there is no problem.  Art
      8 is in principle capable of being engaged: see Ullah, para  46.   But
      where the claim is based on an alleged breach of the right to  private
      life in the broader sense referred to, for example,  in  Bensaid  para
      47, the position  is  more  difficult.   The  preservation  of  mental
      stability is "an indispensable precondition to effective enjoyment  of
      the right to respect for private life".  Let us consider two  paradigm
      cases.  In case A, the person is in good health in the UK, but he says
      that, if he is deported to a "safe" third country,  there  is  a  real
      risk that he will suffer a  serious  decline  in  his  mental  health,
      because he has a fear (admittedly irrational) that he will be returned
      to face persecution in his country of origin.  In case B,  the  person
      is already suffering from mental ill health for which he is  receiving
      treatment in the deporting country.   His  case  is  that,  if  he  is
      deported, his mental condition will become significantly worse because
      in the receiving state he will not be given the treatment that he  has
      previously enjoyed.

      19.   It is clear that case A is not capable of  engaging  article  8:
      the territoriality principle is decisive.  But what about case B?  The
      allegation  is  that  the   expulsion   will   cause   a   significant
      deterioration in the claimant's mental health.  But will it  be  as  a
      result of the cessation of treatment in the deporting country, or will
      it be because the treatment previously enjoyed will not be  replicated
      in the receiving country?  On an application of the  "but  for"  test,
      both will be effective causes.  The deterioration  in  the  claimant's
      mental health will not occur if the deporting state does  not  disrupt
      the treatment being given by it.  But equally it will not occur if the
      receiving state continues the treatment previously  enjoyed.   So  how
      should the territoriality principle be applied in a "mixed case" where
      the  allegation  of  interference  with  private  life  contains   two
      elements, one relating to the deporting country, and the other to  the
      receiving country?

           ...
           22....We suggest that, in order to determine whether the  article
      8 claim is capable of being engaged in the light of the territoriality
      principle, the claim  should  be  considered  in  the  following  way.
      First, the claimant's case in relation to  his  private  life  in  the
      deporting state should be examined.  In a case where  the  essence  of
      the claim is that expulsion will interfere with his  private  life  by
      harming his mental health, this will include a consideration  of  what
      he says  about  his  mental  health  in  the  deporting  country,  the
      treatment he receives and any relevant support that he  says  that  he
      enjoys there.  Secondly, it will be necessary to look at what he  says
      is likely to happen to his mental health  in  the  receiving  country,
      what treatment he can expect to receive there, and what support he can
      expect to enjoy.  The third step  is  to  determine  whether,  on  the
      claimant's case, serious harm to his mental health will be  caused  or
      materially contributed to by the difference between the treatment  and
      support that he is enjoying in the deporting country  and  that  which
      will be available to him in the receiving country.  If  so,  then  the
      territoriality principle is not infringed, and the claim is capable of
      being engaged..."

6.    We find that the appeal before  us  involves  a  mixed  case  for  the
following reasons.  Even if there is room for argument as to the  extent  of
the claimant's mental ill health both have been the subject of periodic  and
concerned medical assessments, particularly the claimant's  wife.   That  is
salient in this case,  since,  when  considering  the  claimant's  right  to
respect for private and family life under Art 8, we have  also  to  consider
the impact on him of his wife's mental ill-health.   His  claim  to  alleged
interference with significant elements of her right to respect  for  private
life has two elements: one relating to her enjoyment of this  right  in  the
UK (arising out of the threat of cessation of  UK  treatment  and  support);
the other relating to her ability to enjoy this  right  in  Kosovo  (arising
out of alleged shortcomings in the treatment and support she  is  likely  to
receive there).  We use the phrase  "significant  elements"  of  private  to
highlight the obvious fact that his claim is not based on the mere  fact  of
having a private life - in certain respects  everyone  has  a  private  life
where they are.  His claim was and is that  there  were/are  considerations,
which affect in a significant way his and  his  wife's  physical  and  moral
integrity.

The due deference issue
7.    We also reject Mr Blundell's related contention that  the  adjudicator
was wrong in this case to conduct the balancing exercise required by  Art  8
for himself.  This was a case  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  in  his
Reasons for Refusal letter did not consider any Art 8 issue.   Against  this
background, it is pertinent to cite from the relevant passages in Razgar:

      "40.  We note that both Moses J and Simon Brown  LJ  were  careful  to
      limit what they said to cases where there is "no issue of fact" (Moses
      J) and "the essential facts are not in doubt or dispute" (Simon  Brown
      LJ).  We recognise that, if the adjudicator  finds  the  facts  to  be
      essentially the same as those which formed the basis of the  Secretary
      of State's decision, there will  be  no  difficulty  in  adopting  the
      approach enunciated by Moses J and Simon Brown LJ.  But  what  if  the
      adjudicator finds the facts to be materially  different?   In  such  a
      case, the adjudicator will have concluded that the Secretary of  State
      carried out the balancing exercise on a  materially  incorrect  and/or
      incomplete factual basis.  There is no power  in  the  adjudicator  to
      remit the case to the Secretary of State for a reconsideration of  the
      balancing exercise on the facts as found by  the  adjudicator.   There
      will, therefore, be cases where it is not meaningful  to  ask  whether
      the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  was  within  the  range  of
      reasonable responses open to him, because his determination was  based
      on an accurate analysis of the facts.  But  even  if  the  adjudicator
      were to conclude that the Secretary of State's analysis was wrong,  it
      would not necessarily follow that the Secretary of State would  remain
      open to the adjudicator to decide that the conclusion reached  by  the
      Secretary of State was lawful (and did not breach the claimant's human
      rights) because it was in fact a proportionate response  even  on  the
      facts as determined by the adjudicator.

      41.   Where the essential  facts  found  by  the  adjudicator  are  so
      fundamentally different from those  determined  by  the  Secretary  of
      State as substantially to undermine the factual basis of the balancing
      exercise performed by him, it may by impossible for the adjudicator to
      determine whether the decision  is  proportionate  otherwise  than  by
      carrying out the balancing exercise himself..."

8.    These passages go on to  emphasise  the  importance  of  adjudicators,
even when conducting  the  balancing  exercise  themselves,  "pay[ing]  very
considerable deference to the view of the Secretary  of  State"  as  to  the
importance of maintaining an effective immigration control.

9.    In a recent starred determination, [2004] 00024 M (Croatia),  a  panel
of the Tribunal chaired by the President has reaffirmed the need to apply  a
different approach depending on whether or not the Secretary  of  State  has
applied his mind to Art 8 at the decision stage or  not.   At  paragraph  25
they accept that "where a decision on proportionality has not been taken  by
the Secretary of State as here, the Adjudicator is obliged to reach his  own
conclusions on whether removal would be proportionate.  The  first  approach
has to be followed [i.e. "it is now for the judicial decision-maker to  make
the decision, giving appropriate weight to the  public  need  identified  in
relation to immigration control: see para 21].

10.   However, the  President  goes  on  to  identify  constraints  on  what
adjudicators can decide when they are obliged by reasons  of  pragmatism  to
conduct the balancing exercise for themselves:

      "The starting-point should  be  that,  if  in  the  circumstances  the
      removal could reasonably by regarded as proportionate, whether or  not
      the Secretary of State has actually said so or applied his mind to the
      issue, it is lawful".

11.   Having considered  the  approach  taken  by  the  adjudicator  to  the
balancing exercise in this case, we do not consider that he failed  to  bear
in mind such constraints.  Even if we are wrong about that,  we  agree  with
the view of the Tribunal in M (Croatia) and the Court of  Appeal  in  Razgar
and Djali that in practice it would be rare indeed for one approach  or  the
other to lead to different outcomes.  This was certainly  not  one  of  such
rare cases: given the adjudicator's flawed approach to the medical  evidence
and the evidence about medical facilities in Kosovo, we  have  no  doubt  he
would have reached  the  same  (wrong)  conclusions  whichever  of  the  two
approaches he took to proportionality.

12.   We have established earlier  that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
consider any Art 8 issue when reaching a decision in this case.   We  should
perhaps stress that we do not think he can be easily blamed for that,  since
the claimant had failed to raise any Art 8 issues when  he  claimed  asylum.
Furthermore, when  the  claimant  was  invited  to  submit  a  statement  of
additional grounds, whilst Arts 2, 3 and 5  were  mentioned,  there  was  no
reference to Art 8.  Possibly, since  the  claimant  did  however  refer  to
concerns that his wife's mental state would be  undermined  by  any  return,
the Secretary of State should  have  recognised  he  had  raised  Art  8  in
substance if not in form and so should have reviewed his  original  decision
on Art 8 grounds.  However, Mr Grieves has not sought to take this point  an
in our view nothing hangs on it in any event.

13.   Mr Blundell raised a further point.  So far as we are  aware  it  was,
at least at the date of first hearing, entirely novel.  It was  that,  as  a
Presenting Officer acting for the Secretary of State  in  this  appeal,  his
submissions on the case amounted to or doubled as the Secretary  of  State's
assessment of the Art 8 claim, and thus the  Tribunal  was  obliged  by  the
principles set out by Edore and Razgar to defer  to  them.   He  highlighted
the fact that a Presenting Officer is normally senior in rank to the  person
who makes the original  decision.   We  are  grateful  to  Mr  Blundell  for
raising this important argument.  However, the novelty of his submission  is
not matched by its logicality.  The  subject  of  any  combined  asylum  and
human rights appeal is the decision or action of  the  Secretary  of  State:
see paragraph 21 of Sch 4 of the  1999  Act.   In  the  case  of  an  appeal
brought as this was under s. 69 (5), the grounds of appeal are  confined  to
the  issue  of  whether  removal  in  pursuance  of  the  decision  to  give
directions for removal would be contrary to the  Refugee  Convention.   They
refer, that is, to a decision already made.  (Matters appear to  remain  the
same in this respect under ss. 82-86 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002).

14.   Similarly, the human rights grounds of appeal under s. 65 concern  any
decision  taken  under  the  Immigration  Acts  relating  to  that  person's
entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom..."  Following  Kehinde
(01/TH/2668*) and Kahiharan [2003]  Imm  AR  163,  "any  decision"  in  this
context  includes  the  decision  taken  to  give  removal  directions.   Mr
Blundell, in his capacity as the Secretary of  State's  representative,  may
have authority to make decisions about whether e.g. to withdraw, concede  or
maintain an appeal; he cannot, however, recast the  decision  which  is  the
subject of the appeal.  Indeed, if he were  to  make  a  fresh  decision  on
behalf of the Secretary of State,  that  would  attract  a  fresh  right  of
appeal and would require a fresh notice to be served and other steps  to  be
taken.  It would not be a decision which we could consider  in  the  context
of this appeal, unless  it  were  the  concurrent  or  subsequent  grant  of
limited leave; and, in that case, pursuant to s. 58(9), we would be  obliged
to treat the current appeal as abandoned.

15.   Mr Blundell ventured a further related submission.  He argued that  in
a case such as this, where the Secretary of  State  had  not  conducted  the
balancing exercise previously, the appellate  authority  should  adjourn  so
that this could be done and then consider the appeal in the  light  of  that
reconsideration.  That submission falls for the same reasons as his  earlier
submission.  The statutory framework governing appeals does not provide  for
post-decision decisions to substitute for the decision under appeal.

16.   We appropriate that this can be the cause of  some  very  considerable
difficulty for the  Secretary  of  State,  particularly  since  the  starred
determination  of  the  Tribunal  in  SK   [2002]   UKIAT   05613   requires
adjudicators to assess the evidence as at the date of hearing.   (Under  ss.
85(4) and 002 (2) of the 2002 Act the ability of the  appellate  authorities
to consider post-decision evidence in asylum and asylum-related  appeals  is
even more clear-cut).  We acknowledge too that it  could  be  said,  in  the
context of the 1999 (and 2002) Act, that there is  some  unfairness  to  the
Secretary of State  in  sometimes  having  to  respond  in  the  last-minute
context of a hearing to  further  human  rights-related  evidence  submitted
late, although the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  afford
some protection against that.  By the same token it could be  said  that  if
the Presenting Officer were seen  as  a  decision-updater,  there  would  be
unfairness to  the  claimant's  side  in  having  to  deal  with  a  revised
decision,  with  no  proper  opportunity  to  respond   to   the   revision.
Nevertheless, although the Presenting Officer cannot be seen as  having  the
role identified by Mr Blundell, we do accept  that  it  is  right  that  the
appellate authorities should always be mindful of the constraints placed  on
the Presenting Officer by the statutory  framework  governing  post-decision
evidence in Art  8  appeals  and  should  always  take  careful  account  of
submissions made, particularly since such submissions may  cast  significant
light  on  the  question  of  whether,  notwithstanding  new  evidence,  the
decision under appeal was and remains unlawful.

17.   However, in our view  the  difficulties  for  the  Presenting  Officer
identified b Mr Blundell are ones created by Parliament: not only  does  the
one-stop appeal process as established by the 1999  (and  2002)  Act  accept
that human rights grounds  of  appeal  can  be  raised  late  by  way  of  a
statement of additional grounds.  It also clearly  contemplates  that  there
will be cases where the decision of the Secretary of State does not  address
human rights grounds raised late.  The One-Stop Notice as  set  out  in  the
Asylum (One-Stop) Procedure Regulations 2000 informs claimants that in  such
cases the material  they  submit  by  way  of  additional  grounds  will  be
included for  the  adjudicator  to  consider.   The  Act  provides  for  the
Secretary of State to review the decision but it  does  not  compel  him  to
issue a fresh decision.  (If anything the  structure  of  the  2002  Act  as
expressed in s.84 (1) (c) and s. 85(4) increases the scope  for  adjudicator
consideration of human rights  grounds  not  previously  considered  by  the
Secretary of State.

The Art 8 issue
18.   There was no question in this case that if any removal  were  made  in
respect of this claimant it would be together with his wife: as  such  there
was no real issue of the decision violating his (or her)  right  to  respect
for family life.  This case then is primarily concerned, not with the  right
to respect for family life, but with the right to respect for private life.

19.   In the light of Razgar, it would be perfectly possible to examine  the
Article 8  issue  initially  in  terms  of  whether  the  decision  posed  a
sufficiently serious threat to the claimant's physical and  moral  integrity
so as to engage Art 8(1).  We  would  not  necessarily  have  to  go  on  to
consider under Art  8(2)  whether  any  interference  with  that  right  was
disproportionate.  However, under either approach  the  essential  question,
certainly in this case, seems the same, namely whether the  decision  was  a
disproportionate one, as to the adjudicator thought, then he  was  right  to
allow the appeal and we would have to dismiss the appeal  of  the  Secretary
of State before us.

20.   The allegation in this case is of a  disproportionate  threat  to  the
claimant's right to respect for private life based on a mix  or  combination
of elements, some relating to enjoyment  of  that  right  in  the  UK,  some
relating to enjoyment of that right in Kosovo.

21.   It is also a case in which it is necessary  to  take  account  of  the
medical situation of the claimant as well as his wife.

The Adjudicator's assessment of the medical evidence and its implications
22.   Specifically in respect of the  claimant,  the  adjudicator  found  as
follows:

      "The lengthy and well-reasoned report by Dr Turner concludes that  the
      appellant is suffering from shame-based Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
      and Depression.  There is a significant  psychiatric  disturbance  and
      the appellant  is  clearly  traumatised.   His  presentation  and  his
      reaction to making the disclosure  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
      history that he gives".

23.   At paragraph 46 the adjudicator summed up his assessment  of  both  as
follows:

      "...the appellant and his wife  have  suffered  serious  trauma  as  a
      result of rape...[and]...to recover the appellant and his wife require
      appropriate and sustained treatment, available in Britain..."

24.   At paragraph 49 (already cited) he amplified this as follows:

      "The appellant and his wife had been subjected to  treatment  of  such
      severity that the  appellant  currently  suffers  from  post-traumatic
      stress disorder and depression  and  his  wife  suffers  from  chronic
      depression requiring a high  level  of  medication.   There  is  clear
      medical evidence that the return of the appellant and  his  wife  will
      adversely affect their mental  health.   Removal  will  be  clinically
      regressive.  There  is  no  realistic  prospect  of  either  receiving
      appropriate medical treatment in Kosovo.  The appellant and  his  wife
      fall  into  the  categories  identified  by  the  UNHCR  as  requiring
      continued international protection on humanitarian grounds".

The medical evidence
25.   It is plain that the adjudicator's decision to  allow  the  appeal  on
Art 8 grounds turned largely on his  evaluation  of  the  medical  evidence.
The central issue in this case is  thus  whether  the  medical  evidence  in
respect of the claimant and his wife properly  supported  the  adjudicator's
conclusions.  Let us first consider the medical evidence in respect  of  the
claimant.

26.   As already noted Mr Blundell withdrew at the  outset  of  the  hearing
the allegation  that  Dr  Turner's  clinical  findings  in  respect  of  the
claimant were unsound.  He made clear that  this  concession  was  based  at
least in part on the fact  that  Dr  Turner  had  produced  a  supplementary
medical report dated 1 September 2003.  In this report Dr  Turner  confirmed
that the  claimant  continued  to  meet  the  detailed  criteria  for  Major
Depressive Disorder and for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder albeit there  had
been marginal improvement.  Reiterating his view that return would  cause  a
significant deterioration in his mental state, Dr Turner noted:

      "Although I would  be  mainly  concerned  here  about  the  depressive
      illness and a risk of suicide as a consequence, I would have  to  draw
      attention to the significance of shame as an important additional risk
      factor in relation to such an outcome.  In other words  if  Mr  Hasani
      found himself confronted with worsening depression, worthlessness  and
      a marked feeling of shame, then a suicidal response would become  very
      understandable.  In my opinion, in such a scenario he would present  a
      serious risk of suicide".

27.   However, Mr Blundell maintained his challenge to the other aspects  of
the adjudicator's findings in respect  of  Dr  Turner's  and  other  medical
experts' assessment of the claimant's medical  condition.   He  pointed  out
that although the claimant was someone  who  suffered  from  depression  and
PTSD, he had not sought medical treatment either prior to  the  decision  of
the  Secretary  of  State  or  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  before   the
adjudicator.  By the time of the hearing before the adjudicator he had  been
in the UK nearly 3 years.  Given the  lack  of  any  treatment  during  this
period, he argued, the adjudicator was not entitled  to  consider  that  the
claimant would necessarily  require  any  specific  treatment  for  himself.
Thus it was irrelevant whether there  were  appropriate  medical  facilities
available to treat him.   The  adjudicator  erred  in  treating  this  as  a
significant factor.

28.   We consider that Mr Blundell is  right  to  identify  a  flaw  in  the
adjudicator's consideration of the medical condition of the  claimant.   The
claimant's lack of treatment should have been  seen  as  a  highly  relevant
consideration.  It was an indication  that  his  illness  was  not  seen  as
severe enough to necessitate immediate treatment.  It is true  that  on  the
evidence accepted by the adjudicator the claimant had felt  too  ashamed  to
make known his experiences of rape until  May  2002  and  we  know  from  Dr
Turner's report that it was not until 8 July 2002 that he felt able to  seek
medical help concerning it.  However,  he  was  not  even  then  immediately
regarded as  someone  urgently  needing  treatment.   Mention  was  made  of
initial SSRI drug treatment in order to  stabilise  the  condition,  nothing
more.

29.   It is also true that, having found that  the  claimant  suffered  from
PTSD and depression, Dr Turner's opinion was that his medical condition  was
seriously affected and that "...he should be treated".  We  also  note  that
an assessment appointment  with  the  Psychological  Therapies  Service  has
recently been made by the claimant's GP.  It is true too that Dr Turner  did
not think his condition would stabilise until  the  claimant's  asylum  case
had been determined.  However,  Dr  Turner  did  not  use  the  language  of
necessity to describe the treatment the  claimant  would  require.   It  was
simply that"...he should be offered cognitive  behavioural  therapy  to  try
and help him  overcome  some  of  the  deeper  emotional  reaction  to  this
experience.  This is likely to involve referral to a specialist centre".

30.   For the above reasons we  do  not  think  that  the  adjudicator  paid
sufficient regard to the fact that the  medical  evidence  relating  to  the
claimant did not disclose that his condition was extremely serious.

31.   We now turn to weigh in the balance the mental health difficulties  of
the claimant's wife.

32.   Specifically in  respect  of  the  claimant's  wife,  the  adjudicator
stated:

      "The appellant's wife's psychiatric history has been documented  since
      at least June 2000.  The appellant's wife is currently prescribed  the
      maximum dose of an antidepressant.  She is suffering from a depressive
      illness.  In the report of 11 March 2002, this is stated to be chronic
      as it has persisted for more than three months.  In the report  of  12
      April 2002 Doctor Ananthanarayanan; Consultant Psychiatrist  at  Chase
      Farm, Enfield expresses the view that it  is  quite  likely  that  the
      appellant's wife would rapidly  deteriorate  further  if  returned  to
      Kosovo.  This is because it seems this was  the  precipitant  for  her
      depression and there is also the issue of her  having  been  raped  in
      Kosovo."

33.   The Tribunal now has further letters from Dr Gillian  Century,  doctor
and counsellor, dated 20 March 2003 and 8 August 2003, which  consider  that
return was likely to lead to a "complete breakdown" of  her  mental  health.
Also before us is a report from Dr S Ahmad, staff grade to  Dr  H  Scurlock,
Consultant Psychiatrist, which found her suffering from moderate  to  severe
depression  with  no  active  suicidal  ideation.   Although   noting   some
improvement in her symptoms, the report concluded that it was possible  that
her return would cause a "full relapse"  considering  her  past  history  of
rape and lack of medication and good psychiatric  services.   We  also  have
further details about the claimant's wife's medication.

34.   Once again, although the medical  assessment  of  her  wife  expressed
serious concerns about her likely situation on return  to  Kosovo,  it  does
not  identify  the  wife  as  someone  whose  current  mental  condition  is
extremely serious or as someone who requires hospitalisation  or  a  special
regime  of  drug  therapy.   And,  once  again,  we  do  not  see  that  the
adjudicator sufficiently recognised that the evidence  did  not  demonstrate
that the claimant's wife's condition was extremely serious.

35.   Given that neither the claimant's nor his wife's mental  condition  is
considered to be extremely serious, much depends in  this  case,  therefore,
on  whether  return  would  cause  a  significant  deterioration  in   their
condition, so that it would become extremely serious.

36.   In approaching the issue of medical evidence insofar as it relates  to
risk on return, we take as our starting point the approach set  out  by  the
Tribunal in the case of P (Yugoslavia) [2003] UKIAT 00017 in  which  is  was
said:

      "The approach of the appellate authorities
      The grounds in this case  are  not  unique  in  complaining  that  the
      Adjudicator failed to attach proper weight to (significant  parts  of)
      the medical evidence.  The appellate authorities are frequently called
      upon to evaluate medical reports  which  deal  with  the  risk  facing
      asylum seekers if returned in the light of their medical history.  How
      should they go about this task?  Drawing on past cases such as  Ademaj
      [2002] 00979 and Cinar [2002] UKIAT 06624 and  in  particular  on  the
      starred determination of the Tribunal in AE and FE [2002] UKIAT 05237,
      it is possible to identify the following principles.

      a)    It is not the job of an Adjudicator to make clinical  judgments.
           This is the job of medical experts to evaluate conditions in  an
           appellant's country of origin.  Except in very rare  cases  they
           have no expertise about such matters.

      b)    Albeit not medical experts, adjudicators are perfectly entitled,
           when evaluating a medical report, to consider to what extent  it
           is  based  on  established  medical  methodology  and  criteria.
           Adjudicators should  obviously  be  cautious  about  criticising
           medical reports unnecessarily, particularly given that  they  do
           not have the benefit of a medical report from the respondent  so
           as to enable a comparison to be made.   But  by  virtue  of  the
           frequency with which the immigration appellate authorities  have
           to examine and assess medical reports in asylum-related case,  a
           fund of experience and knowledge has been built  up,  making  it
           possible to identify what is expect from a "good report", and to
           discern which medical experts among, the many whose reports they
           see, produce  reports  based  squarely  on  established  medical
           methodologies and criteria.  If confronted,  therefore,  with  a
           diagnosis (or prognosis) which departs for no good  reason  from
           methodology  and  criteria  established   within   the   medical
           profession, they cannot be expected to  overlook  that  kind  of
           deficiency.  And to the extent that a medical  report  fails  to
           base itself on established medical methodologies  and  criteria,
           an Adjudicator may be justified in attaching lesser weight to it
           as a consequence.  A medical report purporting to  give  an  in-
           depth diagnosis of PTSD based on one superficial interview is an
           obvious example.  As the Tribunal highlighted in AE and  FE,  an
           Adjudicator is also entitled to assess to what extent a  medical
           report is based on examination which has been conducted as  soon
           as possible after the time of the injury or event which is  said
           to have caused the physical or psychological disorder.

      c)     Irrespective  of  the  quality  of  the  medical  report,   the
           assessment of risk upon  return  that  has  to  be  made  by  an
           Adjudicator must  be  based  on  the  notion  of  real  risk  as
           established by refugee law and human rights law.  That will  not
           necessarily be the same concept of real risk applied by  medical
           experts.

      d)    Since an Adjudicator must be his assessment on  a  consideration
           of all the evidence viewed in the round, it is always ultimately
           a matter for an Adjudicator what weight  if  any  to  attach  to
           medical evidence.  In order to assess whether there  is  a  real
           risk, the medical evidence has to be placed  alongside  all  the
           other evidence.  Where a doctor's report has based some  of  its
           key findings on the truth of what has patient has told him about
           past experiences and/or current fears, it may well  be  that  an
           Adjudicator who  having  made  a  global  assessment  finds  the
           appellant's account not  credible,  will  reject  that  report's
           principal findings.  Depending on the particular  circumstances,
           the  medical  evidence  stating  that  a  person's  injuries  or
           condition is "consistent with" his account of what  happened  to
           him in his country of origin may or may not add credence to  his
           claim".

37.   Applying these principles to this case, we are satisfied (as now  also
is Mr Blundell) that the medical reports did  not  depart  from  established
methodologies.

38.   There is no dispute in this case, either, that the  account  given  by
the claimant and his wife concerning their past  traumatic  experiences  was
true.

39.   However, two  questions  remain.   The  first  is,  does  the  medical
evidence establish that the mere fact of  no  longer  being  treated  by  UK
medical experts (as opposed to medical experts  in  another  country)  would
seriously  threaten  the  claimant's  or  his  wife's  physical  and   moral
integrity?  We think the answer to that question is plainly no.  As  already
noted, neither the claimant nor his wife could be  described  as  undergoing
any  intensive,  special  course  of   psychiatric   treatment   for   their
psychological difficulties currently.  Nor has any of the  medical  evidence
claimed that there was something uniquely crucial about the continuation  of
treatment in the UK (such as it was) as opposed to treatment in  some  other
country).

40.   The second  question  is,  did  the  medical  evidence  in  this  case
demonstrate  of  itself  that  return  to  Kosovo  would  lead  to   serious
deterioration?  It is reasonably clear that at least  one  important  reason
the experts in this case consider that return to Kosovo would be adverse  is
simply because it was events that had happened to the claimant and his  wife
there which were the cause and precipitant of their psychological problems.

41,   In our view this reason  is  plainly  incomplete.   Except  in  highly
unusual circumstances, it must be reasonable  to  expect  that  how  persons
will respond on return  to  the  country  of  trauma  will  depend  to  some
considerable degree on the conditions they will actually  face  once  there.
The medical findings  in  respect  to  the  couples'  subjective  fears  and
anxieties about return to Kosovo are important.  However, equally  important
is the fact that there have been major changes in Kosovo since the  claimant
and his wife left.  We do not  think,  therefore,  that  the  mere  fact  of
returning to their country or origin would necessarily have  a  traumatising
effect.  Nothing in the medical evidence indicates  that  the  claimant  and
his wife would be unable to recognise the significantly different  political
and social realities once they returned  to  Kosovo.   Furthermore,  neither
would be required to return to the  actual  places  where  they  experienced
rape, so it would not automatically follow that return would re-expose  them
to the traumas each was caused by their experiences of rape.

42.   Given these limitations in the medical evidence, we consider that  the
question of whether the claimant and his wife will in reality  face  serious
deterioration in their mental health must in this case depend  crucially  on
the extent to which the couple would be able  to  access  available  medical
treatment in Kosovo.

43.   Mr Blundell in this regard has very  properly  reminded  us  that,  as
well as having to  assess  the  extent  to  which  a  cessation  of  medical
treatment in the UK  of  the  claimant'  wife  might  adversely  affect  the
claimant, account has also to be taken of the extent to  which  there  would
be adequate medical treatment available to her (and  possibly  her  husband)
in Kosovo.  His contention  was,  by  reference  to  Thaqi  and  the  latest
objective  country  evidence,  that  there  would  be   adequate   treatment
available in Kosovo.

44.   As Mr Grieves pointed out, the adjudicator did  not  fail  to  address
this further dimension.  At paragraph 27 he concluded: "...medical  care  in
Kosovo is limited".  At paragraph 30 he stated that:

      "I also place considerable weight upon the UNMIK Reports, the most  up
      to date being April 2001.  Under health care it  is  recommended  that
      those suffering from severe or  chronic  mental  illness  and  psycho-
      social disorders cannot  be  satisfactorily  treated  in  Kosovo.   In
      paragraph 46 he noted that: "Kosovo does not have adequate psychiatric
      facilities to deal with the family's  problems  and  drug  therapy  is
      unlikely to be available".  In paragraph 49 he found that:  "There  is
      no realistic prospect of either [the claimant or his  wife]  receiving
      appropriate medical treatment in Kosovo.  The appellant and  his  wife
      fall into  the  categorised  identified  by  the  UNCHR  as  requiring
      continued international protection on humanitarian grounds".

45.   The question remains, however, did the adjudicator  here  capture  the
main relevant considerations that arose in this case?

46.   We do not think he  did.   There  were  two  particular  shortcomings.
Firstly, despite the firm views expressed by the  medical  experts  in  this
case about the psychological condition of both the claimant  and  his  wife,
the fact remains that: (1) the claimant's condition was not  one  which  had
been seen to necessitate ongoing treatment prior to relatively recently  and
even then all that was specified was cognitive behavioural therapy;  so  far
as drug therapy was concerned nothing specialised had been recommended;  (2)
the claimant's wife had been undergoing some counselling  but  she  has  not
been considered as  requiring  admission  as  an  in-patient.   Dr  S  Ahmad
described her as someone suffering from moderate to severe  depression  with
no active suicidal ideation.   Although  she  is  currently  prescribed  the
maximum dose of an antidepressant, there is no specialised drug therapy.

47.   A second shortcoming was  that  the  adjudicator  did  not  accurately
summarise the situation in Kosovo as regards  available  medical  treatment.
It may be that Kosovo  considered  as  a  whole  does  not  have  "adequate"
psychiatric  facilities.   It  does  not  follow,  however,   that   overall
inadequacy means that persons on return would not be  able  to  access  such
facilities.  In this regard, as the Tribunal has noted in many other  cases,
it is important to note that Kosovo does have special centres for  treatment
of those (like  the claimant in this case) who have experienced war  trauma.
 We have seen no evidence to show that the claimant or  his  wife  would  be
turned away from such centres.  It may  be  that  this  might  require  some
travel or relocation on their part, but, again,  there  is  no  evidence  we
have seen to show that such  difficulties  would  prevent  access  in  needy
cases.

48.   In relation to the adjudicator's reliance upon  UNHCR's  specific  and
continuing concerns about "victims of sexual violence", we do not  think  he
was entitled to treat that as a  decisive  factor.   Plainly  that  document
does not state that all person in this category are at real risk of  serious
harm, it makes clear that much will depend on the particular circumstances.

49.   Summing up our assessment of this case, we do not  consider  that  the
adjudicator was justified in regarding the medical evidence as  establishing
that  the  claimant  and  his  wife  would  face  a  real  risk  of  serious
deterioration in their mental  condition  upon  return.   He  was  wrong  to
consider  that  medical  facilities  in  Kosovo  would  be  insufficient  to
alleviate any serious difficulties the couple would face upon return.

50.   We should add for the sake of completeness that  we  do  not  consider
the adjudicator properly understood that the threshold  in  cases  based  on
threats to a person's physical and moral  integrity  as  an  aspect  of  the
right to respect for private  life  under  Art  8  is  a  high  one:  it  is
necessary to show a threat that is serious, or, put another way, to  show  a
level of resultant harm which would be exceptional and extreme.   Since  the
adjudicator did not have the benefit of the  Court  of  Appeal  insights  in
Razgar and other more recent cases, we do not criticise him too greatly  for
failing to analyse matters as these cases have done.  But the  fact  remains
that (in addition to failing to properly  assess  the  significance  of  the
medical evidence  and  the  evidence  relating  to  available  treatment  in
Kosovo) he set the threshold too low.

51.   For the above  reasons  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
allowed.



                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
