
H-AM-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 6 May 2004              |        |BB (MCDDI- known political  |
|Prepared 7 May 2004        |        |opponent.) Congo Brazzaville|
|                           |        |CG [2004] UKIAT 00223       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|13 August 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter, Vice President                                   |
|Dr H H Storey, Vice President                                     |
|Mr G H Getlevog                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation
For the appellant:           Ms N Braganza of Counsel
For the respondent:          Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Ms M E Lewis, who allowed the respondent's appeal against
      the decision made on 28 March 2003 giving directions for  his  removal
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Congo Brazzaville and in this  determination  the  Tribunal
      will refer to him as the applicant.

Background.

2.    The applicant claims to have left Congo Brazzaville  on  26  December
      2002.  He travelled to the DRC and then on to Zambia  and  Kenya.   He
      said that he arrived in the United Kingdom  on  29  January  2003.  He
      claimed asylum on 30 January 2003.  His  claim  was  refused  for  the
      reasons set out in the Secretary of State's reasons for refusal letter
      dated 27 March 2003. Removal directions were issued on 28 March  2003.
      The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this decision on  16  October
      2003.

3.    The basis of the applicant's  claim  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
      follows.  He was born in Brazzaville on 30 November 1969.  In 1993  he
      took employment as a French teacher in a private  school  in  Bacongo.
      In August 1994 he joined the opposition party the Mouvement Congolaise
      pour la Democratie et la Developpement Integral (MCDDI) and until 1997
      he was in charge of cultural affairs and youth activities in  Bacongo.
      The youth section was known as the JMCDDI.  In his  witness  statement
      the applicant describes his duties as educating the youth  members  to
      act peacefully without weapons and to have  respect  for  each  other.
      The party leader, Bernard Kolelas, went into exile in  1997.   He  was
      Prime Minister at the time when the government was overthrown and  the
      new governing party, the PCT, took control following a military coup.

4.    After Kolelas fled the MCDDI  stopped  functioning  in  its  original
      form.  Michel Mampuya appointed himself  head  of  the  party  and  to
      attract new members changed its aims.  The appellant and those sharing
      similar views continued to consider themselves as members of the MCDDI
      but accepted only Kolelas as their leader.

5.    On 10 April 2001 Kolelas was due  to  return  to  Brazzaville  for  a
      conference.  This news was announced in the  international  media  but
      not in the national news.  The  applicant  was  asked  by  Mampuya  to
      convince the youth members that it was not true.   On  10  April  2001
      Kolelas did arrive at Kinshasa airport but was  forced  to  return  to
      Mali.  Supporters had gathered and started to make their  way  to  the
      airport but they were dispersed by the authorities.  On 16 April  2001
      the appellant received a summons  from  the  main  police  station  in
      Brazzaville.  The summons also named Jacques Loubou, the President  of
      the Association des Jeunes Congolais pour le Soutien de la  Democratie
      Integral (AJCSDI) which the applicant had joined in 1998.   They  were
      both told not to organise any further marches. They were reminded that
      if they became stubborn they would "disappear"  and  that  the  police
      knew where they lived.

6.    In June 2001 the applicant travelled to a music  festival  in  Benin.
      Before boarding the plane he was  questioned  about  his  reasons  for
      travelling to Cotonou and asked if his real reason for  going  was  to
      meet Kolelas.  He replied that he  was  going  to  a  music  festival.
      During his stay in Benin he was aware that he was followed by a man in
      civilian clothing whom he recognised from Brazzaville airport.

7.    In March 2002 Denis Sassou-Nguesso was  elected  President.   In  the
      applicant's  view  the  elections  were  corrupt.   According  to  the
      national news he received 80% of the votes whereas  according  to  the
      applicant the population  of  Pool  and  the  southern  population  of
      Brazzaville represented around 40% of  the  total  population  of  the
      country and many people did not take part in the election because they
      were not provided with voting cards.

8.    The President did not formally take up office until August 2002 and a
      large celebration was arranged for his  inauguration  which  coincided
      with national Independence Day.  The  applicant  wrote  a  short  play
      entitled "Never Again in Congo".  The  intention  was  to  demonstrate
      what the Pool population had been going through.  It  was  hoped  that
      the play would stop any further civil war amongst the  population  and
      was particularly aimed at the Pool population.  The aim was to  ensure
      that the leaders were aware  of  the  kind  of  thing  that  had  been
      happening in Pool: torture, destruction of  homes,  arbitrary  arrests
      and kidnappings.  The actors in the applicant's play were between  the
      ages of 13 and 15.  The idea was that if children played the parts  it
      would be more hard-hitting.

9.    Late at night on 18 August 2002 policemen arrived at the  applicant's
      home.  He was arrested, detained and put in a  prison  cell.   He  was
      asked why he had shamed the President.  His hands were tied behind his
      back. A plastic bag was burnt and put on his legs.  He still  has  the
      scars from the burns.  He was detained until 6 November 2002.  He  was
      beaten, fed with what was called the dogs' diet, water, a tiny  amount
      of meat and dry bread.  He would be given  an  unopened  can  and  was
      expected to open it with his own teeth.  He was forced to perform oral
      sex on the guards.

10.   On 6 November 2002 he was released.  He was made to sign a  piece  of
      paper and then given a document which was a bail letter/warrant.  This
      document said that he was  charged  with  defamation,  complicity  and
      producing slanderous documents.  He was then allowed to  leave.   When
      he arrived at his home he found that it had been burnt to the  ground.
      He went to his parents' home where his wife and son were.  He  decided
      it would be safer to stay with a friend.  He wrote a letter of protest
      to the President which was posted  on  11  November  2002.   Later  he
      learnt that Jacques Loubou had disappeared.  He later saw a  newspaper
      which had his name in  it  accusing  him  of  defamation  against  the
      President.  Arrangements were made for him to leave Congo Brazzaville.
       He travelled across the river to the DRC by fishing boat.  He spent a
      month in Kinshasa and travelled by lorry to Zambia.  He then  flew  to
      Nairobi and took a further flight to the United Kingdom.

The Adjudicator's findings.

11.   The Adjudicator accepted the credibility of the account given by  the
      applicant.  It was supported by medical evidence  and  by  documentary
      evidence and was consistent with the background reports.  There is  no
      challenge in the grounds of appeal to these findings.  The Adjudicator
      accepted that the applicant had been persecuted in the past because of
      his political opinions.  She then considered whether there would be  a
      risk  of  similar  treatment  on  return.   She  commented  that   the
      background material showed that the Cobras were responsible  for  most
      human rights abuses  during  the  conflict  although  there  was  also
      evidence that the security forces were responsible  for  extrajudicial
      killings, summary executions, rapes, beatings and  physical  abuse  of
      detainees.  The Pool region had been the target  of  widespread  human
      rights abuses.  The political and judicial  institutions  that  should
      provide protection were not effective.

 12.  She accepted that  there  was  a  risk  of  arbitrary  detention  and
      vengeance  attacks  to  those  suspected  of  being   connected   with
      opposition or ethnic groups opposed to the government.  There was also
      a risk from  groups  operating  at  arms'  length  from  the  official
      judicial and police process.  The Cobras were now integrated into  the
      security forces and had played a central role in  a  recent  crackdown
      against the Ninjas who were associated with  Kolelas  and  the  MCDDI.
      Given the continuing hostility between the government  and  the  Ninja
      militia and the targeting of those seen to be Kolelas supporters,  the
      Adjudicator  accepted  that  there  remained  a  real  risk  that  the
      applicant would face further  ill-treatment  and  persecution  by  the
      security forces on return.  His appeal was allowed on both asylum  and
      human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal.

13.   In the grounds of appeal the  Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in law by failing properly to consider the objective
      evidence when assessing whether there would be a risk on return.   The
      grounds refer to the objective evidence and in particular to paragraph
      4.65 of the CIPU Report which said that there had been a break through
      in the drive for peace and that Ninja  spokesman  had  agreed  to  end
      hostilities.  There was an amnesty offer  for  rebels.   In  paragraph
      6.24 the MCDDI were described as free to participate in the  political
      arena.  Many former  opposition  political  figures  had  returned  to
      Brazzaville and resumed their political  activities.   Paragraph  6.26
      said that there were no reports of politically motivated harassment of
      political parties during the electoral  process.   Had  these  matters
      been taken into account, the Adjudicator would not  have  allowed  the
      appeal.

14.   At the hearing before the Tribunal  Mr  Morris  relied  on  the  CIPU
      Report October 2003.  Ms Braganza produced a bundle of  documents  (A)
      paginated 1-116 together with a further report dated 7  November  2003
      (A1), two further reports prepared by Paul Melly (A2/3) with a list of
      his qualifications (A4) and a  further  report  from  Ticky  Monekosso
      dated  8  August  2003  (A5).  Mr   Morris   produced   the   Tribunal
      determination in MP (Congo Brazzaville) [2004] UKIAT 00002.

Submissions.

15.   Mr Morris submitted that the Adjudicator had not taken proper account
      of the peace initiative and amnesty referred to in paragraphs  4.57-66
      of the CIPU Report.  He accepted that the facts  were  very  different
      from those in MP (Congo Brazzaville) where there had been  an  adverse
      credibility finding.  The issue was whether there would be a  risk  on
      return.  The Adjudicator had failed to consider the improvement in the
      situation in Congo Brazzaville.  In these  circumstances  there  would
      not be a real likelihood that the authorities would have  any  adverse
      interest in the applicant.

16.   Ms Braganza submitted that the Adjudicator  had  reached  a  decision
      which was properly open to her on the evidence.   She  had  considered
      the applicant's circumstances in the light of the background evidence.
       She submitted that the further evidence indicated  that  even  though
      there may be  some  improvements,  someone  in  the  position  of  the
      applicant would still be at risk.  She referred the Tribunal to the US
      State Department Report and to the  supplementary  reports  from  Paul
      Melly.  There was also direct confirmation from Bernard  Kolelas  that
      the applicant would be at risk on return: A115-6.

The background evidence.

17.   The background to the current situation in Congo Brazzaville  is  set
      out in paragraphs 4.1-66 of the CIPU Report and paragraphs  3.1-13  of
      Paul Melly's generic background report dated 27  February  2002.   The
      country has a history of political violence and deep  ethnic  division
      and experienced a brutal civil war in 1993-4 and from 1997 to 1999.

18.   In August 1992 following multi-party presidential elections,
      Pascal Lissouba was elected President defeating
      Denis Sassou-Nguesso.  The political conflict between Lissouba and his
      opponents including Bernard Kolelas spilled over into civil war.   The
      1997 conflict was triggered by Lissouba's attempt  to  neutralise  the
      militia of his political rival Sassou-Nguesso.  Kolelas was  appointed
      Prime Minister by Lissouba.  The civil  war  continued  until  Sassou-
      Nguesso's forces captured Brazzaville and Pointe  Noire.   In  October
      1997 Sassou-Nguesso was sworn in as President and Lissouba and Kolelas
      fled the country.  Violent clashes continued through 1998 between  the
      Ninja militia who are loyal to Kolelas and government forces loyal  to
      Sassou-Nguesso.  In December 1998 there was a  full-scale  battle  for
      Brazzaville. In November 1999 the government  announced  that  it  had
      reached an agreement with the militia loyal to  Lissouba  and  Kolelas
      for a ceasefire and  a  general  amnesty  but  this  did  not  include
      opposition leaders in exile.

19.   There was a national dialogue in March/April 2001.  According to Paul
      Melly some opposition members were allowed to attend but  their  views
      were ignored.  A referendum in January 2002  paved  the  way  for  the
      restoration of nominally constitutional rule.  Presidential  elections
      were held on 10 March 2002.  The  first  round  of  elections  to  the
      National Assembly took place on 26 May 2002 and the second round on 14
      June 2002.  By this stage there was a resurgence of  violence.   Ninja
      forces launched a series of attacks around the Pool area and  fighting
      between them and the government  army  escalated  to  encompass  large
      areas of the Pool province. There was an attack on Brazzaville in June
      2002.  Fighting continued in the  Pool  area.   In  January  2003  the
      United Nations reported that 60,000 people had  fled  their  homes  in
      Pool as a result of  the  conflict.   In  November  2002  a  plan  was
      presented to the government to end hostilities.  On 19  November  2002
      the President ordered the military to create a  humanitarian  corridor
      to enable Ninja rebels to leave the forests in Pool  and  pass  safely
      through  Brazzaville  in  order  to  disarm.   In  January  2003   the
      President's party said it was willing to meet  with  Pasteur  Entoumi,
      the leader of the Ninjas, on condition that he lay  down  his  weapons
      and abandon violence.  On 17 March 2003 the government and the  Ninjas
      issued a declaration in Brazzaville.  The Ninja  spokesman  agreed  to
      end hostilities, disarm fighters and to enable the  state  to  restore
      authority in Pool.   On  26  March  2003  the  government  and  Ninjas
      exchanged prisoners as part of an agreement to restore  peace  to  the
      country.

20.   The CIPU Report confirms that the Congolese government's human rights
      record is poor and that security  forces  have  been  responsible  for
      extrajudicial killings as well as summary executions, rapes,  beatings
      and the physical abuse  of  detainees  and  citizens:  paragraph  6.1.
      There are credible reports that the government deployed  undisciplined
      forces during 2002 in the Pool region.  In January 2003  the  National
      Assembly adopted a law to create a National Human  Rights  Commission.
      This is a requirement of the Constitution  that  came  into  force  in
      August  2002:  paragraph  6.8.   Human  rights  NGOs  have  cautiously
      welcomed this Commission but wait to see how effectively it will work.
       In the section dealing with freedom of assembly and  association,  it
      is said that the government generally respects  the  freedom  to  hold
      demonstrations and public meetings.  The law permits associations  and
      political parties to form freely and no political parties were  banned
      or suspended in 2002.  The  MCDDI  was  free  to  participate  in  the
      political arena but it failed to win any seats in Parliament and  only
      four in the local elections.  From exile, both  Kolelas  and  Lissouba
      called  on  their  respective  parties  to  boycott  the   legislative
      elections  although  that  call  was  rejected  by  party  leaders  in
      Brazzaville  who  decided  to  contest  the  election.   Many   former
      opposition political figures have returned  to  Brazzaville  and  have
      resumed their political activities.

21.    Writing  in  February  2002  Paul  Melly  describes  the  risks   to
      individuals in paragraph 9 of his report dated 27 February  2002  A65.
      He said the  greatest  risk  to  returning  individuals  suspected  of
      connections to the opposition or ethnic groups thought to  be  opposed
      to the current government lies in the risk of arbitrary detention  and
      revenge attack possibly by  groups  operating  at  arm's  length  from
      official  judicial  and  police  process.   Because  of   the   highly
      ethnicised nature of Congolese politics, natives of  regions  such  as
      Pool are perceived by  the  authorities  as  potential  supporters  of
      opposition parties.  He says that it is not certain that returnees  of
      MCDDI persuasion will be killed or detained  but  there  is  no  clear
      evidence that they would be safe: paragraph 9.6.   Returnees  who  are
      not prominent political figures in their own right but  are  known  to
      have party connections to the opposition do remain a potential  target
      for unofficial revenge action  by  Cobras  or  other  "deniable"  pro-
      government elements: paragraph 9.8.

22.   There are further reports from Paul Melly dated 15 July 2002 and
      7 August 2003 dealing with specific claimants.   There  is  a  further
      general background report dated 5 August 2003.  In the 7  August  2003
      report Paul Melly refers to the Peace Accord  signed  in  March  2003.
      This confirmed that significant  warfare  had  stopped  although  some
      renegade Ninja groups had been slow to  abandon  arms.   He  commented
      that it remained to be seen whether this peace  would  endure  over  a
      longer period.  Bernard Kolelas had recently appealed for the right to
      return home  for  reconciliation  talks  but  the  response  from  the
      President was that he would have to face the judicial  authorities  if
      he returned.  This report at pages 2-4 accepts  that  the  March  2003
      peace agreement between the government and the  Ninjas  may  gradually
      defuse tensions  and  improve  the  treatment  of  ethnic  groups  and
      individuals regarded as sympathetic to the  opposition  but  this  was
      likely to be  a  gradual  process.   It  is  his  view  that,  despite
      government talk of reconciliation, the authorities have not undertaken
      serious efforts to protect the rights of people or to  crack  down  on
      human rights abuses by the  Cobras,  the  pro  Sassou-Nguesso  militia
      whose members are partially integrated into the official forces.   The
      peace  agreement  is  also  referred  to  in  the  report  from  Ticky
      Monekosso.  She said that recent events in  Pool  have  offered  signs
      that violence in Congo may be waning but sustaining peace in   such  a
      ravaged country would be a challenge of  considerable  measure.   Many
      Ninjas have refused to relinquish arms and those who have  demobilised
      are complaining that they have  yet  to  receive  tools  or  seed  for
      farming:  see paragraph 6.1.

23.   The Tribunal have been referred to the  determination  in  MP  (Congo
      Brazzaville).  That appeal related to a claimant who was not likely to
      be regarded as an individual with a history  of  grassroots  political
      activity and he had had only very limited involvement with the  MCDDI.
      The Tribunal was not satisfied that in the light of  the  amnesty  and
      the peace agreement that there was any serious likelihood that being a
      member of the Lari ethnic group would  lead  to  persecution  or  ill-
      treatment.  There  was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  claimant's
      previous activity with  the  MCDDI  and  his  family  connection  with
      someone who was a bodyguard of President Lissouba would  increase  the
      risk for him.  The claimant's  activities  with  the  MCDDI  had  been
      between June 1996 and October  1997  when  he  was  aged  16-17.   The
      Tribunal did not believe that the low level activities with  which  he
      had been involved would have led to him being noticed  by  either  the
      authorities or opposition groups. However, the facts  of  the  present
      appeal are very different and the Tribunal has more recent  background
      evidence to consider.

The Tribunal's conclusions.

24.   Looking at the background evidence as a whole, the  Tribunal  is  not
      satisfied that past or  present  membership  of  an  opposition  party
      including the MCDDI  would  lead  without  more  to  a  real  risk  of
      persecution on return to Congo Brazzaville.  These parties continue to
      function although it seems equally clear they are effectively excluded
      from any real chance of obtaining power and  influence.   However,  in
      our judgment the evidence does support Paul Melly's  view  that  there
      continues to be a danger for some political opponents of  the  current
      regime.  Framing this in terms of the  principles  we  have  to  apply
      under the refugee and human rights conventions we  consider  that  the
      assessment  of  whether  there  is  a  real  risk  depends  upon   the
      individual's background and profile including in particular the extent
      of his political involvement and whether he has or is likely  to  come
      to the attention of the authorities.

25.   The applicant is someone who has been the victim  of  persecution  by
      the present regime in Congo Brazzaville.  He was detained on 18 August
      2002 and was the victim of ill-treatment and torture until his release
      on 6 November 2002.  This was followed by an accusation  that  he  had
      defamed the President.  This accusation and his detention  arose  from
      the play he had put on  at  the  inauguration  ceremony.  The  implied
      criticism of events in Pool did  not  go  unnoticed  and  led  to  his
      detention and ill-treatment.  The appellant followed this up after his
      release by writing a letter to the President.  The  response  to  this
      appears to have been  renewed  interest  in  him  by  the  authorities
      evidenced by the newspaper article and the search warrant.

26.   It is argued that the peace  initiative  and  declaration  issued  in
      March 2003 have changed the situation so that the applicant  would  no
      longer be at risk on return.  In our judgment it is too early to  draw
      any firm conclusions about this peace agreement which in reality is  a
      cessation  of  hostilities.   The   political   situation   in   Congo
      Brazzaville has been exceptionally volatile since 1992 and there is no
      indication in the background evidence that the current  government  is
      becoming more tolerant of effective political opposition.  The problem
      for this applicant is that his activities have come to  the  attention
      of the Congolese authorities at the highest level.   He  is  not  just
      someone who has supported or had connections with the MCDDI but he has
      known anti-government views because of the play  at  the  inauguration
      ceremony and his subsequent letter.  Looking  at  the  evidence  as  a
      whole, the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  was  fully
      justified in her findings that the applicant would be at real risk  of
      persecution on return to Congo Brazzaville

27.   For  these  reasons,  this  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      dismissed.





                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



Approved for electronic distribution
