
ar
            SH (Rahanweyn not a minority clan) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 00272

      IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 23 August 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           28 September 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                              Mr A G Jeevanjee



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives Miss J. Bracken, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  for  the
appellant; Mr I. Edwards of Counsel, instructed by Punator & Co.  Solicitors
for the respondent.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant  is  the  Secretary  of  State.  He  appeals  against  a
      determination of Adjudicator, D.N. Bone, allowing the  appeal  of  the
      respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)  against  a   decision   giving
      directions for removal following refusal to grant asylum.

   2. The Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  claimant  is  a  member  of  the
      Rahanweyn clan whose family lived in Baidoa (otherwise spelt Baydhaba)
      which is in the   Bay  and  Bakool  area  of  south-west  Somalia.  He
      described this as a minority clan whose members "have been  persecuted
      in the past by majority clans and this situation is still prevalent in
      Somalia".  He  also  accepted  the  account  she  gave  of  her   past
      experiences. She had lived with her parents in Baidoa until July  1999
      when her family  was attacked by a group of men from the Hawiye  clan.
      They shot her father in the leg and her in the stomach. She woke up in
      hospital; she assumes she got there with the help of neighbours.  When
      she got out of hospital in September 1999 she and her family  went  to
      Kenya.

3.    Turning the background  evidence the Adjudicator noted that  in  early
      April 2002 Colonel Shaatigudund, leader of the RRA, was inaugurated as
      President of the  new regional administration  called  the  south-west
      state of Somalia. However, in July 2002  fighting  broke  out  between
      forces loyal to the  President  and  those  loyal  to  two  RRA  vice-
      chairmen. Fighting  between  the  two  factions  continued  into  2003
      resulting in deteriorating security   conditions  in  Baidoa  and  its
      environs.

4.    The Adjudicator concluded:

           '60.  It would appear  from  the  objective  evidence  that  the
              situation in the Bay and Bakool regions  of  Somalia  is  far
              from satisfactory. Not only is there history of conflict with
              the Hawiye  clan  but  there  is  infighting  between  senior
              factions of the   Rahanweyn  clan.  Given  the  account  this
              appellant has given of herself and the fact that  her  family
              were targeted at the hands of militants of the Hawiye clan in
              July 1999, even accepting that there has been some  means  of
              improvement in the situation in  the  appellant's  home  area
              since that time, I do consider that this appellant  would  be
              at risk if she were to be returned there. I am satisfied that
              the appellant  has discharged the burden of proof upon her of
              establishing that as at the date of the  hearing  she  had  a
              well-founded fear of persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention
              reason if returned to Somalia. Members of the Rahanweyn  clan
              have been persecuted in the past by majority clans  and  this
              situation is still prevalent in Somalia. I  accept  that  the
              appellant's claim shows a fear of persecution for one of  the
              reasons of the Convention.


           61.  There is no central government in Somalia. I cannot see  in
              such a situation that if the appellant were to be returned to
              Somalia there is in force in that country  a  sufficiency  of
              protection because there is no reasonable willingness by  any
              law enforcement agencies to detect, prosecute and punish  any
              offenders.'

5.    In the grounds of appeal the Secretary  of  State  disputed  that  the
      Rahanweyn were a minority clan and submitted that members of this clan
      did not face persecution in the Bay and Bakool area.  At  the  present
      time. He further submitted that in assessing the  claimant  to  be  at
      real risk of persecution by virtue of in-fighting between factions  of
      the Rahanweyn clan, the Adjudicator  offended the criteria  adumbrated
      in Adan HL [1998] ImmAR  338 that there must be a differential  impact
      over and above sufferings caused by civil war to establish a  risk  of
      persecution.

6.    At  the hearing Mr Edwards pointed out that  the  claimant's  sub-clan
      was Elai (which was not to be confused with Eyle). He accepted that he
      had no evidence about the situation of  this  subclan.  He  sought  an
      adjournment so an expert report could be  obtained.  We  refused  this
      request.   The appellant's representatives had had all the time  since
      the appeal was lodged to obtain an expert report. They had  adduced  a
      (generic) report from Mr C. Barnes dealing with  the   Rahanweyn;  the
      opportunity could have been taken to ask Mr Barnes to comment  on  the
      Elai sub-clan.

7.     Miss  Bracken  highlighted  references  in  the  background  evidence
      identifying the  Rahanweyn's close connections  with  the  Digil,  who
      were  a majority clan. Within the  Bay and Bakool area  the  Rahanweyn
      had established themselves as  the  dominant  clan.  Their  inter-clan
      fighting would not  expose the claimant to any  risk  over  and  above
      those faced by other civilian Rahanweyn. Even if risk in the home area
      were  accepted,  she  would  have   a   viable   internal   relocation
      alternative.

8.    Mr  Edwards  argued  that  the  Adjudicator  had  reached  sustainable
      conclusions. He had not identified the  Rahanweyn as a minority  tribe
      and  had correctly identified that within the  Bay  and   Bakool  area
      they had power. He did not accept that Adan principles would apply  to
      the situation of the claimant because, as a woman with a  young  child
      from a subclan she described as very small and vulnerable,  she  would
      found herself in an area of interclan armed conflict in which rape had
      been used as a weapon of war and human rights  abuses  were  committed
      with impunity. Not only would the claimant be  at  risk  in  her  home
      area, it would be unduly harsh for her to relocate, since   she  would
      be an internally displaced person  (IDP) without the protection of any
      majority clan.

Our assessment
9.    We do not consider that the  Rahanweyn constitutes  a  minority  clan.
      We would accept that there has been some division of opinion about the
      minority clan status of the Rahanweyn in  the  past:  the  Adjudicator
      correctly noted this at paragraphs 43 and 56.  However, it is  clearly
      affiliated with the majority Digil clan. Paragraph 1.1 of the   Report
      on Minority Groups in Somalia indicates this,  albeit  observing  that
      the clan is considered  to be less  noble than the major Somali clans.
      That affiliation may  mean, as the  Adjudicator  describes  things  at
      paragraph 3.2 of his determination, that  it  occupies  in  effect  an
      intermediate position between the  main  Somali,  clans  and  minority
      clans  proper.  Furthermore,  2002  has  seen   its   main   political
      embodiment, the  RRA, consolidate its control of the  Bay  and  Bakool
      regions. Even though since 2002 there has been  fighting  between  two
      RRA factions, there is no evidence to suggest that  major  clans  from
      outside the  area,  the  Hawiye  in  particular,  any  longer  have  a
      significant power base there.

10.   We agree with Mr Edwards that for the most part  the  Adjudicator  was
      quite careful not to describe the  Rahanweyn as a minority clan.  But,
      in explaining at paragraph 60 why he was allowing the  appeal  he  did
      state:

             'Members of the Rahanweyn clan have  been  persecuted  in  the
             past by majority clans and the situation is still prevalent in
             Somalia".

11.   This was an error of law on the part  of  the  Adjudicator  since  the
      objective evidence before him simply did not demonstrate  that   "this
      situation  is  still  prevalent  in  Somalia".  On  the  contrary   it
      demonstrated that the Rahanweyn had established themselves through the
       RRA as the dominant clan in that area and it  did  not  disclose  any
      continuing power base held by the Hawiye in that area.

12.   Mr Edwards contended that even if we found the Adjudicator  had  erred
      in his assessment of the position of  the   Rahanweyn  currently,  his
      decision to allow the appeal was still justified in light of the  fact
      that the sub-clan to which the claimant belonged - the  Elai - were  a
      small and vulnerable sub-clan. The difficulty with this contention  is
      that apart from the claimant's own evidence, there is no evidence that
      the   Elai  are  a  vulnerable  subclan.  Given  that  the  background
      materials go to considerable lengths to identify  minority  clans  and
      vulnerable subclans, we consider this  lack  of  mention  significant,
      particularly since the  Elai  is  listed  as  one  of  the   Rahanweyn
      subclans.  It would be absurd to classify  a  sub-clan  as  vulnerable
      simply because it is smaller than the parent clan: most clans,  major,
      intermediate or minority, divide into subclans.

13.   Mr Edwards urged us to find that even if Elai in general were  not  at
      risk of persecution, this claimant  would  be  in  view  of  her  past
      persecution at the hands of the Hawiye: there was no  good  reason  to
      think that this could not re-occur. However, this suggestion  was  not
      supported by the  background evidence, which did not indicate that the
      Rahanweyn were at real risk of further persecution at the hands of the
      Hawiye.

14.   Turning to Mr Edward's submission that the interclan fighting  in  the
      Bay and  Bakool  region  would  have  a  differential  impact  on  the
      claimant, we again find no support for it in the background  evidence.
      It  may  be  that  the  armed  conflict  there  has  been  marked   by
      international humanitarian law violations, but these are not stated to
      have been wide-scale, nor are they stated  to  include  a  significant
      incidence of targeting of civilians. The January  2004  Joint  Danish,
      Finnish, Norwegian  and  British   Fact-Finding  mission  on  southern
      Somalia noted that throughout  the  period  since   summer  2000  when
      clashes began: 'The majority of the civilians in a number of districts
      throughout  Bay and Bakool never experienced armed clashes  and  these
      areas have remained relatively stable'. It was added that as  long  as
      clan members stay within their own sub-clan's traditional  area,  they
      are  considered   safe.'   Furthermore,   the   background   materials
      specifically describes the armed conflict concerned as fighting in the
      context of a leadership dispute  between  different  factions  of  the
      RRA. Neither the claimant nor  any  member  of  her  family  has  been
      involved with any faction of the RRA.  Whilst there  is  reference  in
      CIPU April 2004 Report at paragraphs 6.167-8 to a deterioration in the
      security situation in the   Bay  and  Bakool  region  particularly  in
      Baidoa as a result of the  continued fighting  between  different  RRA
      factions,  it  is  also  stated  that,  since  reconciliation  efforts
      started, clashes have  diminished in intensity.

15.   We agree with Miss Bracken that when assessing risk  within  the   Bay
      and Bakool area the Adjudicator should have applied the principles set
      out by the House of Lords  in Adan and the Tribunal in such cases as J
      (Somalia) [2003] UKIAT 00147. A risk of being exposed  to  lawlessness
      or the normal incidents of civil war or armed conflict does not amount
      to persecution under the Refugee Convention. Nor  does  it  amount  to
      treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention,  since
      a person affected by civil war or armed conflict can only  succeed  in
      showing a real risk of such treatment if he can show a  risk  personal
      to him: Vilvirajah v UK [1991] 14 EHRR 248.

16.   Our conclusion is that the Adjudicator's  finding  that  the  claimant
      would be at risk of persecution/treatment contrary to Article 3 in her
      home  region   was   contrary   to   the   objective   evidence.   The
      misapprehension of fact involved constituted an error of law.

17.   For the above  reasons  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.



                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


