
ar         RM (Sufficiency of Protection-IFA-FGM)  Kenya  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
00022


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

HHeard at Field House
On : 20 January 2004                                              Date
Determination notified
Prepared: 21 January 2004                                              12th
February 2004


                                   Before:

                         Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)
                                Mrs J Harris



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant :          Mr M. Blundell, Home Office Presenting  Officer

For the respondent :         Ms B. Temple, of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr R.A. Cox, who allowed the respondent's appeal on  both
      asylum and human rights grounds against a decision made on 11 February
      2003 refusing to grant her asylum, but granting exceptional  leave  to
      remain until 26 October 2004, the day before her eighteenth  birthday.
      In this determination the Tribunal will refer  to  the  respondent  to
      this appeal as the applicant.

2.    The applicant is a citizen of Kenya, born  on  27  October  1986.  She
      claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  27  September  2002
      accompanied by an agent who provided her with documentation to  enable
      her to enter.  She was abandoned by her agent but  was  found  by  the
      police on 23 September 2002. She claimed asylum on 1 October 2002.

3.    Her claim can briefly be summarised as follows. Her problems began  in
      2000 when her father joined the Mungiki sect. At that  time  both  she
      and her sister were still in school. He stopped her  attending  church
      and became very aggressive.  In July 2000 he  came  home  with  twenty
      other members of the sect and forcibly performed  female  circumcision
      on her mother.  Seven days later her mother died as a  result  of  her
      injuries. Shortly afterwards her father married a woman who was also a
      member of the Mungiki sect. He insisted that both  the  applicant  and
      her sister should be circumcised but they flatly refused. Five members
      of the sect came to their home and both the applicant and her  sisters
      were attacked. Her sister was beaten  and  the  applicant  was  raped.
      Shortly after this ordeal her father managed to trick her sister  into
      leaving with him. They returned.  Her  sister  was  bleeding  and  her
      father was carrying a knife covered in blood. The applicant  was  told
      that she would be next.

4.    Her father insisted that  the  applicant  should  be  circumcised.  He
      threatened to perform the operation there and then but she was able to
      escape and leave home  running to her uncle's house for  safety.   Her
      father knew where she had gone and came  over  to  the  uncle's  house
      threatening to kill him if he did not hand the  applicant  over.   Her
      uncle introduced her to members of a church and they raised the  money
      to buy a ticket for her to leave. The applicant was  taken  by  a  man
      called John who accompanied her to the United Kingdom.

5.    Her account of events was not challenged up to the attack  on  her  by
      her father with a view to carrying out FGM.  The Adjudicator  rejected
      the applicant's evidence given orally at  the  hearing  that  she  had
      reported the matter to the police but they had not taken  any  action.
      He also did not believe the evidence that the applicant's  father  had
      come on almost a daily basis  to  her  uncle's  house  threatening  to
      recover her but had not in fact taken any physical action.

   6. The Adjudicator accepted that the applicant had remained at risk  from
      her father and the Mungiki up to the time of her flight from Kenya and
      that she had a genuine and well-founded fear of them. He  went  on  to
      consider whether the 1951 Convention was engaged.   He  was  satisfied
      that the applicant was a member of a particular social group which the
      Adjudicator identified as women in Kenya and particularly Kikuyu women
      under the age of sixty-five. They had immutable characteristics of age
      and sex which existed independently of persecution and the group as  a
      whole was not defined by persecution.  He  went  on  to  consider  the
      issue of state protection  and  concluded  that  protection  for  this
      particular applicant would be  neither  adequate  nor  effective.   He
      found that relocation would be unreasonable  and  unduly  harsh.   The
      applicant was only sixteen.  The Mungiki were to be found more or less
      throughout Kenya and she had no relatives  elsewhere.   There  was  no
      particular person to protect her. There were only limited  child  care
      facilities in Kenya and many calls on their services from thousands of
      AIDS orphans becoming homeless. The appeal was allowed on both  asylum
      and human rights grounds.

   7. In the grounds of appeal  two issues were raised. The first is whether
      the Adjudicator was right to find that the applicant was a member of a
      particular social group and secondly, whether he was right to conclude
      that state protection against the risk of forcible FGM  would  not  be
      available to the  applicant  in  Kenya.  At  the  hearing  before  the
      Tribunal Mr Blundell referred us to  the  Tribunal  determinations  in
      Muchomba [2002] UKIAT 01348, Hashim [2002] UKIAT  02691  and  Adhiambo
      [2002] UKIAT 03536.  The Tribunal also referred to  Indrakumar  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 1677, a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  Mr Blundell  sought
      permission to amend the grounds  of  appeal  to  include  an  argument
      relating to the issue of internal flight.  This was  opposed  by  Miss
      Temple. In our judgment it is too late for this issue to be raised. It
      should have been raised in the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal
      or at the very least an application should have been made  in  writing
      before the day of the hearing.

8.    It was Mr Blundell's submission that the Adjudicator had erred in  his
      assessment of whether the applicant  was  a  member  of  a  particular
      social group.  He  had  declined  to  follow  Muchomba.   Mr  Blundell
      accepted  that  the  reasoning  in  Muchomba  may  be  susceptible  to
      criticism and he relied on the reasoning in Adhiambo and  Hashim.   It
      was argued before the Adjudicator that the  social  group  was  either
      Kenyan women under the age of sixty-five or Kenyan Kikuyu  women:  see
      paragraph 18 of his determination.  The reality  was  that  the  group
      could not be defined without  reference  to  the  feared  persecution.
      This appeared from paragraph 20  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination
      where he accepted that there was a social group  of  women  in  Kenya,
      particularly women under the age of 65, of whom the  applicant  was  a
      member.  He accepted that they had immutable  characteristics  of  age
      and sex which existed independently of persecution and that the  group
      was not defined by persecution, but then he commented that nonetheless
      it may be identified by reference to their liability  to  undergo  FGM
      particularly if they were members of or  related  to  members  of  the
      Mungiki sect.  In Adhiambo  the  Tribunal  had  assessed  the  country
      information in relation to Kenya and found that it did not support the
      contention that there was a particular social group defined either  as
      Kikuyu women or women who faced FGM.  There was no  evidence  to  show
      that Kikuyu women were discriminated against or at  any  greater  risk
      than women in general.

9.    Miss Temple submitted that the Tribunal should be  slow  to  interfere
      with an exercise  of  judgment  by  an  Adjudicator  and  should  only
      interfere if the judgment was  plainly  wrong  or  unsustainable.  The
      Adjudicator had considered the judgment of the House of Lords in  Shah
      and Islam [1999] ImmAR 283. He had not been bound by the  decision  of
      the Tribunal in  Muchomba.  The  Tribunal  in  Muchomba  had  confused
      persecution with the concept of  having  an  immutable  characteristic
      when it commented that, because all members of the group would not  be
      forced to undergo FGM as many would undergo it voluntarily, this would
      prevent the group having an immutable  characteristic.   She  referred
      the Tribunal to Yake [2000] 00/TH/00493  and  Kasinga  [1996]  the  US
      State Department Report of Immigration Appeals interim  decision  3278
      where the social group identified was  young  women  of  the  Tchamba-
      Kunsuntu tribe who have not had FGM as practised by the tribe and  who
      were opposed to it.  This decision was followed in Yake where  it  was
      defined as a Yopougun women who may be subjected to FGM.  Miss  Temple
      submitted that the social group was  correctly  identified  as  either
      Kenyan women or Kikuyu women under the age of sixty-five.

10.   The Adjudicator did not follow Muchomba because he was  not  satisfied
      by the reasoning that the fact  that  some  members  of  the  proposed
      social  group  would  undergo  FGM  voluntarily  would  rule  out  the
      existence of a particular social group. The Tribunal  agree  that  the
      Tribunal's reasoning was flawed. The Adjudicator was right to  comment
      as he did in paragraph 19 of his determination that the fact that some
      Kikuyu women voluntarily submit to FGM was irrelevant to the existence
      or otherwise of the social group. However, that leaves open the  issue
      of whether Kenyan or Kikuyu women under  the  age  of  sixty-five  can
      properly be categorised as a social group.

11.   In Shah and Islam the House of Lords held that the  social  group  had
      to exist independently of the persecution so  that  persecution  alone
      could not be relied  on  to  prove  the  group's  existence.  However,
      cohesiveness was not an essential requirement of the  group.   Looking
      at the situation  of  women  in  Pakistan,  women  were  discriminated
      against as a group in matters of fundamental human rights.  The  state
      gave them no protection because  they  were  perceived  as  not  being
      entitled to the same human rights as men, and in these  circumstances,
      the applicants in those appeals could be regarded as  belonging  to  a
      particular social group even if more  narrowly  defined  than  by  the
      unifying characteristics of gender, of being suspected of adultery and
      of lacking protection from the  state  and  public  authorities.  Even
      though all members of the group  were  not  persecuted,  the  fear  of
      persecution was sanctioned or tolerated  by  the  state  and  was  for
      reasons of membership of the particular social group.

12.   In the speech of Lord Hoffmann at page 1033 he said:-

             'To what social group, if any, did the appellant  belong?   To
             identify a social group one must first identify the society of
             which it forms a part. In this case  the  society  is  plainly
             that of Pakistan. Within that society, it  seems  to  me  that
             women form a social  group  of  a  kind  contemplated  by  the
             Convention.   Discrimination  against  women  in  matters   of
             fundamental human rights on the grounds that they are women is
             plainly in pari materiae with discrimination on the grounds of
             race. It offends against their rights as human beings to equal
             treatment and respect.'  What constitutes a particular  social
             group in a particular country is a  question  of  fact  to  be
             considered on a case by case basis.

13.   The Adjudicator was not referred to the  Tribunal's  determination  in
      Adhiambo which was an appeal by a member of the Kikuyu tribe against a
      threat of FGM because of membership  of  the  Mungiki  cult.  In  that
      determination the Tribunal viewed the background evidence and came  to
      the following conclusion:

           '23. On a balanced assessment of the Country Information  before
                us it is clear  that  whilst  there  are  some  similarities
                between Kenya and Pakistan, there are  greater  differences.
                The US State Department Report  shows  serious  problems  of
                rape and  domestic  violence,  which  are  often  unreported
                because of the widespread belief that the perpetrators  will
                not be punished.  However, Kenya has agreed to be  bound  by
                international human rights standards. Police regard domestic
                violence against women as a family matter not  as  a  crime.
                But they are being trained  in  gender  issues.  A  domestic
                violence bill has been published and there are a  number  of
                active women NGOs. The overall picture does  not  show  that
                women in Kenya are unprotected by  the  state  to  the  same
                extent as Pakistan. It shows that there is real progress  in
                reducing  institutionalised  discrimination  against  women,
                still some toleration  of  discrimination  but  very  little
                discrimination which is positively sanctioned by the  state.
                A good example, particularly relevant  to  this  appeal,  is
                that there has been a presidential decree banning FGM.   For
                this purpose we do not accept Miss Fisher's submission  that
                a presidential decree is in any way inferior to  an  act  of
                parliament.


           24.   The evidence does not support a  particular  social  group
                defined as either "Kikuyu women" or "women  who  face  FGM".
                There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  Kikuyu  women   are
                discriminated against or at any greater risk that  women  in
                general. As to  women  who  face  FGM,  whilst  the  Country
                Information shows that it is still widely  practised,  there
                is clearly an improvement, exemplified by  the  presidential
                decree to which we have referred.


           25.    We  find  that  the  respondent  does  not  belong  to  a
                particular  social  group.  She  has   not   established   a
                Convention  reason  and  for  this   reasons   her   Refugee
                Convention appeal must fail. However, her Article 3  is  not
                dependent on a Convention reason.'

14.   Miss Temple argues that the factual matrix in  Muchomba  and  Adhiambo
      cannot be relied on. The evidence before those tribunals was that only
      169 girls suffered FGM in  December  1999  compared  with  1200  girls
      during the same month in the previous four  years.   In  the  2003  US
      State Department Report there is reference to  1300  girls  undergoing
      FGM in Marakewet in December 2001 in sharp contrast to the figures for
      1999.   The Tribunal are not satisfied that the extent of the practice
      of FGM in the context of the situation in Kenya affects whether or not
      a social group exists any more than the fact that some members of  the
      proposed group voluntarily submit to this practice. The fact that  the
      number of cases of FGM has increased is confirmed by an expert  report
      from Dr Aguilar dated 9 January 2004.  This deals with the  historical
      developments of the Mungiki movement suggesting that the Mungiki  have
      reasonable political influence in Kenya and the practice  of  FGM  has
      been widespread due to the  search  for  Kikuyu  indigenous  practices
      among the Mungiki followers.

15.   It is estimated that the Mungiki have between 1.5/2 million  followers
      including 400,000 women.  During the ethnic clashes from 1991 to  1998
      the Mungiki administered personal oaths to its members to  promise  to
      fight to defend the Kikuyu, their land and  their  customs.   In  this
      context  radical  members  implemented  the  practice  of  FGM  as   a
      systematic practice to challenge the laws of Kenya and exercise  power
      and control over Kikuyu women.  The  report  confirms  that  there  is
      provision in Kenyan law to protect women threatened with FGM  but  due
      to corruption amongst the police and the lack of local human rights in
      security shelters women are at risk  and  have  to  flee  their  local
      areas.  The  courts  are  not  proactive  in  protecting   women   and
      implementing the law so the numbers of FGM have  increased  since  FGM
      was banned in Kenya.

16.   The Tribunal are not  satisfied  that  this  evidence  indicates  that
      within society in Kenya there is either a social group  of  Kenyan  or
      Kikuyu women under the age of sixty-five. The risk does not arise from
      being a woman or a Kikuyu woman but from being a member of or  closely
      related to a member of the Mungiki movement. The  appellant  does  not
      claim herself to be a member of the Mungiki movement. The risk to  her
      arises from the fact that her father wanted her to undergo FGM.

17.   The Tribunal were referred  to  the  determination  in  Yake  and  the
      decision in Kasinga.  Although the Tribunal in Yake  referred  to  the
      judgement of the House of Lords in Shah and Islam,  the  Tribunal  are
      not satisfied that there was any proper analysis  of  how  the  social
      group identified would be regarded in the particular society, in  that
      appeal, the Ivory Coast.  In any event, the social  group  as  defined
      included within it a reference to the feared persecution:  a  Yopougun
      woman who may be subjected to FGM.  This ignores the point in Shah and
      Islam that  the  social  group  has  to  exist  independently  of  the
      persecution. The same criticisms can  be  made  of  the  social  group
      defined in Kasinga.

18.   The Tribunal is satisfied that the reasoning  in  Adhiambo  is  to  be
      preferred.  We agree with the Tribunal's reasoning in that appeal.  We
      are not satisfied that there is any change in the background situation
      which would justify us taking a different view. It  follows  that  the
      Tribunal is not satisfied that the  social  group  identified  by  the
      Adjudicator can properly be regarded as a  'particular  social  group'
      within the meaning of the Convention.

19.   In these  circumstances  the  Tribunal  are  not  satisfied  that  the
      applicant's fears arise by reason of her membership  of  a  particular
      social  group  and  her  claim  therefore  falls  outside   the   1951
      Convention. The Tribunal need not deal with the argument as to whether
      state protection would be available to the applicant nor as the matter
      is not raised in the grounds of appeal  whether  the  applicant  could
      relocate in safety elsewhere in Kenya.

20.   The appeal was  also  allowed  by  the  Adjudicator  on  human  rights
      grounds.  Both Mr Blundell and Ms Temple agreed that  the  Adjudicator
      erred in doing so.  The decision under appeal was a decision to refuse
      asylum but to grant exceptional leave to remain until 26 October 2004.
      In these circumstances it could not be  argued  that  in  taking  this
      decision the Secretary of State acted in  breach  of  the  applicant's
      human  rights.    The  grant  of  exceptional  leave  gives  her   the
      protection she may well require at the present time  under  the  Human
      Rights Convention and the position  will  be  reviewed  on  the  facts
      prevailing at the time if an application is made for further leave  to
      remain.

21.   For the reasons the Tribunal have  given,  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds.




                                                               H.J.E. LATTER

                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

                                                     -----------------------
      1


