
                                      RS (failed asylum seekers) Syria
[2004] UKIAT 00257 | |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:  12 August  2004                                  |
|Date Signed:      9 September 2004                                 |
|Date Determination Notified: 14/09/2004                            |
|Given orally in court                                              |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                       |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr M L James                                                       |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|For the Appellant:   |Mr A Salfiti, Solicitor, instructed by       |
|                     |Salfiti & Co, Solicitors                     |
|For the Respondent:  |Mr M Davidson, Home Office Presenting Officer|
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


The appellant is a citizen of Syria, born on 20 January 1977 who arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 21 July 2001 with entry clearance  obtained  from  the
British Embassy in Damascus a few weeks previously.   He  travelled  on  his
own valid passport which had been issued to  him  on  25  October  1999  and
which  expires  on  24  October  2005.   It  shows  that  he  has  travelled
extensively outside Syria prior to his arrival in the  United  Kingdom  when
he was granted 6 months leave to enter as a visitor pursuant  to  the  entry
clearance which had been granted to him.

2.    On 15 January 2002, a few days before his leave to remain was  due  to
expire, he claimed asylum and although he was requested to attend  the  Home
Office for interview on 14 February 2002 he failed to do so.  He  says  this
is because he did not receive the letter of invitation.   He  did  submit  a
self evidence form and the Secretary of State refused  his  application  for
the reasons which were set out in a letter dated 6 March 2002.  On  8  March
2002 the Secretary of State issued notice of his decision to refuse to  vary
leave following refusal of his asylum application.

3.      The appellant appealed against that  decision  on  both  asylum  and
human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 15 December 2003 by Mr A  R
Lawrence, an Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator did not believe the basis of  the
claim which he had made and he dismissed his asylum  and  Article  3  claims
for that reason,   He accepted that the  appellant  had  married  a  British
citizen on 23 July 2002 but concluded that although he accepted that  family
life had been established in the United Kingdom his  removal  would  not  be
disproportionate to the important consideration of a maintenance of  regular
immigration control, and so he dismissed the Article 8 claim also.

4.    The appellant has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  us  on  the
single point  that  it  is  asserted  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  not
considering the current Syrian practice of detaining failed asylum  seekers.
  There is no challenge to  the  adverse  credibility  findings  or  to  the
dismissal of the Article 8 claim.    It follows therefore that so far as  we
are concerned this appellant had no past history in  Syria  which  would  be
reasonably likely to bring him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Syrian
authorities on return and that we  are  concerned  solely  with  the  single
point raised in the grounds of appeal.

5.    Mr Salfiti sought to  rely  on  an  Amnesty  International  report  of
January 2004 dealing with the risk  on  return  to  Syria  which  says  that
seeking political asylum abroad is perceived to be  the  act  of  government
opponents by the Syrian authorities and that the very fact  of  leaving  the
country  to  seek  asylum  abroad  is  imputed  to  be  a  manifestation  of
opposition to the Syrian government.  It draws attention to  the  fact  that
former political  prisoners  and  those  who  have  left  illegally  without
authorisation or with false papers are  generally  at  risk  of  arrest  and
detention upon their return.   It says  that  if  they  are  refused  asylum
seekers accompanied by security forces from the country where he or she  has
sought asylum, the Syrian government  is  likely  to  be  made  aware  of  a
person's demand for  asylum.  In  addition,  Syrian  secret  service  agents
working abroad may become aware of requests for asylum as their task  is  to
monitor the Syrian community and opposition abroad.    Mr  Salfiti  did  not
suggest to us in his submissions that there was any  real  possibility  that
this appellant might have come to the attention  of  Syrian  secret  service
agents working abroad and, indeed, as he has no  political  profile  in  his
own country and has clearly been able to travel  in  and  out  of  it  on  a
regular basis in the past there is no apparent reason  why  that  should  be
the case.   He did, however, stress that if he  were  forcibly  returned  he
might then come to the attention of  the  Syrian  authorities  as  a  failed
returned asylum seeker.   He conceded however that given the fact  that  the
appellant has a current valid passport in his own name regularly  issued  by
his own government which on the appellant's own account bears a proper  exit
stamp on the occasion when he came to this country, that it  would  be  open
to the appellant to return on that document without  there  being  any  need
for it to become known to the Syrian authorities that he had claimed  asylum
abroad.   If he fails to depart voluntarily in that way it seems to us  that
he cannot then pray in aid  the  fact  that  he  chooses  to  place  himself
deliberately at risk by ensuring that his removal is a forced return  rather
than the  voluntary return which is properly open  to  him  at  the  current
time.

6.    Mr Salfiti also submitted to us that the length of his absence  abroad
would of itself raise suspicions in Syria but, when pressed, was  unable  to
point to any evidence at all to support such a proposition.   He  did  refer
us to the current  United  States  State  Department  report  issued  on  25
February 2004 which records under the heading "Freedom  of  movement  within
the  country  foreign  travel,  emigration  and  repatriation"   that   "the
authorities could prosecute any person found attempting to  emigrate  or  to
travel abroad illegally or who was deported from another country or who  was
suspected of having visited Israel".  It does not seem to us  that there  is
anything in that passage which the appellant can pray in aid to advance  his
appeal before us.

7.    We were also referred to the  Syrian  Human  Rights  Committee  Annual
Report for the period 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003, and in particular to  the
passage at pages 10 and 11 of  that  report  under  the  title  "third:  the
forcibly deported".    In that short passage there is a reference  to  three
people who have been forcibly deported and whom  it  is  claimed  have  been
subject to severe torture  and  interrogation  on  their  return.   We  note
however, that the  first  quoted,  a  Maher  Arrar,  was  charged  with  co-
operating with Al-Qaeda following his deportation by the United  States  and
that others who are said  to  have  faced  difficulties  were  a  number  of
Syrians forcibly deported from Pakistan "and  delivered  to  Syria".    That
again, seems to be a clear reference  in  the  current  situation  to  there
being  suspicion  once  more  of  Al-Qaeda  or  similar  Islamic   extremist
membership on their part.  It is common ground in other parts of the  report
as well as in this  section  that  those  who  are  members  of  the  Muslim
Brotherhood are at particular risk but they, of  course,  are  perceived  to
have a particular political agenda by the Syrian authorities.

8.    Finally, it is reported that  Syrian  security  forces  have  arrested
Syrian and Palestinian nationals deported by Iran who  suspected  that  they
may  have  been  in  Afghanistan;  this  again  shows  a  potential  Islamic
extremist connection.    There is nothing whatsoever in the history of  this
appellant to suggest that he comes into such  a  category  and,  indeed,  it
will be open to him if called upon to explain the  length  of  time  he  has
spent in this country to show  that  he  entered  into  a  marriage  with  a
British citizen on 23 July 2002 with whom he  has  been  living.  There  is,
therefore,  a clear and plausible explanation for the length of  time  which
he has been abroad should that be a matter  which  would  draw  the  adverse
attention of the Syrian authorities.   Although Mr  Salfiti  submitted  that
the length of period abroad would of  itself  lead  to  htis  he  was  again
unable to point us to any evidence at all to support such a submission.

9.    In those circumstances we are satisfied that  on  the  evidence  which
has been put before us there is nothing to show that there is any real  risk
to this appellant, if he is now returned to Syria using his  own  papers  as
he is entitled to do, that he  would  be  reasonably  likely  either  to  be
persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason or to be  treated  in  breach  of
his protected human rights.

10.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                   J Barnes
                                                   Vice President
























