

|LSH                        |        |                            |
|Heard at Field House       |        |EK (non overt - homosexual) |
|                           |        |Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00021   |
|On 22 January 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|12 February 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Chairman)                              |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is the adjourned hearing of the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
      determination of Mr Adjudicator Britton, sitting on 22 August 2002.

   2. By that appeal the Adjudicator rejected the claimant's assertions that
      the Secretary of State was wrong to refuse him  asylum  and  to  issue
      removal directions against him.   From that judgment he appeals to the
      Tribunal on the basis that the Adjudicator has made a number of errors
      of fact in his determination which render that  determination  unsafe.
      The principal thrust of the appeal before  us  has,  however,  centred
      upon the Adjudicator's finding that the claimant was not a  homosexual
      and his findings therefore that  there  was  no  conceivable  risk  of
      persecution or Article 3 harm that the claimant would run were  he  to
      return to Uganda.

   3. We should point out at the outset that part of the matters before  the
      Adjudicator were and remain  certified.    These  concern  the  asylum
      claim that was made.  The human rights claim that was made  was  never
      the subject of certification and accordingly we have  jurisdiction  to
      deal with it.

   4. The question that this Tribunal to deal with as  it  seems  to  us  as
      follows.

           a) Was the Adjudicator right to come to the conclusions  on  the
              facts that he did as to the claimant's sexuality and


      (b)   If he was wrong, does that mean that the claimant would, even on
              his  own  account  be  someone  who  was  at  real  risk   of
              persecution were he to be returned to Uganda.


      In order to analyse that, and before we turn to the facts of the case,
      it will be necessary to consider whether the laws of Uganda as far  as
      we are made aware of them are laws that  prohibit  homosexuality.   It
      seems to us abundantly plain that they are.  We have been assisted  by
      citation from two reports, the first being a CIPU  report  of  October
      2003 which states in its relevant paragraphs as follows:


      "6.103      Under the Uganda Penal Code homosexuality is  illegal  for
                 men.  Homosexual acts  between  women  are  not  mentioned.
                 The maximum penalty  for  homosexuals  in  Uganda  is  life
                 imprisonment.  Section 140 of the Penal  code  criminalises
                 "carnal knowledge against  the  order  of  nature"  with  a
                 maximum  penalty  of  life   imprisonment.    Section   141
                 "attempts at carnal knowledge with a maximum penalty  of  7
                 years  imprisonment".   Section  143   punishes   acts   or
                 procurement  of  or  attempts  to  procure  acts  of  gross
                 indecency between men in public of private  with  up  to  5
                 years imprisonment.  In September 1999  President  Musevene
                 called for the  arrest  of  homosexuals  for  carrying  out
                 "abominable acts" following the wedding of two gay men.


       6.104     In March 2002 while accepting an award for his government's
                 successful campaign  against  HIV/AIDS  President  Musevene
                 said "we do not have  homosexuals  in  Uganda  so  this  is
                 mainly heterosexual transmission".  In  December  2002  the
                 Bishop  of  Mukono  Diocese  cautioned  Christians  against
                 homosexual organisations that want to join  the  church  in
                 the pretext of funding them."


5.    We have further had placed  before  us  the  2003  report  by  Amnesty
      International into Uganda which covers events from January to December
      2002 and deals with the problems faced by sexual  minorities  in  that
      country.  We will cite the relevant passage:


      "Discrimination against lesbian, gay  and  bisexual  and  transgender
      LGBT Ugandans continued.  Legislation discriminating against gays and
      lesbians remained in place.  In March President Musevene  said  in  a
      speech to the Commonwealth heads of government meeting  in  Australia
      that the relative success of fight against aids in Uganda was because
      the country has no homosexuals.  On 30 August the Ministry of  Ethics
      and Integrity ordered police to  arrest  and  prosecute  homosexuals.
      Security agents continued harassing members  of  the  LGBT  community
      throughout 2002 and seven  were  arrested  because  of  their  sexual
      orientation.  In December the police arrested and released on  police
      bond a prominent member of an association of gay men and lesbians who
      went to a  police  station  to  enquire  about  two  members  of  the
      association,  arrested  him  allegedly  because   of   their   sexual
      orientation. "


6.    It is plain from these passages that at least enshrined in the law  of
      Uganda there are  very  severe  penalties  for  persons  who  practice
      homosexuality.   It is also apparent that at  the  highest  levels  of
      government and indeed of the church there is the strongest deprecation
      of persons who engage in homosexual acts, and there does appear to  be
      on  occasions  a  willingness  to  prosecute  persons  who  engage  in
      homosexual acts.

7.    What we can infer from the material that is placed before us  is  that
      a number of arrests have taken place and there have  been  detentions.
      There is nothing that suggests to us that lengthy prison sentences are
      imposed on those who have been caught in engaging in homosexual  acts.
      If there were such evidence we would find it surprising, to put it  no
      higher, that evidence of these sentences does not appear in either the
      CIPU report or in Amnesty Internationals report.

8.    Thus the position as far as we can tell from the evidence as  to  what
      happens  to  homosexuals  in  Uganda  is   that   they   are   plainly
      discriminated against and that they are the  subject  of  disapproval.
      They are at times, arrested and  it  seems  that  they  are  at  times
      detained.  We note that the word used to characterise  the  extent  of
      arrest in the Amnesty international report is "several".  It does  not
      seem to us that this is the sort of wording that is consistent with  a
      very wide scale crackdown against homosexuals or indeed the imposition
      of draconian penalties upon them.   Nonetheless, to be a homosexual in
      Uganda would it seems to be a person who at least in theory  might  be
      subject to arrest.  We have been assisted by two authorities that have
      been laced before us that  help  show  what  the  tribunal's  approach
      should be to this particular problem.   The first in the judgement  of
      the Court of Appeal in N and Z against the SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  952.
      In that case the Court of Appeal was faced with persons who came  from
      Zimbabwe where as, in Uganda it is criminal to  engage  in  homosexual
      acts.   At page 6 of our copy of the judgment the  following  citation
      appears which we consider to be of great assistance.

      "Mr Blake submitted that whatever the submissions which the  ECHR  had
      currently reached this Court was free to develop its  case  law  under
      the Human Rights Act.  So it is.  The  question  thus  arises  whether
      this court should Rule that no immigration policy considerations could
      justify the return of an individual to accompany where his  expression
      of his sexual desires with another  adult  in  private  is  in  anyway
      inhibited.


      For my part I would  not  rule  in  such  broad  terms.    This  is  a
      difficult area.  Consider a proposed expulsion of a  heterosexual  man
      to a destination state  which  has,  and  enforces  laws  which  would
      inhibit that man from marrying or founding a family or more than  say,
      1 child - for instance laws which prohibit marriages  between  persons
      of different races or laws which place it as a severe disadvantage for
      those who have more than 1 child.   These are fanciful examples and  I
      consider that we should develop the law on a case by case basis in the
      light of the facts of that case rather than rule on the points in  the
      abstract."


8.    That case was followed by the  Administrative  Court  on  18  February
      2003 in the application of  Dawkins  against  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal heard by Mr Justice Wall.   The  case  concerned  a  Jamaican
      citizen.  The claim was set out in paragraph 5 of the judgment.

      "The essence of his claim is that it would be a  breach of  his  human
      rights and in particular Article 8 were  he  to  be  returned  to  the
      jurisdiction of  Jamaica  where  homosexual  activity  is  a  criminal
      offence.  Not just because of that factor but becau8se he will  suffer
      an  element  of  persecution  and  disruption  to  his  life  in   the
      jurisdiction."

9.    There is a further passage from Dawkins which  we  must  cite  because
      again it assists us in the way that we  approach  the  facts  of  this
      case.   At paragraph 46 the learned judge quoted the passage in  Ullah
      where the Master of the Rolls had stated as follows:

      "This appeal is concerned with Article 9, our  reasoning  has  however
      wider implications.  Where the  Convention  is  invoked  on  the  sole
      ground of treatment which an alien  refused  the  right  to  enter  or
      remain is likely to be subjected  by  the  receiving  state  and  that
      treatment is not  sufficiently  severe  to  engage  Article  3.    The
      English court is not required to recognise it.  Any other  article  of
      the Convention is or may  be  engaged.   Where  such  treatment  falls
      outside Article 3 there may be  places  which  justify  the  grant  of
      exceptional leave on humanitarian grounds."

      "After referring to the case of N & Z


       "49. It simply cannot be the more in my judgment that merely  because
           the law  of  Jamaica  has  a  criminal  statue  it  criminalises
           homosexual  behaviour,  that  mere  fact  cannot  of  itself  be
           sufficient to require this country to grant  immigration  status
           to al practicing homosexuals in Jamaica.  On that  basis  anyone
           who is a homosexual could come to this country and claim asylum.

         50.      Therefore the  matter  must  be  fact  sensitive  and  the
           applicant must show something in addition to the mere fact  that
           he his homosexual.  In my judgement the over whelming weight  of
           the authorities is that an applicant in  the  position  of  this
           applicant has to bring himself either within  Article  3  or  at
           least show some substantial sub-stratum fact that he is going to
           be subject to substantial  discrimination  and/or  violence  and
           abuse."

10.   It seems to us therefore that the position that has been  reached  the
      courts of this country is that it is not enough that homosexuality  is
      a crime in Uganda.  It would have to be shown that there  would  be  a
      real risk to this claimant on return to Uganda of being  subjected  to
      treatment as that would consist of  inhuman  treatment  defined  under
      Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   The  threshold
      for such treatment is of course set very high.  With all that in  mind
      it is necessary now to turn to the facts of the  case  and  to  do  so
      applying the facts in relation to  his  sexuality  that  the  claimant
      himself put forward in support of his own case.  It seems to  us  that
      it is certainly arguable in this particular case that the  Adjudicator
      too readily dismissed the description that the claimant  gave  of  his
      past personal life.  We will therefore put the case as he  would  wish
      it to be put in so far as his sexuality is concerned and  analyse  the
      risk to him on that basis.

11.   The claimant was born on 28 August 1969.   He  states  that  he  first
      expressed his homosexual identity when at boarding school at  the  age
      of 18.   This would have been in 1987 or 1988.  His sexual  activities
      were confined to the boarding school they did not carry  on  after  he
      left.

12.   In 1989 when he was about 20 he began to work  as  shop  assistant  in
      Kampala.   He remained working there until  1993.   He  abandoned  his
      homosexual lifestyle during the whole of this period.   He was without
      difficulty for a period of 3 years until 1992 but in 1992 people began
      to suspect that he was homosexual and he began to be  the  subject  of
      abuse.    One day a lady shouted abuse at him, another day a group  of
      young men threatened him in the street  On a further day  he  went  to
      collect water and had stones thrown  at  him  one  of  which  hit  him
      causing a scar over his eye.   That night people  went  by  his  house
      threatening him.  This caused him to leave and  he  went  by  Taxi  to
      another  area  of  Uganda  called  Bweyogerere  having  collected  his
      belongings.

13.   He then worked in Bweyogerere as a  barber  until  1998.   He  had  no
      problems  during  that  period  until  eventually  rumours  began   to
      circulate about him in January 1998  when  threats  were  made  again.
      Again, he asserts that during the whole of  this  period  he  did  not
      engage in homosexual activity.  Indeed his case is  that  he  did  not
      engage in homosexual activity from the time  that  he  was  at  school
      until the time he arrived in the United Kingdom.

14.   He then having had the trouble that he had  in  Bweyogerere  left  and
      joined his brothers who were in another part of Uganda.   He  asserted
      that he was engaged with some rebels at the  time  but  this  was  not
      accepted by the Adjudicator and there have been no submissions  before
      us on this point.     The long and short of the matter is that he  was
      out of circulation and was not engaging homosexual  activity.   On  18
      March 2000, according to him he left the country from Entebbe  airport
      on a false passport arriving in the United Kingdom but not immediately
      claiming asylum.  Asylum was claimed on 19 April 2000.    It  is  said
      by a witness called to this effect that during his time in the  United
      Kingdom he had a 6 week homosexual relationship  but  he  has  had  no
      other homosexual relationships.

15.   That is not the end however of the history of  the  personal  life  of
      this claimant in so far as it is relevant to  the  matters  before  us
      however because he has also had a heterosexual life  in  Uganda.    He
      had a female partner who gave birth to his daughter on 4 January 1999.
        It thus appears that appearances whatever rumours  might  have  been
      spreading about him in 1998 or 1999 he was also living what to  others
      would appear to have been an entirely heterosexual family  life.    It
      is finally  submitted  on  his  behalf  that  he  did  not  engage  in
      homosexual activities in Uganda  because  he  was  frightened  of  the
      consequences of doing so.   We of course have to consider against this
      background of facts whether there is a real risk

      (a)   that he would be identified as being homosexual  on  his  return
           and


      (b)   whether he would be at  real  risk  on  return  because  of  any
           conduct that he might be likely to engage in after  he  returned
           to Uganda.

16.   We consider that first and fore most on immediate  arrival  in  Uganda
      there would be no reason for the authorities to suspect  that  he  was
      homosexual at all.   He has  never  been  charged  with  any  criminal
      offence of that nature in Uganda or indeed so far as we are aware with
      any criminal offence.   He would simply be a returning Ugandan passing
      through the airport.   Would it be likely thereafter that he would  so
      conduct himself that he would come to the  adverse  attention  of  the
      authorities?  We consider that there is no  real  risk  or  likelihood
      that he would do so.  His entire past shows that his homosexual  urges
      are not matters which he has ever felt compelled to  display,  whether
      that be from fear of the authorities or otherwise.   He did no  engage
      in any homosexual activity at all from the age of 18 to about the  age
      of 31 or 32 when he had a brief homosexual experience with  a  man  in
      this country.  He  did  however  engage  in  what  must  have  been  a
      relatively long standing heterosexual relationship in  Uganda  as  the
      result of which he is the father of a daughter.

17.   It seems to us that the real risk that this man would subject  himself
      to any penalty in Uganda as a result of such sexual inclination as  he
      may have in fact so slight  that  it  cannot  be  characterised  as  a
      likelihood or real risk at all.   We do not  consider  that  the  fact
      that he is unable to express his sexuality as he would  wish  or  says
      that he is would in any event sufficient to engage Article 3 but that,
      it seems to us, would be to look at matters in two  abstract  a  form.
      The fact is that throughout his early adult life he never  engaged  in
      any homosexual acts.  We do not consider that the fact that he may not
      again engage in homosexual acts in Uganda or at least  not  engage  in
      them in public is a matter that is so detrimental to him that it could
      be said to engage Article 3.

18.   For these reasons as Article 3 is the article to which  we  must  play
      heed we consider that this appeal must be dismissed.



                                        His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                        Vice President
