
H-KM-V4

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On  4 May 2004             |        |ZS and AR (Costs of         |
|                           |        |statutory review) Iraq      |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00231          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23 August 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H Storey - Vice President                                      |
|Mr C P Mather - Vice President                                    |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The First Appellant, [             ]  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.   She
    appeals the determination of an Adjudicator (Mrs I R Montgomery)  which
    was promulgated on  16  September  2003.   In  that  determination  the
    Adjudicator dismissed her appeal,  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds, from a decision of the Respondent made on 16 May 2001 to issue
    directions for her removal to Iraq following the refusal of her  asylum
    application.  The second appellant is her dependent daughter  and  only
    child who was born in Baghdad on 20 September 1994.

2.    Permission to appeal in this case was granted by the Court of Session
    on 27 January 2004 when, on a statutory review the court  reversed  the
    refusal of a Vice President, on 16 November 2003, to  grant  permission
    to appeal.

3.    We will set out here  the  appellant's  immigration  history  because
    there is no convenient chronology in the  papers  and  the  appellant's
    arguments depend,  to some extent, on dates.

4.    The Chronology:-

       (a)  December 2000 - Appellant leaves Iraq.


       (b)  27 January 2001 -  Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  and
           claimed asylum at port of entry.


       (c)  16 May 2001 - the respondent refuses asylum and issues  removal
           directions.


       (d)  October 2001 - the first Adjudicator (Mr McSherry)  allows  the
           appellant's appeal on asylum, Article 2 and 3  grounds  but  not
           Article 8.


       (e)  22 November 2002 - the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  allows  the
           respondent's appeal from Mr McSherry's determination and  remits
           the appeal for a fresh hearing.


       (f)  16 September 2003 - the second Adjudicator (Mrs  I  Montgomery)
           dismisses the appeal.


       (g)  16 November 2003 - Vice President refuses permission to appeal.


       (h)  27 January 2004 - Court of Session reverses  the  decision  and
           grants permission to appeal.


5.    When the appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom,  with  her  only
    child, Saddam Hussein was still in power in  Iraq.   The  appellant,  a
    graduate, married her husband in 1993.   She  obtained  her  degree  in
    Modern Languages from the University of Baghdad in 1995.  Both she  and
    her husband are Kurds and originally from Northern Iraq.   Her  husband
    owned a motor spares, parts, and taxi business  in  Baghdad.   He  also
    traded in rugs with Northern Iraq and owned property  in  Suleymaniyah.
    The appellant claimed that her husband  became  involved  in  smuggling
    people into the Kurdish Autonomous Area  (the  KAA)  and  he  did  this
    because of sympathy with the plight of the Kurds.   She  described  his
    activities as covert and highly  dangerous.   This  culminated  in  him
    smuggling a senior Iraqi army officer into the KAA in  September  2000,
    we do not know why.  He used the appellant and their daughter as cover.
     In December 2000, the appellant's husband became aware that there  was
    a warrant for his arrest.  The family fled, first  to  Jordan  then  to
    Turkey, from where the appellant and her daughter came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her husband remained in Turkey.  She says that  she  has  not
    seen or heard from him since.

6.    The first Adjudicator found the appellant to be credible and  allowed
    her appeal.  The respondent's appeal to the  Tribunal  was  effectively
    allowed by consent.  Both  representatives  before  that  Tribunal  are
    recorded as having agreed that the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
    was flawed because of inadequate findings concerning the possibility of
    internal flight.

7.    By the time  the  appeal  came  before  the  second  Adjudicator  the
    coalition forces  had  toppled  the  regime  of  Saddam  Hussein.   The
    appellant's Counsel conceded that she  no  longer  had  any  basis  for
    claiming a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq.  The asylum appeal
    was not pursued.  Similarly, the appellant did not  pursue  any  appeal
    under Article 3 ECHR but restricted her appeal to  a  consideration  of
    her rights under Article 8.  The Adjudicator expressly  accepted  that,
    although the appellant could no longer  argue  that  she  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Iraq, the appeal may have succeeded  had
    there been a final determination prior to April 2003.

8.    The original grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  challenged  the
    Adjudicator's finding that it would  be  proportionate  to  return  the
    appellant to Iraq notwithstanding that she  accepted  that  the  second
    appellant (the daughter), at least, had established a private  life  in
    the United Kingdom and that through her, as  her  mother,  so  had  the
    first appellant.

9.    The Adjudicator found that the only family life which the  appellants
    have in the United Kingdom is with each other.  She observed  that  the
    prospects of obtaining support from other family members is greater  in
    Iraq than it is in the UK, because they may  still  have  close  family
    members living there.

10.   The Adjudicator then turned to look at what  private  life  had  been
    established in the United Kingdom.   She  accepted  that  private  life
    included the right to development and personality  and  to  create  and
    foster relationships with others.   She  said  it  would  include  such
    factors as community ties, employment and contribution to  taxes.   She
    concluded that taken in isolation the first appellant could not be said
    to have established a private life in the United Kingdom.  In doing so,
    she acknowledged she had formed some friendships in the United  Kingdom
    but had no evidence as to the nature of those relationships.   She  did
    not know whether they were close or meaningful.   She  also  said  that
    they were formed at a time when the appellant's immigration status  was
    uncertain.

11.   As to the second appellant, the Adjudicator said  her  situation  was
    different because she had been at school in Scotland for  approximately
    two and a half years and the Adjudicator considered this a very  strong
    tie to the community.  She had formed friendships and become accustomed
    to a way of life within the Scottish community.  She had  enjoyed  that
    way of life since she was six  years  of  age.   The  second  appellant
    probably was not aware  of  her  precarious  immigration  status.   The
    Adjudicator concluded that taken together the  appellants  did  have  a
    private life in the United Kingdom.

12.   The Adjudicator then went on to  ask  herself  the  correct  question
    namely, is the  decision  to  remove  the  appellants  a  proportionate
    response to  the  "aim  of  preserving  the  integrity  of  immigration
    control".  In considering this  question,  the  Adjudicator  considered
    objective evidence about conditions in Iraq.  She  noted  that  despite
    some evidence that general conditions were not  as  good  as  sometimes
    indicated,  it  was  clear  that  the  universities  in  Iraq  are  all
    functioning again and the health services are recovering rapidly.  This
    is so even  though  many  sacked  Ba'ath  party  professors  have  been
    reinstated and new hospital  equipment  has  yet  to  arrive.   It  was
    submitted to the Adjudicator that the appellants  would  find  life  in
    Iraq extremely unpleasant and that they would risk their  physical  and
    moral integrity if they were to be returned.  It was argued  that  they
    would have no protection by a husband or father and the family home has
    been destroyed.  But, the Adjudicator noted that no evidence was led to
    show that the appellants will be at any greater  risk  than  any  other
    mother and child being returned to Iraq without male  protection.   She
    said that it was possible that once in Iraq the appellants will be able
    to re-establish contact with close  family  members.   The  Adjudicator
    concluded that she was not satisfied that the appellant's  physical  or
    moral integrity would be sufficiently  effected  to  a  degree  falling
    within the scope of Article 8 of the Convention. Therefore the  Article
    8 claim failed.

13.   During  the  course  of  the  argument  before  the  Adjudicator  the
    appellant, claimed that as a result of the case of  Shala  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 233, the fact that the appellant had been a  genuine  refugee  when
    she arrived, and would, had her claim been  dealt  with  quickly,  have
    achieved refugee  status,  meant  that  the  Article  8  appeal  should
    succeed.   The  Adjudicator  disagreed  with  that  assertion  and  the
    argument was reopened before us.

14.   Before we turn to  the  instant  appeal  we  need  to  deal  with  an
    application made by Mr Blair to vary the grounds of appeal.  The  first
    issue he wished to add arises from the Court of Session's  decision  in
    Saber v  the  Home  Secretary  (13  November  2003)  that  the  Kurdish
    Autonomous Area is not an entity which can afford protection under  the
    Refugee Convention.  He argued that, following that decision the  first
    Tribunal had been  wrong  to  remit  the  question  of  sufficiency  of
    protection  to  another  Adjudicator  and  in  doing  so  had  made   a
    fundamental error in law.  He argued that the conclusion  the  Tribunal
    should have drawn was  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  refugee
    status.

15.   The other two  proposed  amendments  both  related  directly  to  the
    assessment of the Article 8 appeal.  In  argument,  Mr  Blair  accepted
    these two amended grounds were no more than particulars of  the  ground
    upon which permission had been given. He accepted that he did not  need
    to press for the amendments.

16.   Having heard argument about the proposed variation, we were unable to
    see any basis for allowing such a variation.   The  decision  in  Saber
    relates to adequacy of protection.  That relates to asylum and  Article
    3 grounds in respect of which the appellant had  conceded   before  the
    Adjudicator that she no longer had a  basis  for  a  well-founded  fear
    following the  removal  of  the  Saddam  Hussein  regime.   We  refused
    permission to vary the grounds.  The  relevance  of  Saber  was  argued
    again when we came to consider the issues dealt with in  Shala  in  the
    Article 8 appeal.

17.  Mr  Blair  took  us  first   to   the   Adjudicator's   treatment   of
    proportionality. He argued that she has not addressed the issue at all.
     He also argued that the Adjudicator had confused the issues which  she
    had to  decide  by  introducing  the  concept  of  physical  and  moral
    integrity and also by looking at the conditions in Iraq.   Mr  Blundell
    argued that her finding was impeccable.

18. We are by no means certain that it is. It is true that the  Adjudicator
    asked herself the correct question at the end of paragraph 17 when  she
    said:-

          "The crucial issue in  this  case  is,  as  Mr  Bryce  indicated,
          whether or  not  the  decision  to  remove  these  appellants  is
          proportionate  to  the  aim  of  preserving  the   integrity   of
          immigration control".


19. But the next, and final substantive,  paragraph  of  the  determination
    confined itself to looking entirely at the position the appellants  may
    find themselves in, in Iraq.  Thus we agree with Mr Blair when he  said
    that the  Adjudicator  has  not  actually  addressed  the  question  of
    proportionality even though she asked herself the question.

20. However we do not consider that the Adjudicator's failure  to  properly
    consider proportionality fundamentally flawed her determination.   Even
    if it had, we consider we are in a position to  assess  proportionality
    ourselves subject to certain  caveats.   The  Tribunal,  in  a  starred
    decision [2004] UKIAT 00024  M  (Croatia)  has  considered  the  proper
    approach to follow in Article 8 appeals.  At paragraph 25 it recognises
    that where an Adjudicator was the primary decision maker (as here)  the
    Adjudicator was obliged to reach her own conclusion on whether  removal
    would be disproportionate.  The approach to  be  followed  is  for  the
    Adjudicator to make that assessment giving appropriate  weight  to  the
    public  need  identified  in  relation  to  immigration  control.    In
    paragraph 27 the  Tribunal  said  that  the  interests  of  immigration
    control "will usually be a very  weighty  consideration  indeed".   The
    procedure to be adopted by the Tribunal in a case such as  this,  where
    an assessment of proportionality has not been  carried  out  is  to  be
    found in paragraph 28.  So far as relevant, paragraph 28 says this:-

          "The starting point should be that if in  the  circumstances  the
          removal could reasonably be regarded as proportionate, whether or
          not the Secretary of State has actually said so  or  applied  his
          mind to the issue, it is lawful.  The Tribunal  and  Adjudicators
          should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali  as   providing   clear
          exemplification  of  the   limits   of   what   is   lawful   and
          proportionate.  They should normally  hold  that  a  decision  to
          remove is unlawful only when the disproportion is so  great  that
          no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could   remove   in   those
          circumstances.  ... it would ... have to be a  truly  exceptional
          case, identified and reasoned, which would justify the conclusion
          that the  removal  decision  was  unlawful  by  reference  to  an
          assessment that  removal  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable
          assessment and  proportionality.   We  cannot  think  of  one  at
          present; it is simply that we cannot rule it out."

21.   Bearing in mind these caveats we now turn to assess  whether  or  not
    removing these appellants would be proportionate.

22.   The facts set out above demonstrate nothing exceptional about  either
    of the two appellants.   The Adjudicator found the first appellant  did
    not have a private life independently of the  second  appellant.    The
    second appellant's private life is nothing unusual.  She is  a  9  year
    old girl who, in accordance with the law of  the  United  Kingdom,  has
    attended school  here.   During  that  attendance  she  has  made  some
    friends.  During that time she has lived in Scotland.

23.   What then is the impact of the  Shala  decision  in  this  particular
    case?  Shala was considered in M (Croatia) and we use  the  President's
    summary from M (Croatia) (at paragraph 30) to illustrate the impact and
    significance of Shala:-

       "30.       The Court  of  Appeal  in  Shala  held  that  there  were
           circumstances in which the delay on the part of the Secretary of
           State in dealing  with  the  asylum  claim  was  an  exceptional
           feature which took  the  case  outside  a  significant  area  of
           judgment which the courts  would  allow  him  in  balancing  the
           conflicting interests of the proper maintenance  of  immigration
           control and interference with Article 8 rights.  The exceptional
           feature in that case was that the  appellant  had  a  legitimate
           claim to enter because at the time he would have been the likely
           beneficiary of the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  of  granting
           asylum to ethnic Albanians from Kosovo but  his  claim  had  not
           been determined for some four years despite  his  chivvying  the
           Secretary of State for an answer, which was an unreasonably long
           time.  Had the decision been made within a reasonable  time,  he
           would have been likely to have been granted some form  of  leave
           to remain.  This would have enabled him to  make  an  in-country
           application for a variation in his leave to stay as a spouse and
           the Secretary of State's policy, of requiring those who  had  no
           leave, to apply for entry clearance out of  country,  would  not
           have applied, and the interference with family  life  would  not
           have occurred.  The appellant in that case had  married  someone
           who had no connection with  Kosovo,  who  had  already  had  two
           children and who had already been granted refugee status in this
           country.  The interference was expected to be temporary and  was
           to be inflicted in  order  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the
           immigration control system, to encourage others to abide  by  it
           and to discourage its breach in circumstances where the asserted
           need to uphold the system in its vigour and  harshness  in  that
           particular case, arose from the Secretary of State's failure  to
           deal with matters in a reasonably prompt fashion."


24.   In the preceding paragraph the President had said that in relation to
    Shala he recognised that the impact of delay on  the  consideration  of
    proportionality is relevant to both private and family  life,  although
    the weight to be given to it is likely to be very much greater  in  the
    latter than in the former.

25.   There are a number of very important factual differences between  the
    instant case and Shala. In Shala it was the respondent who had  delayed
    in making a decision.  Here, he made a prompt decision. The reasons for
    refusal letter is dated about six weeks after the  appellants  arrival,
    although the formal decision was not  made  until  four  months  later.
    That is not a significant  delay.   In  Shala  it  was  said  that  the
    Secretary of State had a policy of granting status to  people  arriving
    from Kosovo at the time the appellants did.  In this case there was  no
    similar policy at the time.  The respondent considered and refused  the
    asylum claim.  Also, the appellants  have  no  application  which  they
    could make in-country if they were to have been  granted  any  sort  of
    status.  It was never intended that Mr Shala would  leave  the  country
    permanently but that he would merely be inconvenienced by having to  go
    and make an application from abroad.

26.   We accept that delay in making a decision can  be  a  factor  in  the
    consideration of proportionality.  The President  said  as  much  in  M
    (Croatia).  The same point was made by  Dr  Storey  when  his  Tribunal
    considered Shala and delay in [2004] UKIAT 00016 J.  In J the  Tribunal
    went on to say that the Shala point will only  cover  delay  if  it  is
    underpinned  by  special  or  exceptional   circumstances.    That   is
    predicated on three things:

       "(a)       the fact that the appellant had  a  legitimate  claim  to
           enter at the time when,  on  any  reasonable  basis,  his  claim
           should have been determined;


       (b)  the fact that, had  his  asylum  application  been  dealt  with
           reasonably efficiently,  he  would  have  been  likely  to  have
           obtained at least exceptional leave to remain; and


       (c)  the fact that his  private  or  family  life  had  only  become
           significantly established as a result of the time spent  by  him
           in  the  UK  where  he  formed  a   relationship.    Accordingly
           possession of ELR, if it had been granted when  it  should  have
           been, would have given him the ability to apply from within  the
           UK for a variation of leave on the grounds of his relationship".


      That is all very different from the situation in the instant case.

  27. In Janjanin [2004] EWCA Civ 448 Lord Justice  Wall  said  that  Shala
      depended very much  on  its  own  facts.   The  overall  decision  in
      Janjanin is support for the approach of the Tribunal in  M  (Croatia)
      although M (Croatia) was not relied upon before the  (English)  Court
      of Appeal, or if it was, it was not referred to in the judgment.

  28. Mr Blair argued that Shala represents the right of an  appellant  not
      to suffer from arbitrary decisions, which might extend  not  just  to
      the respondent but the whole of  the  United  Kingdom  establishment.
      Thus, he argued, the fact that the appellant's asylum application was
      promptly refused does not preclude him from arguing that delay  is  a
      relevant factor in this appeal.  He said that, on appeal to the first
      Adjudicator the appellant was  found  credible  and  her  appeal  was
      allowed.  He used that  as  his  platform  for  suggesting  that  the
      appellant should have obtained refugee status in  October  2001.   He
      reminded us that the Court  of  Session  had  now  decided  that  the
      authorities in the Kurdish Autonomous Area are legally  incapable  of
      providing protection as envisaged by the 1951 Convention.  This issue
      had been dealt with obiter in Gardi a decision of the [English] Court
      of Appeal which suggested  that  was  the  case.  That  decision  was
      ultimately impugned for technical reasons and the  specific  question
      of the legal ability of the KAA to provide such  protection  had  not
      been subsequently  decided.   Mr  Blair  argued  that  following  the
      decision in Saber it was appropriate to apply hindsight  and  to  say
      that the respondent should not have appealed the first  Adjudicator's
      decision.  Hence the appellant was entitled to refugee  status  after
      that decision.

  29. We suggested to Mr  Blair  that  it  could  hardly  be  described  as
      arbitrary to pursue an  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent
      believed that there was adequate protection in  the  KAA.   That  has
      been his consistent approach in cases involving Kurds from Iraq.   He
      had taken the point and fully argued it before the Court of  Session.
      Although Mr Blair sought to disagree, he did not manage to satisfy us
      that it had been an arbitrary decision.

  30. The time that it has taken this appeal to progress through the system
      does not amount to an unreasonable delay.  The respondent himself has
      certainly acted promptly.  There has not been any inordinate delay in
      the proceedings since. Both parties were, at various  times  pursuing
      legitimate litigation.  We do not regard the respondent's approach as
      being made illegitimate by the subsequent decision of  the  Court  of
      Session which sought to resolve an issue which had not been  resolved
      earlier.

31.   Finally we observe the appellants' Counsel consented to the  remittal
    of the appeal by the  first  Tribunal  and  thereby  consented  to  the
    prolonging of the procedure.

32.   In any event there is a major fallacy in Mr  Blair's  argument.   The
    issue dealt with in Saber was  the  question  of  protection.   It  was
    decided that the KAA  is  legally  unable  to  offer  such  protection.
    However, the first Adjudicator's determination was remitted because  of
    problems with his findings concerning internal flight.  Internal flight
    is not the same issue as protection.  If the appellants had  been  able
    to go to the Kurdish  Autonomous  Area  safely  then  on  its  own  the
    question of protection would not arise.  If there is  no  basis  for  a
    well-founded  fear,  there  is  no  requirement  for  protection.   The
    appellants' fear at the time was of Saddam Hussein's Government and his
    officials.  She had not said that she would have fears in the KAA  even
    if there had been other reasons for arguing that she could  not  go  to
    the KAA.

33.   As a result of what we have said above it follows that the  appellant
    cannot succeed on a Shala point.  There has not  been  any  significant
    delay on the part of the respondent and there has not been  significant
    delay on the part of the appellate authorities.  The appellants do  not
    claim to be prevented from making an application in-country, but  which
    would now have to  be  made  out  of  country.  We  disagree  with  the
    submissions of Mr  Blair  concerning  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
    status at an earlier stage.   We do not accept the argument that  delay
    in the appeal process is equivalent to delay by the respondent, even if
    there had been such delay.

  34. The first appellant cannot properly argue that she had  a  legitimate
      claim  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  because  of  the   first
      Adjudicator's findings.  At no time has she been able to claim  that.
      It is true that she has been, with her daughter, here  since  January
      2001. She is entitled to have the time that she has been  here  taken
      into  account  in  the  course  of  considering   the   question   of
      proportionality.  That she believed that she had a  legitimate  claim
      to asylum at one time is something that we  can  properly  take  into
      account.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  her  claim  was   without
      foundation, albeit that it has never succeeded. That goes on  to  the
      credit side of the balancing exercise along  with  such  elements  of
      private life that we have referred to  earlier.   But,  the  type  of
      private life claimed by the appellants  carries  very  little  weight
      even taking full account of the length of time  the  appellants  have
      been here, and the fact that they may have succeeded  if  the  appeal
      had been decided earlier.  Allowing for  all  those  factors  we  are
      unable to find that, this is an exceptional case.  It is not.   There
      is nothing exceptional about it at all.

35.   When the Court of Session reversed the Vice President's  decision  to
    refuse permission to appeal it reserved the question  of  expenses  for
    determination by the Tribunal.  The basis for this order is to be found
    in Rule 41.52 of the rules of the Court of Session which says:-

            "The court may reserve the expenses of the  application  to  be
            determined by the Tribunal".


    Mr Blair argued that it is appropriate to award costs to the appellants
    if their appeal succeeded.  In other words, the costs of the  statutory
    review should follow the event before us.  Mr Blundell  argued  against
    this because in a statutory review application the  respondent  is  not
    served with the papers and has no opportunity to make  submissions  and
    is therefore arguably not a party to the application.  For example, the
    respondent could not concede such an application.  Rule 41.49  provides
    for only the Tribunal to be served  with  a  copy  of  a  petition  for
    statutory review and  Rule  41.50  provides  for  the  petition  to  be
    determined by a single Judge without a hearing.

36.   If an order is made for expenses to be paid, the amount  is  assessed
    by an auditor, there are provisions in chapter 42 dealing with that.

37.   As this appeal failed, there is no  basis  for  ordering  payment  of
    expenses to the appellant.  The Court of Session must have had in  mind
    that payment of the appellant's expenses should  be  dependent  on  the
    outcome of this appeal, otherwise it would  have  made  a  final  order
    itself.  The respondent was not a party to the Statutory Review and has
    incurred no expenses.  There is no  basis  for  making  any  order  for
    payment to or by the appellant.  We were not told anything about  legal
    aid expenses.

38.   The appeal is dismissed.    There is no  order  for  payment  of  the
    expenses of Statutory Review.




                                                                  C P MATHER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

Approved for electronic distribution.










