
 WK (Credibility - Hizb-i-Islami - Pashtuns- Kabul) Afghanistan [2004]
UKIAT 00280 | |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing: 25 August 2004                                    |
|Date Signed:       200                                             |
|Date Determination Notified: 04th October 2004                     |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                               |
|Mr M J Griffiths                                                   |
|Ms S S Ramsumair, JP                                               |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|                     |                                             |
|                     |                                             |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


For the appellant:           Mr M Saleem, a Solicitor of Malik & Malik
For the respondent:    Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer

The appellant appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of  an
Adjudicator, Mr A W  Brown,  who  dismissed  his  asylum  and  human  rights
appeals against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to  recognise
him as a refugee or to grant him leave to remain on humanitarian grounds.

Permission to appeal was granted in relation to the  sustainability  of  the
Adjudicator's findings, in particular,

      (a)   The Adjudicator's decision to prefer an uncertified  translation
           made for the Home Office in place of  the  apparently  certified
           translation produced by appellant.  The  Adjudicator  relied  on
           the Home Office version to make his adverse credibility findings
           (paragraph 11 and 32 of the determination).


      (b)   The Adjudicator's reliance upon  the  appellant's  demeanour  in
           that after breaking down in tears, 'the  appellant's  eyes  were
           not reddened and he did not appear to be truthful... he did  not
           appear to be someone who was genuinely upset'.


      (c)   The alleged persecution of the Hizb-i-Islami and  in  particular
           supporters of Engineer Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,  leader  of  Hizb-i-
           Islami Gulbuddin, who was expelled  in  February  2002  for  his
           vocal opposition to President Hekmatzar Karazi.  In April 2002 a
           number of his supporters  were  detained  in  Kabul  accused  of
           conspiring to plant bombs.  The  appellant's  father  was  found
           dead near a canal and the claimant relies upon this as  evidence
           of the Northern Alliance's opposition to the family  as  Hizb-i-
           Islami supporters.


      (d)   The Adjudicator's failure to consider background evidence  about
           the difficulties of return to areas outside Kabul.

The chronology of this appellant's accounts as set out in his  evidence,  in
the context of events in Afghanistan is as follows:-

         . 1 January 1981  -  The  appellant  was  born  in  Jalalabad,  in
           Ningrahar Province, Afghanistan.  His family were  Hizb-i-Islami
           supporters, his father and uncle Commanders in Hizb-i-Islami.


         . 1996 - The appellant ceased going to school  in  Ningrahar  when
           the Taliban came to power.   He  used  to  go  to  Hizb-i-Islami
           meetings with his father, although he was not a member.  Usually
           the meetings were about Pashtun welfare.  His understanding  was
           that it was a legal party.


         . 15 March 1997 -  The  Taliban  arrested  the  appellant's  uncle
           Modeer Lawang who has not been since.  The uncle was working  as
           an assistant for Haji Abdul Qadir.


         . 22 December 2001 - Hamid Karzai, a Pashtun royalist,  was  sworn
           in as head of a power sharing Transitional Administration  which
           included Haji Abdul Qadir as one of five Vice-Presidents.

         . January  2002  -  The  first  contingent  of  the  International
           Security Assistance Force arrived in Afghanistan.


         . April 2002 - The  former  King  Mohammed  Zahir  Shah  returned,
           making no claim to the throne of Afghan.


         . May 2002 - the UN Security Council extended the mandate  of  the
           International Security Assistance  Force  until  December  2002,
           with allied Forces continuing their military  campaign  to  find
           remnants of Al Qa'ida and Taliban forces in the south east.


         . June 2002 - The Loya Jirga elected Hamid Karzai as head of state
           and he chose his Transitional Administration members,  to  serve
           until 2004, including Turkey took over as the head  national  in
           ISAF.


         . July 2002 - Vice President Haji Abdul Qadir assassinated.


         . 15 August 2002  -  the  appellant  claims  to  have  received  a
           threatening letter telling him to  stop  supporting  Haji  Abdul
           Qadir.


         . 23 August 2002 - He received another threatening letter.


         . 22/23 August 2002  -  Northern  Alliance  soldiers  visited  the
           appellant's house warning him not to support Haji Abdul Qadir.

         . 27 August 2002 - The appellant left Jalalabad with the  help  of
           an agent.


         . September 2002 - Hamid Karzai narrowly escaped an  assassination
           attempt in Kandahar his home town.


         . 4 September 2002 - appellant arrived in the United Kingdom.


         . November 2002 - appellant received a telephone call from  abroad
           to say his father had disappeared.


         . February 2003 - Germany and the Netherlands  took  over  as  the
           league nations in the ISAF.


         . 19 February  2003  -  the  US  Department  of  State  designated
           Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar,  leader  of  Hizb-i-Islami  Hekmatyar,  an
           international terrorist.  Hekmatyar returned to  Afghanistan  at
           about  this  time  after  being  expelled  in  2002,   but   his
           whereabouts are unknown in Afghanistan.


         . August 2002 - NATO took control of security in Kabul, this being
           the organisations first operational commitment outside Europe in
           its history.


         . August 2003 - it was reported that Hizb-i-Islami were one of the
           groups believed to have been responsible for a spate of  attacks
           on Afghan and  Western  government,  military  had  humanitarian
           targets.



Mr Saleem submitted that given the prominence of Vice-President  Haji  Abdul
Qadir, the appellant would still be at risk.  We observe that the  appellant
is claiming to have been threatened for supporting Mr Haji  Abdul  Qadir,  a
Vice-President in the Transitional Administration, when  he  had  been  dead
for a month.  Mr Saleem  argued  that  Vice-President  Qadir  had  not  been
replaced as  a  Vice-President  as  the  Pashtuns  could  not  agree  on  an
alternative candidate.  As regards the risk to the appellant as  a  Pashtun,
the relevant passages in the April 2004 CIPU Country Report  are  paragraphs
6.121 to 6.132, to which we return  below.       Mr  Saleem  submitted  that
Hizb-i-Islami was being persecuted.   He  relied  on  the  April  2004  CIPU
report and filed no additional up to  date  documents  of  his  own.     The
relevant passages  in  that  report  relating  to  the  appellant's  Pashtun
ethnicity are at paragraphs 6.121 to 6.132.

Mr Saleem also  submitted  that  Hizb-i-Islami  was  being  persecuted.   He
relied on the April 2004 CIPU report and filed  no  additional  up  to  date
documents of his own.  The appellant claims to be at risk from the  Northern
Alliance and to  be  recognisable  in  his  home  area  of  Jalalabad.   The
appellant was never a member of any faction of Hizb-i-Islami but as  a  good
son he helped his father with his  father's  Hizb-i-Islami  activities  when
his father was too ill  to  carry  them  out.   He  would  run  errands  and
generally support his father.  Neither  man  was  a  combatant  despite  his
father's title of Commander.

When the appellant and his father were asked to become  personally  involved
in the contract in Northern Afghanistan, they decided to leave the area  and
cease supporting Hizb-i-Islami.  We note that CIPU (Paragraph 6.328) Hizb-i-
Islami as a whole is now  supportive  of  the  Transitional  Administration,
despite difficulties with one  wing  (Hizb-i-Islami  Hekbatyar),  which  has
connections with terrorism.

      "6.328        An  international  Crisis  Group  (ICG)  Asia   Briefing
      published on 30 March 2004  stated  that,  "In  the  weeks  since  the
      constitutional Loya Jirga, the president has  appointed  a  number  of
      former Hizb-i-Islami (Hikmatyar) commanders and political  figures  to
      high-level post, including Bashir Baghlani as governor of Farah, Khyal
      Mohammad as governor of Zabul, and Sabawoon as minister-adviser in the
      Ministry of Border  and  Tribal  Affairs."   According  to  ICG,  "The
      incorporation  of  former   Hizb-i-Islami   personalities   into   the
      government has accelerated since the  Constitutional  Loya  Jirga,  an
      indication  that  the  support  extended  to  Karzai  by  the  party's
      erstwhile members may be more than a short-term alliance."

Mr Saleem asked the Tribunal to allow the appeal.

For the respondent, Mr Morris observed that the appellant was  a  low  level
activist and that his activities were now some time ago.  Pashtuns  in  that
position  were  not  at  risk.   He  accepted  that  the  leading   Tribunal
determinations were based upon somewhat older evidence, but paragraph 6.123-
4 of the current CIPU Country Report set out the position of Pashtuns -

      "6.123      The world  Directory  of  Minorities  further  notes  that
           "despite the dominant position they have held, Pashtuns  do  not
           form a  homogeneous  group,  and  many  have  fallen  victim  to
           oppression at the hands of their  own  elites.   The  power  and
           leadership of individuals are perhaps what divides Pashtuns, not
           only into different tribes but also  into  numerous  sub-tribes,
           each isolated within  its  own  borders.   Interference  in  one
           another's  affairs  has   caused   conflicts   among   sub-tribe
           throughout  their  history.   Yet  external   interference,   or
           interference by the central government, has usually resulted  in
           a unified response." [27] (p 539)


        6.124     In 1997, a UNHCR background paper on refugees  and  asylum
           seekers from Afghanistan noted that Pashtuns made up  the  great
           majority of  the  refugees  in  Pakistan.   The  Pashtun  tribal
           population of Pakistan's  North-West  Frontier  Province  (NWFP)
           still had much in common  in  terms  of  culture,  language  and
           traditions with their fellow Pashtun-speakers across the  border
           (the "Duran Line') in  Afghanistan.   The  Duran  Line  of  1893
           demarcated the border of modern-day  Pakistan  and  Afghanistan.
           There is a long tradition of mobility  among  the  Pashtuns  who
           live in the NWFP and those  of  eastern  Afghanistan.   Notably,
           some  60,000  nomads  ('kuchis'  or  'powindahs'  as  they   are
           respectively known in Afghanistan and Pakistan) were  accustomed
           to moving annually with their herds between summer and  pastures
           in Afghanistan and winter pastures  in  Pakistan.   Others  were
           merchants or businessmen with interest in  Kabul,  Kandahar  and
           Jalalabad in Afghanistan and Peshawar  in  Pakistan,  who  moved
           regularly between the two countries.  [11a] (p 5).


        6.130     In early March 2003 it was reported by the BBC World  News
           that the main local leaders in Afghanistan had agreed  to  bring
           an end to factional  fighting  and  help  thousands  of  Afghans
           return to their homes.  UN officials said that the agreement had
           been secured by Ruud Lubbers,  the  UN  High  Commissioners  for
           Refugees.


        6.131     According to a UNCHR report issued in  July  2003,  "Since
           April 2002, the situation for Pashtun minorities  in  the  North
           and West has progressively improved.  UNHCR  has  been  actively
           supporting initiatives to prepare for the  voluntary,  safe  and
           dignified return of displaced Pashtuns to  the  North,  and  the
           major party leaders in the  North  have  given  assurances  that
           their rights will be  respected.   Although  the  situation  has
           calmed in certain regions, particularly in Badghis as well as in
           the North-East where there have been larger Pashtun refugee  and
           IDP  returns,  the  situation  of  Pashtun  communities  remains
           precarious in the North West, where harassment  and  opportunism
           by local commanders have not ceased."


        6.132     On 21 March 2004, a UNAMA spokesman announced that "Go and
           see" visits were underway in the Northern Provinces.   According
           to the spokesman, "The Ministry  of  Refugees  and  Repatriation
           (MoRR) and UNCHR have organized the second "go and see" visit by
           leaders of internally displaced people (IDPs) as well as refugee
           representatives from Balochistan Province in Pakistan... (as you
           know,) the first "go and see"  visit  organized  last  month  to
           Faryab Province has proven very  useful  in  helping  IDPs  make
           decision about their possible return back  to  their  places  of
           origin... Many of these  families  had  fled  the  north-western
           province nearly three years ago and were staying in  Zar-e-Dasht
           camp in Kandahar Province.  They are of  Pashtun  ethnicity  and
           had left their homes due to conflict and human rights violations
           after the fall of the Taliban regime.  The  return  momentum  is
           picking up, taking advantage of improved conditions in the North
           West.   About  100  more  internally  displaced  families   have
           expressed their willingness to return to their places of  origin
           in Badghis Province and another 40 families are eager to  return
           back to Faryab Province."

Paragraph 6.124 refers to a 1997 UNCHR background  paper,  seven  years  old
now.  Whilst there are still some difficulties in the  north  and  east  the
background evidence is that these are improving and there was no  suggestion
that Pashtuns, the largest ethnic group, in  Afghanistan  could  not  safely
relocate to Kabul should they have difficulties in their home area.

In reply, Mr Saleem argued that Jalalabad  was  not  safe  at  present.   In
order to return to Kabul the appellant would have to  declare  the  name  of
his father and other male relatives; his  connection  to  Haji  Abdul  Qadir
would become apparent.  He was the eldest, the head of the family and  would
be expected to pick up where his father left off.  He asked the Tribunal  to
allow the appeal.

The Tribunal reserved its determination  for  postal  delivery.     We  have
taken note of the criticisms of the Adjudicator's  reliance  upon  demeanour
and  his  approach  to  the  translated  document.   We  have  treated   the
appellant's core account as credible to the  standard  appropriate  for  the
Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugee and Stateless  Persons  1951  and
its protocols and the European Convention on Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
Freedoms 1950.

Nevertheless, we do  not  find  ourselves  able  to  allow  the  appellant's
appeal.  Taken at its very highest his claim is that he assisted his  father
in low-level Hizb-i-Islami activities in Jalalabad before the  beginning  of
the Transitional Administration, and that his  family  has  a  Hizb-i-Islami
profile, in particular as supporters of the late Vice-President  Haji  Abdul
Qadir.  Hizb-i-Islami is  now  one  of  the  supporting  groups  behind  the
Transitional Administration and the appellant comes from a  majority  ethnic
group within Afghanistan as a whole.  The appellant has relied on  the  CIPU
Country Report evidence without filing any fresh  country  evidence  of  his
own, and for good reason.

The recent evidence does not,  as  alleged,  show  a  deterioration  in  the
position of Hizb-i-Islami supporters (except perhaps Hekmatyar) nor in  that
of Pashtuns or supporters of Haji Abdul Qadir.   The  evidence  is  that  in
Kabul at least, there is a  stable  situation  supported  by  ISAF  and  the
Transitional Administration, which Hizb-i-Islami supports and that  Pashtuns
are 40% of all Afghans.  As regards support of the late Vice-President  Haji
Abdul Qadir, he is effectively a martyr to peace and there is  n  indication
at all that outside Jalalabad (or even within it)  such  support  would  now
cause difficulties for the appellant on return.

We see nothing in the recent evidence which we have examined  which  renders
incorrect the conclusions reached by the Tribunal in the decisions in S  and
AL, both of which indicate that Pashtuns with  difficulties  in  their  home
area may be return safely to Kabul and take up their  lives  there.   We  do
not see how that can put the appellant at any enhanced risk whatsoever.

For all of the above reasons, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.








                                                         Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                                              Vice President

                                                             07 October 2004












