
ar
                                                     AM (Sudan Draft evader)
                                                    Sudan [2004] UKIAT 00335

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing : 29 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  29/12/2004
                                   Before:

                   Mr M W Rapinet (Acting Vice President)
                                Mr K Kimnell
                                 Mr A Eames




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant  : Ms M Plimmer, Counsel, instructed by  Browell  Smith  &
Co.
For the respondent : Mr M Raj, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Sudan, appeals by leave  of  the  Tribunal
      against the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Miss  J.E.  Perrett,
      dismissing his appeal against the refusal of the Secretary of State to
      grant asylum and the decision to give removal directions to Sudan. The
      grounds of appeal are in the bundle before us.

2.    The appellant, who comes from the Nuba part of the  Sudan,  though  he
      has lived in the north of Sudan since childhood, he having moved there
      with his mother when his father died, claims that he has  been  called
      up and has evaded military service.

3.    This appeal first came before us on 27 September  2004.  Miss  Plimmer
      then argued before us that the appellant objects to  military  service
      on the basis that the conduct of the war in Sudan is such as to  bring
      it within the definition of a war which  would  be  condemned  by  the
      international community.  We pointed out to her that  the  grounds  of
      appeal do not raise this issue but are based  upon  the  Adjudicator's
      findings of risk upon return to the appellant, and in  particular  her
      finding that it is unlikely that he would be imprisoned  for  avoiding
      military service, and that there is a possibility that he would not be
      required to do military service in any event. Miss  Plimmer  indicated
      that as a Nuban the appellant would  be  at  particular  risk  and  at
      further risk of conscription because of his  ethnicity  and  that  the
      conduct of the war by the Sudanese government in the Sudan is such  as
      to lead to a view that it is a war which is internationally condemned,
      and that this would take the appellant outside the  Sepet  and  Bulbul
      ruling in relation to military service.  She sought leave to amend her
      grounds of appeal. We decided to grant leave  and  gave  Miss  Plimmer
      fourteen days within which to file her amended grounds of  appeal  and
      the Home Office a further ten days in which to reply.

4.    The case came before us on the adjourned hearing on 29 November  2004.
      By that date Miss Plimmer's amended grounds of appeal had  been  filed
      but no reply had been filed by the Home Office.

5.    The amended grounds of appeal, supported by a witness  statement  from
      the appellant, indicate that the appellant objects to participating in
      military  action  against  persons  for  reasons  relating  to   their
      religious or ethnic origin. It is now maintained  that,  although  the
      appellant originally objected to doing military  service  in  the  war
      against the south of Sudan, this objection now relates to the  current
      war being conducted in the Dafur area of Sudan and in other regions.

6.    It is contended in the amended grounds  that  the  appellant  will  be
      compelled to do his national service and that there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that such service will necessitate him participating in the
      commission of international crimes or human rights crimes, contrary to
      his genuinely held convictions and conscience within  the  context  of
      the objective evidence as to the manner in which the Sudanese military
      conducts itself against the basic rules of human conduct. Reliance  is
      placed on the case of Krotov v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 69.

7.    We would mention that this appeal comes to us  by  remittal  from  the
      Court of Appeal which allowed an  appeal  against  another  Tribunal's
      determination dismissing the appellant's  appeal  and  which  directed
      that the case be reheard by a differently  constituted  Tribunal.  The
      Court of Appeal dealt primarily with the question of risk upon  return
      and did not address, nor was indeed was it invited to, apparently, the
      question of the appellant being  required  to  participate  in  a  war
      involving the commission of international or humanitarian crimes.

8.    As Miss Plimmer points out in her amended  grounds  of  appeal,  there
      are now two issues  before  us.  The  first  is  whether  or  not  the
      appellant would be involved in military action in Sudan involving acts
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct. The  second  is  whether
      the appellant would be at risk  of  ill-treatment  on  return  in  any
      event, the latter factor having been considered by the Court of Appeal
      when deciding to remit this case for rehearing by another Tribunal.

9.     In  her  submissions  Miss  Plimmer  emphasised  the  fact  that  the
      appellant is of Nuban origin, and therefore one of the minority groups
      targeted by the authorities, and therefore at particular risk of being
      conscripted into the  army  and  sent  to  the  front  which,  in  her
      submission, in this case would involve war in Dafur.  She accepts that
      the objective evidence  indicates  primarily  that  the  war  in  that
      region is being conducted by a militia called the Janjaweed  and  that
      it would not appear  that  the  Sudanese  armed  forces  are  directly
      involved. However, she emphasised to us that  the  objective  evidence
      does indicate that the Janjaweed have government support and she  drew
      our attention to objective evidence which would indicate that Sudanese
      forces were also involved in that region.   She  referred  us  to  the
      Sudan Organisation against Torture Annual Human Rights Report covering
      the period up to March this year, and in particular paragraph 8  which
      deals  with  Dafur.   Paragraph  8.1  reads:  'Sustained  attacks   by
      government forces and local militias  on  local  civilian  populations
      have led to catastrophic levels of violence and destruction.'

10.   On the same page it is stated: 'Whilst there have  been  some  reports
      of atrocities being committed by the rebel  groups,  the  overwhelming
      majority of these violations  still  remained  the  responsibility  of
      government forces and government sponsored militia groups.'

11.   At paragraph 8.2 it is stated that

             'Indiscriminate aerial bombardment of towns  and  villages  by
             government antonov aircraft also augment such  attacks.  These
             bombings  take  place   in  areas  where  the  opposition   to
             government and militia are thought to be  strongest,  although
             there is no effort to distinguish civilian  from  non-civilian
             targets.'

12.   In her submission there is a reasonable likelihood that the  appellant
      would be required to complete his military service and he would engage
      in military action which would be against the  basic  rules  of  human
      conduct.  The report to which she has referred us and  from  which  we
      have quoted above indicates that the action of the forces  engaged  in
      Dafur is such as to constitute a gross breach of human rights  and  of
      all rules relating to the normal conduct of war.   She  refers  us  to
      the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Krotov  and  in  particular
      paragraph 37 of that judgment in which Lord Justice Potter states:

             'In my view, the  crimes  listed  above,  if  committed  on  a
             systemic basis as an aspect  of  deliberate  policy  or  as  a
             result of official difference to the widespread actions  of  a
             brutal military, qualify as acts contrary to the  basic  rules
             of  human  conduct  in  which  punishment  or  a  refusal   to
             participate would constitute within  the  ambit  of  the  1951
             Convention.'

13.   Miss Plimmer goes on to submit  that  the  Adjudicator  has  erred  in
      finding that there would be no risk to the appellant upon  return  and
      even if there was a possibility that he was picked up  and  questioned
      about whether he had done military service, there  was  no  reasonable
      likelihood that he would be prosecuted for draft evasion  and  subject
      to imprisonment.

14.   Miss Plimmer also submits that the Adjudicator's determination of  the
      Sepet and Bulbul is flawed, particularly by reason of  the judgment of
      the Court of Appeal in the case of Krotov.  She  referred  us  to  the
      judgment of the Court of Appeal in the instant case and in  particular
      paragraph 11 of the judgment of Lord Justice Schiemann who states:

             'Miss Plimmer submits that the finding of the IAT in the  last
             sentence of paragraph 13 of the determination that  there  was
             no real risk that the appellant would  be  identified  at  the
             airport as a person who has not answered his  call  up  papers
             cannot be supported. He is of the appropriate  age.  He  would
             have come from abroad.  He  would  have  been  asked  for  the
             certificate referred to  in  paragraph  5.68  of  the  Country
             Report and would not have it. This would lead to  questioning,
             possibility about the sort of bribe referred to  in  paragraph
             5.52.  There must be a  real  risk  that  the  failure  to  do
             military  service  would  be  discovered.  I   agree.'    [our
             emphasis]

15.    In  paragraph  12  of  the  judgment  his  lordship  deals  with  the
      submission by Miss Plimmer relating to the  determination of  the  IAT
      that the penalties for refusing to perform military  service  are  not
      imposed. His lordship states:
             'It may well be that circumstances can arise  when  a  law  is
             shown to be never enforced in which case  there  would  be  no
             real risk to a citizen that he would be imprisoned pursuant to
             it. But for my part, I do not consider that it was open to the
             IAT to conclude from the evidence before it that  the  present
             was such a case.'

16.   Miss Plimmer urged us to accept the view of the Court of Appeal.

17.   In a final submission she maintained  that  there  are  three  matters
      which have to be considered. The first  is,  would  the  appellant  be
      discovered to be a draft evader? In this connection she referred us to
      the judgment of the Court of Appeal at paragraph 11 to which  we  have
      referred above and also referred us to the determination in  which  at
      paragraphs 20, 24 and 26 the Adjudicator seems to accept that there is
      a reasonable likelihood that he would be discovered and  that  he  has
      received his call up papers.  Secondly, if he is conscripted, is there
      a likelihood that he would be posted to Dafur?  She accepts that there
      is no direct evidence to show that  draft  evaders  are  posted  there
      routinely but the evidence is that he would be. He is from  an  ethnic
      minority which has been targeted in the past  by  the  government  and
      would be a candidate for harsh treatment in the military and he  would
      be treated with antipathy. The objective  evidence  to  which  he  has
      drawn our attention is that government forces are involved  in  Dafur.
      In any event, she  argues, there is further objective evidence in  the
      bundle before us that Dafur is not the only area of activity in  which
      the government is involved in the Sudan. Although some sort  of  peace
      arrangement has  been  arrived  at  in  relation  to  the  south,  the
      government is active in other regions  where  it  has  targeted  other
      minorities.

18.   The third issue is the application of the  case  of  Krotov.   If  the
      appellant is likely to be sent  to  Dafur  or  any  region  where  the
      government is involved in military activities, it is  likely  that  he
      would be a party, perforce, to acts of inhuman conduct  in  breach  of
      the Convention. If he refused to carry out orders he would be at  risk
      of persecution.

19.   Mr Raj in his submission maintains  that  there  is  no  risk  to  the
      appellant upon return, as the  Adjudicator  has  correctly  found.  He
      relies on two determinations of the Tribunal: the  case  of  AA  Sudan
      [2004] UKIAT 00167, and the case of AB Sudan [2004]  UKIAT  00260.  In
      the former case the Danish Fact Finding Mission had found

             'Sudanese nationals who have been abroad  for  more  than  one
             year do not have to report to the security service, police  or
             any other investigative agency in Sudan.  On the  other  hand,
             those who have been abroad for more than one year do  have  to
             report to the tax authorities in the Sudan  on  their  return.
             This is because Sudanese nationals abroad are required to  pay
             tax in Sudan for the period spent abroad. ...  If they fail to
             do so they are guilty of tax evasion and will not be  able  to
             get an exit visa if they want to travel abroad.'

20.   The Tribunal also found that Sudanese citizens who are staying  abroad
      whose passports have expired  could  apply  to  the  nearest  Sudanese
      embassy or to  the  passport  issue  office  in  Khartoum  for  a  new
      passport. He points out that according  to  the  US  State  Department
      Report as referred to in paragraph 5.80 of the  CIPU  Report   'No-one
      was jailed during  the  year  2003  for  evading  compulsory  military
      service'.

21.   So far as the Nuban ethnicity is concerned, Mr Raj points out  that  a
      peace accord has been signed and there is no evidence  of  persecution
      of draft evaders of Nuban  origin.  Nor,  he  submits,  is  there  any
      evidence of conscripted government forces being sent  to  Dafur.   The
      decree to which reference is made in the case of AA Sudan [2004] UKIAT
      00167 has been  found  not  to  exist.   This  is  a  reported  decree
      directing that those from the Sudan who have been abroad for in excess
      of a year should be detained. Confirmation of this is to be  found  in
      the case of AA 00260.  In  paragraph  37  of  that  determination  the
      Tribunal states:

             'The position,  then,  is  that  neither  the  fact  that  the
             respondent will be returned as a failed asylum seeker who  has
             been absent from the Sudan for more than a year, nor the  fact
             that he has originated from the south of that country, will be
             reasonably likely to  result  in  him  being  subjected  to  a
             significant  investigation  (let  alone  detention)   by   the
             immigration authorities at Khartoum Airport.'

22.   Mr Raj submits that there is no risk to the appellant  being  detained
      upon return, and therefore no  risk  of  him  being  conscripted,  and
      therefore no risk that he would be sent to Dafur. In any event,  there
      is no evidence that draft evaders are sent to Dafur.

23.   We will deal first with the question of  the  risk  to  the  appellant
      that he would be apprehended upon return or/and that it would be found
      that he has evaded his military service.  Mr  Raj's  submissions  rest
      largely on the determinations of the Tribunal in the case of AA 00167,
      and AB 00260.  Neither of those cases concern draft evaders. And  both
      found that the decree directing that all those who have  been  out  of
      Sudan for more than a year should be arrested does not exist. However,
      AA 00167 does quote from a Danish Fact Finding Mission which indicates
      that those who have been abroad for more than  one  year  do  have  to
      report to the tax authorities in the Sudan on  their  return.  If  the
      appellant is to lead any form of normal life and obtain employment and
      seek accommodation etc. it seems to us that it  is  reasonably  likely
      that he will have to report to the tax authorities on  his  return  in
      order to obtain the necessary clearance to enable him to carry out his
      life in Sudan. During the course of such interview the fact that he is
      of military age would obviously  come  to  light  and  we  would  have
      thought that there is a reasonable likelihood that he would  be  asked
      to produce some  document  to  indicate  that  he  has  completed  his
      military service. The Adjudicator has accepted  that  call  up  papers
      have been issued against the appellant.    At  5.70  the  CIPU  Report
      indicates that 'Those called up for military service are  not  allowed
      to follow an education or get a  job.  Men  of  conscription  age  are
      forbidden to leave the country for any  reason.'   Assuming  that  the
      appellant was not detained at the airport it would  be  necessary  for
      him to obtain employment, housing and other amenities once he  returns
      and it would seem that if he cannot show that  he  has  performed  his
      military service he will be barred from so doing. The very  fact  that
      he is not able to show that he has performed military service and that
      call up papers have been issued against him must lead to a  reasonable
      likelihood that he would be apprehended.

24.   For these reasons and the reasons indicated by the Court of Appeal  in
      the instant case at paragraph  11  of  its  judgment,  we  would  with
      respect to the Court of Appeal, totally concur with its conclusions.

25.   Turning to the question of whether or not he would  be  imprisoned  we
      accept that the US State Department Report indicates that there is  no
      record of any imprisonment for failure to do military service  in  the
      year 2003 but, bearing in mind the fact that the appellant is a Nuban,
      bearing in mind the fact that he has been out of the country for  some
      time, we would again respectfully agree with the Court  of  Appeal  at
      paragraph 12 of its  judgment  in  this  case.    We  would  refer  to
      paragraph 14 above.

26.   We would take the view that there is a reasonable likelihood that  the
      appellant's failure to do military service will come to the  attention
      of the authorities and that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  he
      would be imprisoned for such an offence.  Paragraph 5.55 of  the  CIPU
      Report describes prison conditions as being harsh and life threatening
      and states: 'Most prisons are old and poorly maintained and many  lack
      basic  facilities  such  as  toilets  or  showers.  Health  care   was
      primitive, food was  inadequate.  Prison  officials  arbitrarily  deny
      family visits to prisoners.'

27.   Paragraph 5.633 states that 'The government does  not  permit  regular
      visits to prisons by human rights observers. No  independent  domestic
      human rights organisation monitor prison conditions.'

28.   Bearing in mind that the appellant is a Nuban and is a  draft  evader,
      we think that there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  he  would  be
      imprisoned and that the conditions of imprisonment will be such as  to
      reach the threshold required under an Article 3 claim.

29.   Turning now to Miss Plimmer's argument in relation  to  the  appellant
      being required to serve in Dafur were he to  be  conscripted  directly
      into the army rather than imprisoned, we  have  considered  this  with
      care.   Although  the  general  objective  material   indicates   that
      Janjaweed is the militia  primarily  responsible  for  the  atrocities
      currently commit in Dafur,  there  is  strong  objective  evidence  to
      indicate  that  not  only  does  the  Janjaweed   receive   government
      assistance but that the  government  forces  are  themselves  actively
      involved and we would refer to the  reports  to  which  we  have  made
      reference earlier in this determination and to which Miss Plimmer drew
      our attention.  We are satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood
      that the appellant might be sent to the front and that the front might
      well include Dafur, but  could  also  include,  as  Miss  Plimmer  has
      indicated, other regions in the  Sudan  where  the  Sudanese  military
      authorities are currently involved. There appear to be other  minority
      groups which are targeted by the Sudanese authorities,  in  particular
      we observe from the Sudan report from which we have quoted above, that
      attacks on the  Fur  tribe  by  government  forces  are  frequent  and
      paragraph 105 of that report sets out seven areas where the government
      forces  have  been  responsible  for  violence   against   the   local
      population.  We are fortified in this view by an article in the  Daily
      Telegraph of 30 November headed "British Aid Workers Are Expelled from
      Sudan".  It is there started that  "An  upsurge  in  fighting  between
      government  troops  and  rebel  fighters  forced  the  suspension   of
      emergency food supplies to Northern Sudan".

30.   We are of the view that there is a reasonable likelihood that if  this
      appellant were drafted into the army he would be sent to  one  of  the
      areas where the government is currently engaged in military action  of
      one sort or another. The Court of Appeal in the  case  of  Krotov  has
      considered carefully the question of participation in a war  which  is
      internationally  condemned  and  the   definition   of   international
      condemnation.

31.   At paragraph Lord Justice Potter states:

             'In this  respect  there  is  a  core  of  humanitarian  norms
             generally accepted between nations as necessary and applicable
             to protect individuals  in  war  or  armed  conflict  and,  in
             particular, civilians, the wounded and prisoners of war.  They
             prohibit action such as genocide, the deliberate  killing  and
             targeting of  the  civilian  population,  rape,  torture,  the
             execution and ill-treatment of prisoners  and  the  taking  of
             civilian hostages.'

32.    In  the  following  paragraphs  His   Lordship   sets   out   various
      international instruments and materials which support what  is  stated
      in paragraph 30.  At paragraph 37 his lordship states:

             'In my view, the  crimes  listed  above,  is  committed  on  a
             systemic basis as an aspect of deliberate  policy,  or  as   a
             result of official indifference to the widespread actions of a
             brutal military, qualify as acts contrary to the  basic  rules
             of human conduct in respect of which punishment for refusal to
             participate would constitute persecution within the  ambit  of
             the 1951 Convention.'

33.   Having considered the objective material which is before  us  we  take
      the view that the conduct of the Sudanese  army  in  relation  to  the
      recent military activity in the south,  in  relation  to  the  current
      activities in Dafur, and in relation to activities in other  parts  of
      the country, are such  as  to  come  within  the  definition  of  acts
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.

34.   If the appellant were required to  perform  military  service  on  his
      being apprehended, we are satisfied  that  he  might  be  required  to
      participate  in  the  commission  of  international  crimes  We  would
      therefore  support  Miss  Plimmer's  argument  that  the   appellant's
      convictions and conscience in the light of such a finding are such  as
      to involve a risk of persecution of him were  he  to  be  required  to
      complete military service.

35.   We accordingly allow the  appeal  both  in  respect  of  the   Refugee
      Convention and in respect of the Human Rights Act.




                                M.W. RAPINET
                            ACTING VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


