
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  | |                                                       |
|        |                LB (Article 3 - Monrovia - Security) Liberia CG    |
|        |[2004] UKIAT 00299                                                 |

|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:|                  |
|Heard on:         |24th March 2004       |Appeal number:  |                  |
|Date typed:       |14th April 2004                                          |
|Date promulgated: | 28th April 2004                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (VICE PRESIDENT)                                             |
|MRS. J. HOLT                                                                |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. B.  Nauman,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Duncan
                     Lewis & Co. Solicitors.
For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  P.  Deller,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.

1.    The Appellant (a national of  Liberia,  born  on  3rd  May  1983,  who
     entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  on  17th  October  2002)  has
     appealed, with permission, against the determination of Mr. G M  Perry,
     an Adjudicator, who (following a hearing on 11th July  2003  at  Hatton
     Cross) dismissed his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds  against
     the Respondent's decision of 28th November 2002 to give directions  for
     his removal to Liberia.

2.    The Respondent disputed the Appellant's nationality.  The  Adjudicator
     accepted that the Appellant is a Liberian national.

3.    Given the terms of the grounds of application and the terms  in  which
     permission to appeal was granted, the issues before us are whether  the
     Appellant's removal to Monrovia would be in breach of his rights  under
     Articles 2 or 3, bearing in mind  the  general  security  situation  in
     Monrovia and the humanitarian conditions in Monrovia.

4.    The Tribunal  in  its  reported  decision  in  [2003]  UKIAT  00164  T
     (Liberia) considered the issue of safety in Monrovia and concluded that
     Monrovia is safe. In that case, the Tribunal did not  consider  whether
     the general humanitarian conditions in Monrovia are  such  as  to  give
     rise to a breach of Article 3.

5.    This Determination is being reported because:

      (a)   with regard to the security situation in Monrovia, we  have  had
           our attention drawn to a report  from  UNHCR  dated  8th  August
           2003, which was not before the Tribunal in the 164 T case.

             Our  conclusion  on  the  security  situation  is  set  out  at
           paragraph 17.12 below.

      (b)   we consider  whether  the  general  humanitarian  conditions  in
           Monrovia are such that removal to Monrovia would give rise to  a
           breach of Article 3.

            Our conclusion on the general  humanitarian  conditions  is  set
           out at paragraph 18.6 below.

6.    The Appellant's accounts: The Appellant is a Muslim  by  religion.  He
     was born in Foya in Liberia. His mother is a Mandingo by ethnic origin.
     He claimed to have experienced problems in Liberia on  account  of  his
     father's involvement with  the  Liberia  Action  Party  (LAP)  and  his
     father's former position as a town warden. He claimed that  his  father
     was replaced by a new chief warden, after Charles Taylor came to power.
     He claimed that he and his family had  problems  with  rebels  fighting
     against the government of Charles  Taylor,  when  the  rebels  attacked
     Foya. He claimed that, when government troops returned to the area,  he
     and his family also had problems from the government troops because the
     new chief warden reported to them that the family's home was a base for
     the rebels. He claimed that his parents were  shot  by  the  government
     troops and that he and his brother managed to  escape.  He  claimed  to
     fear persecution from the government troops  or  the  rebels.  He  also
     claims to fear persecution because of his Mandingo ethnic origin.

7.     The  Adjudicator's  Determination:  The  Adjudicator   rejected   the
     Appellant's accounts of his alleged problems in Liberia on  account  of
     his father's political association or position as a town warden. It  is
     clear  from  paragraphs  32  to  38  of  the  Determination  that   the
     Adjudicator did not believe the Appellant's story. He  found  that  the
     Appellant's accounts of the problems facing his family had been free of
     any reference to any ethnic issue. It is clear, from  paragraph  39  of
     the Determination, that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  accept   that  the
     Appellant had ever suffered  any  problems  on  account  of  his  half-
     Mandingo ethnic origin.

8.    We quote paragraphs 40, 41 and 42 of the Determination:

      40.   Given these facts I find that the Appellant has no  well-founded
           fear of persecution were he to return to Liberia. I do not  find
           that such a return, subject to my observation  below,  would  be
           unreasonable or unduly harsh.

      41.   I bear in mind the submissions made in relation to Article 3  of
           the ECHR and the Appellant's right  not  to  suffer  torture  or
           inhuman or degrading treatment and for the reasons set out I  do
           not find that to return the Appellant to the [sic] Liberia would
           cause the United Kingdom to be  in  breach  of  its  obligations
           under the Convention or at all.

      42.   I am still mindful  of  the  daily  news  that  emerges  of  the
           situation in Liberia. It is clear that the situation is unstable
           and there is considerable loss of life - much  of  it  civilian.
           Whilst I have found that the Appellant has neither established a
           well-founded fear of persecution nor engaged the articles of the
           ECHR I invite the Respondent to consider whether it would  [sic]
           appropriate, in all the circumstances, to suspend its  power  to
           give removal directions.

9.    In the grounds of application, it is asserted that  the  Adjudicator's
     recommendation that the Respondent suspend  removal  directions  is  an
     acknowledgement of a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment and that  the
     Adjudicator therefore erred in dismissing the human rights  appeal.  It
     is  asserted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to  deal  with   the
     submission made to him that, if the  Appellant's  human  rights  appeal
     were to be allowed, then  (absent  a  challenge  to  the  Adjudicator's
     decision) the Appellant would have been granted humanitarian protection
     for a specified period, under a caution that, if the situation changes,
     he would be liable to be removed.


      Oral submissions

10.   At the hearing before us, both parties  agreed  that  the  Adjudicator
     had erred in his assessment of the risk on return in  relation  to  the
     Article 3 claim - firstly, because he had apparently taken into account
     "daily news" reports which were not adduced to him by way of  evidence;
     and secondly, because his recommendation that the  Respondent  suspends
     removal directions undermines his finding that removal would not  be  a
     breach of the Appellant's Article 3 rights.

11.   We drew Mr. Nauman's attention to the fact that the  UNHCR  report  is
     dated 8th August 2003 - i.e. only four days after the  arrival  on  4th
     August 2003 of the peacekeeping troops  in  Monrovia.  Furthermore,  we
     noted that the UNHCR report appears to provide a general history of the
     conflict, and the human rights situation,  in  Liberia  since  December
     1989. We asked Mr. Nauman to draw our attention to  any  parts  of  the
     UNHCR report which specifically deal with  the  situation  in  Monrovia
     since the arrival of the peacekeeping troops on 4th August 2003.

12.1  With regard to safety in Monrovia, Mr. Nauman submitted that there  is
     no information concerning human rights abuses  in  Monrovia  since  the
     arrival of the peacekeeping troops. In his  submission,  one  can  only
     assume that  the  arrival  of  the  troops  means  that  protection  is
     available. Mr. Nauman referred us to the following parts of the UNHCR's
     report (page numbers refer to the Appellant's bundle) and the following
     parts of the CIPU Report dated October 2003:

       page  11E    Reports  from  IDPs  indicate  serious  maltreatment  of
                 displaced persons both within
      para 19    Monrovia and in the counties by all sides of the  conflict,
                 but particularly by the
      (UNHCR)    Government-allied forces. Reports continue to  be  made  of
                 systematic lootings, extortion, harassment and intimidation
                 within Monrovia and the  rest  of  the  country.  IDPs  are
                 robbed and forced to labour, oftentimes subjected to sexual
                 abuse.

      page 11F   There are consistent allegations of abductions  for  forced
     labour or sexual slavery
      para 22    and forced recruitment by  all  parties  in  the  conflict,
                 especially government allied
       (UNHCR)     militia.  Humanitarian  agencies  have  documented   many
                 incidents of forced abduction of young men and  women  from
                 displaced persons and refugee camps,  some  of  which  have
                 implicated Government troops. As of the start of  the  year
                 and  towards  the  recent  escalation  of   the   conflict,
                 abductions from IDP and  refugee  camps  took  place  on  a
                 seemingly regular basis with camp residents reporting  such
                 incidents as their major concern. Abductees were  allegedly
                 used for purposes of porterage, sexual  slavery,  or  other
                 forms of forced labour. Forced recruitment is also known to
                 have taken place  in  several  locations  and  even  within
                 Monrovia  in  broad  daylight,  purportedly  by  Government
                 allied forces.

                       (our emphasis)

      page 11F   This states that crippling poverty, multiple  displacements
     and continuous war has
      para 24    decimated Liberia's health infrastructure.  At  the  height
                 of the recent attacks on
       (UNHCR)     Monrovia  there  was  not  a   single   public   hospital
                 functioning in the whole   of  Liberia.  In  addition,  the
                 continuing conflict and looting of relief items has greatly
                 reduced the  capacity  of  the  humanitarian  community  to
                 respond to the current challenges in the health sector.

      para 5.18  This states that there has been a reduction in violence  in
     areas where peacekeepers
      CIPU report      have been deployed,  particularly  in  Monrovia,  but
     the situation remains tense.

      para 6.30  ......... There have  also  been  incidents  of  rape,  and
                 theft from IDPs is common. Both
      CIPU Report      forces  loyal  to  the  Government  and  rebels  have
                 committed these crimes, which appear to  have  been  mainly
                 perpetrated by members of the various militias.

      para 6.52  On 4th August 2003, the first  units  of  the  peacekeeping
                 forces began into arrive.
      CIPU Report      Both rebel and Government forces have withdrawn  from
                 Monrovia, and are allowing peacekeepers to  operate  within
                 the city.

      para 6.53  However, this paragraph states that fighting is  continuing
                 in many areas. This
      CIPU Report      violence is marked by looting  and  rape,  mostly  by
                 rival Government and rebel militias.

      para 6.54  In the country generally,  violent  clashes  between  rebel
                 and Government supporters
      CIPU Report      has made  the  provision  of  aid  and  reporting  on
                 conditions in these areas very difficult. In July 2003, the
                 UNHCR requested that Governments do not enforce the removal
                 of failed Liberian asylum  seekers  for  a  period  of  six
                 months. This was in response to an upsurge in violence, and
                 the resulting difficulties in providing protection  to  the
                 general population.

12.2  Mr. Nauman acknowledged that paragraph 22 of the UNHCR on page 11F  of
     the Appellant's bundle refers to the situation before  the  arrival  of
     the peacekeeping troops. In Mr. Nauman's submission, the  reference  in
     paragraph 24 of the UNHCR report to  looting  is  a  reference  to  the
     situation after the arrival of the peacekeeping troops. In Mr. Nauman's
     submission, paragraph 5.18 of the CIPU Report only says that there is a
     reduction in violence in  Monrovia.  It  does  not  say  that  all  the
     problems have been resolved. Paragraph 6.30 of the  CIPU  Report  shows
     that, as at September 2003, rebels and government forces were  creeping
     into Monrovia. Paragraphs 6.52 and 6.53 of the CIPU  Report  show  that
     fighting is continuing around the city of  Monrovia.  In  Mr.  Nauman's
     submission,  the  six-month  suspension  recommended   by   the   UNHCR
     (paragraph 6.54 of the CIPU report) would have covered  the  period  up
     until January 2004. Only two months have elapsed since the end of  that
     period. In Mr. Nauman's submission, the situation in Liberia as a whole
     or in Monrovia would not  have  improved  during  this  period  of  two
     months.

12.3  We asked Mr. Nauman whether he was saying that  any  general  risk  in
     Monrovia means that the Appellant is at real risk of ill-treatment. Mr.
     Nauman asked us to take into account the fact  that  the  Appellant  is
     half-Mandingo. The government forces suspect persons of Mandingo origin
     of being rebel supporters. Although the Appellant has not  referred  to
     any specific problems on account of his ethnicity, he  referred  us  to
     paragraph 6.33 of the CIPU report, which states:

      para 6.33  Many members of the predominantly Muslim Mandingo  minority
                 encountered
      CIPU Report      hostility when they sought to return, after  the  end
                 of  the  civil  war,  to  their  villages  ............Many
                 Mandingos   were   unable   to   reoccupy    their    homes
                 ...............Mandingo     citizens     faced      growing
                 discrimination, arbitrary arrests, and  violence  based  on
                 their ethnicity.

12.4  With regard to the general humanitarian conditions  in  Monrovia,  Mr.
     Nauman submitted that the arrival of the peacekeeping troops would  not
     have improved the  humanitarian  conditions.  He  referred  us  to  the
     following parts of the UNHCR's report (the page numbers  refer  to  the
     Appellant's bundle) and the CIPU report dated October 2003:

      page 11B   This refers  to  violations  of  the  Cease-fire  Agreement
                 signed between the
      (UNHCR)    Government and two reels groups on 17th June 2003.

      page 11A   This  states that a humanitarian  disaster  has  ensued  as
                 international aid agencies
      (UNHCR)    have been unable to reach most of  the  country,  including
                 the capital, Monrovia, with food and medical aid that  many
                 people require. The lack  of  food,  sufficient  water  and
                 sanitation facilities has led to the outbreak of contagious
                 diseases like diarrhoea and cholera. (This is  repeated  at
                 page 11E, paragraph 18.)

      page 11C   This states that, despite the  signing  of  the  cease-fire
                 agreement, fighting resumed
      (UNHCR)    on 24th June 2003 in Monrovia. Since  then,  the  city  has
                 been under siege, several denied  humanitarian  access  and
                 means to their livelihood.

      page 11F   Ninety per cent  of  Liberians  live  in  absolute  poverty
                 (less than $1 per day); of these,
      (UNHCR)    half live on less than $0.50 per day. This  has  translated
                 to a serious situation of hunger, malnutrition and lack  of
                 access to the basic necessities of life.

      para 5.29   This  states  that,  in  Monrovia,  the  lack  of  medical
     supplies, food, adequate sanitation,
      CIPU Report      and damage to  the  city's  water  supply  caused  by
                 fighting, has made the  health  crisis  much  worse.  Large
                 numbers of people are seeking shelter in  the  city,  which
                 has  added  to  the  difficulty   in   providing   adequate
                 assistance. Civilians have  also  been  caught  up  in  the
                 fighting in Monrovia. While it is not clear  if  they  have
                 been deliberately targeted, there have been a large  number
                 of casualties, possibly in the thousands.

      para 6.29  This states  that  recent  fighting  would  mean  that  the
     present figure of IDPs can only
      CIPU Report      be estimated,  and  this  was  given  as  500,000  in
                 September 2003.

      para 6.39  The recent fighting has also caused  more  people  to  seek
                 shelter in Monrovia. In
      CIPU Report      September 2003, there was an estimated  300,000  IDPs
                 sheltering within the city, with  only  limited  provisions
                 for their care.  The lack  of  medicine,  food,  access  to
                 clean water and shelter has resulted in  a  serious  health
                 crisis, which  international  agencies  are  attempting  to
                 address.

      para 6.50  Conditions in Monrovia itself remain poor. There is a  lack
                 of medical supplies, food,
      CIPU Report      and adequate sanitation, and these factors have  made
                 the provision of health care difficult. Many thousands have
                 been displaced by the recent fighting, and have  no  access
                 to adequate shelter,  they  are  either  living  rough,  or
                 seeking refuge in  schools,  churches  or  other  temporary
                 shelters.

      para 6.51  This refers to the looting  of  the  port  of  Monrovia  in
                 early August 2003 by rebels
      CIPU Report      withdrawing from the city and Liberians desperate  to
                 obtain food. The loss of supplies has made distribution  of
                 aid  much  harder  for  NGOs  operating  within  the  city.
                 Peacekeepers have attempted to restore order  to  the  port
                 area, so as to permit the arrival of aid by sea.

      para 6.54  Conditions in Monrovia have improved, but the provision  of
                 basic services remains
      CIPU Report      poor.

12.5  Mr. Nauman drew our attention to the  fact that a previous  cease-fire
     attempt was  not  successful.  Mr.  Nauman  submitted  that  the  above
     passages show the general humanitarian conditions as at the date of the
     report  of  the  UNHCR.  In  his  submission,  the  mere   arrival   of
     peacekeeping troops on 4th August 2003  would  not  have  improved  the
     humanitarian conditions. The situation in Liberia got to a very serious
     point both in terms of general security as well  as  in  terms  of  the
     general humanitarian conditions, before the peacekeeping  forces  moved
     in.  In  his  submission,  the  situation  would  not   have   improved
     sufficiently since then. Although the rebel troops and  the  government
     forces have withdrawn from Monrovia, this only applies to Monrovia.  In
     his submission, the general humanitarian conditions and  the  situation
     as to safety in Monrovia do reach the Article 3 threshold as  explained
     by Laws LJ in the N. case, as the Appellant  would  be  returned  to  a
     situation where there is insufficient food and  where  basic  resources
     such as water and medical care are  lacking.  Contagious  diseases  are
     rife. If the Appellant were to become ill, he  would  not  be  able  to
     obtain adequate medical treatment.

12.6  In Mr. Nauman's submission, the  Amnesty  International  Report  dated
     24th November 20043 referred to in the 164 T case concentrated  on  the
     protection available in Monrovia. It  only  states  that  there  is  an
     uneasy calm in Monrovia. This does  not  mean  that  the  situation  is
     satisfactory or that protection is  available  in  Monrovia.  The  word
     "uneasy" does mean that the situation is  100%  perfect.  Although  the
     report  states  that  adequate  logistical  support  is  needed  beyond
     Monrovia, it would be dangerous to read this as meaning  that  adequate
     logistical support is available in Monrovia.

13.   In Mr. Deller's submission, there was no reason for  the  Tribunal  to
     take a different view from that taken by the  Tribunal  in  the  164  T
     case. The Amnesty International Report referred in the 164  T  case  is
     the  most  up-to-date  before  us.  It  is  clear  from   the   Amnesty
     International Report  that  Monrovia  is  now  safe.  In  Mr.  Deller's
     submission, the humanitarian conditions in Monrovia were not such as to
     reach the Article 3 threshold.

14.   In response, Mr. Nauman acknowledged that Amnesty International  is  a
     loud voice in relation to the  Liberia  but,  in  his  submission,  the
     report of Amnesty International Report quoted in the 164 T case was not
     as detailed as the UNHCR report dated 8th August 2003.  In  any  event,
     the Amnesty International Report did not consider in detail the general
     humanitarian conditions in Monrovia, neither had the  Tribunal  in  the
     164 T case.

15.   We reserved our determination.

      DETERMINATION AND REASONS

16.   We have decided to dismiss this  appeal,  for  reasons  which  we  now
     give.

17.1  Permission to appeal was not granted in respect of  the  Adjudicator's
     finding that the Appellant is not at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  on
     account of his half-Mandingo ethnic origin. However, Mr.  Nauman  asked
     us to take into account the Appellant's  ethnic  origin  and  paragraph
     6.33 of the CIPU report. We are prepared to do so. We acknowledge  that
     paragraph 6.33 refers to  Mandingos  facing  difficulties  in  Liberia,
     growing discrimination, arbitrary arrests and violence based  on  their
     ethnicity. We make two points - firstly, there is no   mention  of  any
     difficulties experienced by Mandingos in Monrovia, which is  the  place
     where the Appellant will be  returned  to.  Secondly,  the  Adjudicator
     rejected the Appellant's claims that any of his  alleged  problems  had
     anything to do with his part-Mandingo  ethnicity.  That  is  a  finding
     which is fully sustainable, for the reasons the Adjudicator  gave  (see
     paragraph 39 of the Determination). We have  to  determine  the  issues
     before us on the basis of that finding. Given that  the  Appellant  did
     not experience any problems on account of his  part-Mandingo  ethnicity
     in his home area of Foya, it is not reasonably  likely  that  he  would
     have  any  problems  in  Monrovia  on  account  of  his   part-Mandingo
     ethnicity, and we so find.

17.2  This means that  there  is  nothing  about  the  Appellant's  personal
     circumstances which places him at risk of  ill-treatment  in  Monrovia.
     His situation is the same as anyone else in Monrovia.

17.3  It is clear, from the Court of Appeal's judgement  in  Hariri  v.  The
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  807,  that
     absent anything personal to a claimant which puts him at real  risk  of
     serious ill-treatment, it is not enough to show that the  ill-treatment
     feared occurs frequently or routinely in Monrovia. In order to  satisfy
     the "real risk" standard, it must be shown that there is  a  consistent
     pattern of gross and systematic violation of fundamental  human  rights
     in Monrovia (see paragraphs 4, 8 and 9 of the judgement). We bear  this
     in mind in deciding whether the Appellant is at real risk of  any  ill-
     treatment which the general population in Monrovia may experience.

17.4  We now consider what the general security situation is in Monrovia.

17.5  We have carefully considered the UNHCR's report dated 8th April  2003.
     As we pointed out to Mr. Nauman, this report is dated 4 days after  the
     peacekeeping forces began to move in.  It  is  important  to  read  the
     report as a  whole  to  understand  that  this  report  gives  detailed
     background  about  the  situation  in  Liberia  since  1989  and  makes
     conclusions and recommendations in part IV of the report (see page  11H
     of the Appellant's bundle).  We can find no mention in this  report  of
     the fact that, on 4th August 2003, the  first  units  of  the  Economic
     Community of West Africa Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL) peacekeeping force
     began to arrive. This is surprising given that the report does  mention
     (see paragraphs 28 and 30 on page 11G of the  Appellant's  bundle)  the
     adoption of resolution 1497  (2003)  by  the  United  Nations  Security
     Council on 1st August 2003 - just  3  days  before  ECOMIL  arrived  in
     Monrovia and 7 days before the date of the report itself. We have  also
     carefully considered paragraphs 19 and 22 of the report, which we  have
     quoted above. Mr. Nauman glossed over paragraph 22  and  said  that  he
     would not be making submissions on it because it clearly refers to  the
     position before the arrival of ECOMIL in Monrovia. We do not gloss over
     it. We consider that paragraph  22  sets  into  context  what  is  said
     elsewhere in the report. It is clear from the text we  have  emboldened
     in paragraph 22 above (see paragraph 12.1 of  our  Determination)  that
     the references  to  abductions  and  forced  recruitment,  even  within
     Monrovia, clearly relates to the situation prior to the arrival of  the
     peacekeeping forces in Monrovia.

17.6  We then have to set the UNHCR  report  next  to  the  other  objective
     material we have - namely the CIPU report dated October  2003  and  the
     Amnesty International Report of 24th November 2003 which is referred to
     in the 164 T case.

17.7  The CIPU report is dated October 2003. It  states  at  paragraph  6.52
     (see above) that  rebel  and  Government  forces  have  withdrawn  from
     Monrovia and are allowing peacekeepers to operate within the  city  and
     at paragraph 5.18 (see above) that violence has reduced in areas  where
     peacekeepers are deployed particularly in Monrovia.  The  reference  in
     paragraph 6.53 to fighting continuing in many areas does not help us to
     decide the situation in Monrovia, since we know that there is  violence
     outside Monrovia in areas  where  there  are  no  peacekeeping  forces.
     Similarly, the reference in paragraph 6.54 to "violent clashes  between
     rebel and government supporters" "in the country  generally"  does  not
     help us the decide the situation in Monrovia.

17.7. The Amnesty International Report (an extract of  which  is  quoted  at
     paragraph 6 of the 164 T case) states:

            Although the capital Monrovia enjoys an uneasy  calm  after  the
           devastating events of June and  July  attacks  on  the  civilian
           population  by  former  government  forces  and  the  two  armed
           opposition groups ........ are continuing  in  Bong,  Nimba  and
           Grand Bassa counties. "

17.8  There is no mention of attacks continuing  in  Monrovia.  Indeed,  the
     words "uneasy calm" means that Monrovia is calm, albeit that it  is  an
     uneasy calm. The report continues (see the final paragraph on page 3 of
     the Tribunal's Determination):

            "It is clear  the  presence  of  United  Nations  troops  offers
           protection to the civilian population in a few areas where  they
           are currently deployed"

            .......... Amnesty International said "what is  needed  urgently
           is  swift  deployment  of  additional   forces   with   adequate
           logistical  support  beyond  Monrovia  and  the  main  route  to
           Gbarnga".

17.9  However, there is no  mention  in  the  UNHCR  report  of  any  United
     Nations troops in Monrovia or, for that matter, in any part of Liberia.
     We have had our attention drawn to UNHCR's recommendation in June  2003
     that removals be suspended for  six  months.  This  sixth-month  period
     ended in January 2004. Mr. Nauman submitted that, as  only  two  months
     have elapsed since the expiry of the six-month  period,  it  cannot  be
     said that the situation would have improved sufficiently during the two
     months.  However, UNHCR must be  perfectly  aware  that  the  six-month
     period ended in January 2004, and yet it has chosen not to recommend an
     extension of the period of suspension.

17.10 We conclude that the  UNHCR  report  dated  8th  August  2003  is  not
     representative of the situation  in  Monrovia  today,  although  it  is
     helpful in setting out the history to the conflict in the country since
     1989, except for the two years from 1997 to 1999 (see  paragraph  1  of
     the UNHCR report)  and the suffering  of  the  population  since  1989.
     Amnesty International is not  known  to  be  reticent  in  voicing  its
     concerns (if it has concerns) on the general human rights situation  in
     any country. Mr. Nauman acknowledged  that  Amnesty  International  has
     been a "loud voice" (to use Mr. Nauman's own  description)  in  voicing
     concerns about Liberia. It is inconceivable that, if  there  are  human
     rights violations and abuses in Monrovia, if the situation in  Monrovia
     was dangerous, Amnesty International would not have said  so  in  their
     report. If they had, then those aspects of the report would  have  been
     drawn to the Tribunal's attention in the 164 T case  and  the  Tribunal
     would have referred to them. The Tribunal did not.

17.11 Paragraph 6.30 refers to there having been  "incidents  of  rape".  We
     agree with Mr. Nauman that this appears to be a reference to  Monrovia,
     having regard to the paragraph as a whole. The  paragraph  also  states
     that theft from IDPs is "common". The final sentence states that forces
     loyal to the Government as well as rebels have committed these  crimes.
     In Mr. Nauman's submission, this shows that Government forces and rebel
     forces are able to infiltrate Monrovia. This may be  so.  However,  the
     fact that the October 2003 CIPU refers to "incidents of rape" and theft
     being "common" does not mean that Monrovia is not safe, nor that it  is
     reasonably likely that the Appellant would be subjected to any such ill-
     treatment.

17.12 We conclude, from the evidence before us, as did the Tribunal  in  the
     164 T case, that the situation in Monrovia is safe. We have  considered
     the UNHCR report but, for the reasons given above, find  that  it  does
     not help us to determine the situation in Monrovia now. On the evidence
     before us, the up-to-date evidence is that  contained  in  the  Amnesty
     International Report referred to in  the  164  T  case.  We  adopt  the
     conclusions of the Tribunal in  that  case  (see  paragraph  8  of  the
     Tribunal's Determination) - namely, that the situation in  Monrovia  is
     tense but it is under control, that Monrovia is an area where there are
     UN troops in numbers and they are able to keep the peace in that  city;
     that IDP camps  around  Monrovia  function  and  are  open  to  outside
     scrutiny and that the people in those camps are safe.

17.13 In the 164 T case,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Appellant,  a
     Mandingo and a Muslim, could safely return to Monrovia as he  would  be
     at no particular enhanced risk over and above that  run  by  any  other
     Liberian citizen. We see no reason to take  a  different  view  in  the
     instant appeal, the Appellant being only half-Mandingo and  not  having
     experienced any problems in the past in his home area on account of his
     half-Mandingo ethnicity.

18.1  We now  turn  to  consider  the  general  humanitarian  conditions  in
     Monrovia.

18.2  For the reasons we have already given  above,  we  consider  that  the
     UNHCR  report  of  8th  August  2003  does  not  reflect  the   current
     humanitarian situation in Monrovia. However, the reference in the UNHCR
     report of 8th August 2003 to the outbreak of contagious  diseases  such
     as diarrhoea and cholera may still be relevant, because it  takes  time
     to bring such diseases under  control.  In  other  respects,  the  CIPU
     report of October 2003 is more up-to-date. We also  take  into  account
     the fact that the UNHCR has not recommended a  suspension  of  removals
     for a further period, at the end of the sixth month period  covered  by
     its position of June  2003.  We  accept  that  the  IDP  population  in
     Monrovia is large- an estimated 300,000 (paragraph 6.39 of  the  CIPU).
     As paragraphs 6.29 and 6.39 state, conditions  in  Monrovia  are  poor.
     There is a lack of medical supplies,  food,  and  adequate  sanitation.
     Many thousands have no access to  shelter  and  are  living  rough.  We
     acknowledge  that, in early August  2003,  the  port  of  Monrovia  was
     looted. There have no reports of looting since then of aid supplies.

18.3  We accept that the general humanitarian  conditions  in  Monrovia  are
     very bad.  We  acknowledge  that,  if  the  Appellant  is  returned  to
     Monrovia, he would experience difficulties in obtaining food  supplies,
     shelter and other basic necessities. The objective  evidence  indicates
     that there are NGOs operating in Monrovia, although we acknowledge that
     they experienced difficulties in distributing food after  the  port  of
     Monrovia was looted. The Appellant does not have any  medical  problems
     and has not indicated a need of any medical supplies. Nevertheless,  we
     accept that, if the Appellant is returned to  Monrovia,  his  situation
     would be very difficult. We do not underestimate his difficulties.

18.4  However, the Article 3 threshold is a high one,  as  the  decision  of
     the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHr) in  Bensaid  v.  The  United
     Kingdom [2002[ INLR 325 shows. In that case, the ECtHr said  (paragraph
     40 of the judgement):

      40.   The Court accepts the seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
           condition. Having regard however to the high  threshold  set  by
           Article 3, particularly where the  case  does  not  concern  the
           direct  responsibility  of  the  Contracting   State   for   the
           infliction of harm, the Court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the  applicant's  removal  in  these
           circumstances would be contrary to the standard of Article 3. It
           does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of the  D.  case
           (cited above) where the applicant was in the final stages  of  a
           terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical  care  or
           family support on expulsion to St. Kitts.

18.5  Whilst the Claimant does  not  rely  on  any  medical  condition,  the
     principle in Bensaid is also applicable where the Article  3  claim  is
     based solely on the general conditions in the receiving country.

18.6  On the whole of the evidence before us,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
     conditions the Appellant would face in Monrovia would not  be  of  such
     severity as to reach the threshold for a breach of Article 3 or  be  in
     breach of Article 2.  Accordingly,  we  agree  with  the  Adjudicator's
     decision that removal  would  not  be  in  breach  of  the  Appellant's
     protected human rights.

19.   It follows that we must dismiss this appeal.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 25th April 2004
