

AK and SA (Carers concession - indefinite leave sought) Pakistan
[2005]UKIAT 00018
                                                                         | |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 13 December 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                        Date Determination notified:26/01/05

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                       Miss B Mensah (Vice President)

Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     And
                                   (.....)
                                                                 RESPONDENTS


For the Appellant:           Mr C Colombo, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          No appearance



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State.  He appeals, with permission,
     against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr Graham Manchester, who
     allowed to a limited extend the appeal of  the  Respondents,  whom  we
     shall the Claimants, against his decision on 7  August  and  1  August
     respectively refusing to vary their leave.

  2. The Claimants did not appear and were not represented  before  us.   A
     full bundle had been submitted with a full skeleton  argument  and  we
     were informed that Counsel who had  intended  to  represent  them  had
     simply  sent  a  message  saying  that  he  was  ill  today.   In  the
     circumstances, we considered that no adjournment was necessary in  the
     interests of justice and we exercised our discretion with proceed with
     the appeal in the absence of the Claimants.

  3. The Claimants arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 June 2000.  They are
     citizens of Pakistan and had sought and obtained  in  Islamabad  entry
     clearance as visitors.  They were granted leave to enter  as  visitors
     for six months.  We should say that the avowed purpose of their  visit
     as declared to the Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad was  in  order
     to visit their parents, (.........) and (.......) who were ill.   They
     had both been ill for some  time  and,  during  their  interview,  the
     Claimants told the Entry Clearance Officer that they had got worse.

  4.  On  12  September  2000,  the  Claimants'  parents  applied,  on  the
     Claimants' behalf, for indefinite leave to remain for the Claimants to
     look after the parents.  There is no doubt that  the  application  was
     for an indefinite period properly so called:  that is not to  say  for
     ever, but in order for the Claimants to be with their  parents  during
     their declining years and final days.  Medical evidence was provided.

  5. In the course of investigating  that  application,  the  Secretary  of
     State obtained copies of the forms and interviews which  had  resulted
     from the Claimants' application for their visit visa.  Having done so,
     he took into account the facts before him in order to  decide  whether
     the Claimants should be allowed to remain.  He decided that there  was
     no provision enabling them to remain under the Immigration Rules.  The
     Adjudicator agreed, and there has been no appeal against that  element
     of his decision.  The Secretary of State also decided that there  were
     no human rights grounds upon which the Claimants should be allowed  to
     remain in the United Kingdom  with  their  parents.   The  Adjudicator
     agreed about that as well, and again there has been no appeal  against
     that element of his decision.

  6. However, between those two parts of the Secretary of State's decision,
     he considered another matter, which was whether the  Claimants  should
     be allowed to remain under what is called the Carers  Concession.   We
     shall look in a little bit more detail shortly  into  the  process  by
     which the Secretary of State decided that that Concession  should  not
     be applied to the Claimants.   But,  in  any  event,  the  Adjudicator
     decided that the Secretary of State's process  was  defective  in  law
     because, in the Adjudicator's view, he had not applied  his  published
     policy.

  7. The Adjudicator wrote this:

           "27.  I find that the decision taken by the  Respondent  outside
                 the Immigration Rules has failed to take into account of or
                 give effect to his own published policy since he appears to
                 have considered the exercise of his  discretion  under  the
                 Concession for Carers only  on  the  basis  of  whether  it
                 provides for a person to be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
                 remain which of course is what the First Appellant and  the
                 Second Appellant were seeking.  However, even if they  were
                 seeking  something  that  was  outside  the  scope  of  the
                 Concession, they are still entitled, on the  basis  of  the
                 facts  found  by  me,  to  have  had   their   applications
                 considered  within  the   permitted   parameters   of   the
                 Concession.
           ...
           31.   ... I am satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that,
                 for the reasons and to  the  extent  that  I  have  already
                 stated, the decision taken by the  Respondent  outside  the
                 Immigration Rules was not in accordance  with  the  law  in
                 that it failed to take account of or  give  effect  to  the
                 Respondent's own published policy and to  that  extent  the
                 appeal will be allowed.


           DECISION


           32.   I allow the appeal to the extent that it  be  remitted  to
                 the Respondent for a decision to be made under and  to  the
                 extent allowed by the  Concession  relating  to  Carers  in
                 accordance with the facts found by me in this appeal."

  8. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that the Adjudicator
     should not have determined  the  appeal  in  that  sense  because  the
     Secretary of State had already considered and refused the  application
     under the Carers Concession.  The grounds go on to assert that, in any
     event, the Claimants are and were  unable  to  comply  with  the  pre-
     conditions for the exercise of discretions under that Concession.

  9. The relevant part of the Explanatory Statement follows  the  Secretary
     of State's consideration of the Claimants' case under the  Immigration
     Rules and reads as follows:

           "3.4  The Secretary of State  then  considered  the  application
                 exceptionally outside the  Immigration  Rules.   Under  the
                 carers concession, applicants can  be  granted  exceptional
                 leave to remain for a period  of  three  months  to  enable
                 alternative  care  arrangements  to  be  made  before   the
                 applicant  leaves  the  United   Kingdom.    However,   the
                 concession does not provide for  a  person  to  be  granted
                 indefinite leave to remain to care for a sick  or  disabled
                 relative.   Therefore  the  Secretary  of  State   is   not
                 satisfied  that  the  appellants  meet  the  terms  of  the
                 concession for carers and he is not  prepared  to  exercise
                 his discretion in their favour."

 10. As we understand it, the Adjudicator took exception to that process of
     reasoning because he thought (and it  may  well  be  that  in  certain
     circumstances he would have been right to think)  that  a  person  who
     applies generally for permission to stay because  a  relative  is  ill
     should be taken as applying generally for the Carers Concession.  What
     is abundantly clear from the facts of this case, however, is that  the
     Claimants were not applying for three months' leave to remain in order
     to enable alternative care arrangements to be made.   Indeed,  as  the
     Adjudicator found, alternative care arrangements were  available.   It
     is quite clear that the Claimants sought, as we have indicated, not  a
     definite short period but an indefinite period of stay here.

 11. In those circumstances, we are unable to see  that  the  Secretary  of
     State erred in taking the terms of the Claimants' application  against
     them in considering whether the Carers Concession should be applied to
     them.  What he had before him was an application which was so contrary
     to the thinking behind the Carers Concession that he was right to  say
     that the Carers Concession could not be applicable to these Claimants.

 12. As we have said, in a different case it might be that a  more  general
     application should be considered within the Carers Concession:  and it
     may be that the Secretary of State will wish  to  look  again  at  any
     standard paragraphs that he uses in Explanatory Statements  for  these
     purposes.  But, so far as this case is concerned, the application  was
     not one which was capable of falling within the Carers Concession  and
     the Secretary of State's refusal to apply  that  Concession  to  these
     Claimants was amply justified.

 13. We should say that if we had any doubts about that  conclusion,  which
     we do not, they would have been resolved by the fact that we have  not
     been told that during the period - now over four years - in which  the
     Claimants have been in the United Kingdom, they have made any  attempt
     to secure alternative arrangements for their parents  and  then  leave
     the United Kingdom.  We are sorry to  have  to  record  that  in  fact
     (......) died on 24 August 2003.

 14. For the reasons we have given, we have concluded that the Secretary of
     State's principal ground is made out.  The Adjudicator erred in law in
     allowing the appeal to the extent that he did.  We substitute for  his
     determination a decision that the Claimants' appeal to the Adjudicator
     be dismissed on all grounds.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
