


|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 19 November 2004        |        |RG (Suicide - Risk - Razgar |
|                           |        |Considered) Sri Lanka [2005]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00072                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23 March 2005                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes - Vice-President                                      |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr J Middleton of Counsel  instructed  by  A  J
            Paterson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G S Jagpal, Home Office Presenting Officer

Note:

This determination is being reported as it deals  with  the  effect  of  the
House of Lords decision  in  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  on  the
consideration of claims that either Article 3 or Article 8 of  the  European
Convention will be engaged by  virtue  of  a  claimed  suicide  risk  on  or
following removal of a claimant.

For this reason, after   reviewing  the  factual  basis  of  the  claimant's
history and the changes which have taken place in Sri Lanka at paragraphs  5
and 6 of the determination, the psychiatric evidence before the tribunal  is
then set out  at  length  at  paragraphs  10  to  23  (evidence  before  the
Adjudicator) and at paragraphs 29 to  34  (additional  evidence  before  the
Tribunal).

Paragraphs 37 to 47 are concerned with the Article 3 claim,  taking  account
of N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 in the light of  the  guidance  of  the  House  of
Lords in Razgar and conclude that Kurtolli [2003] EWHC 2744 (Admin)  can  no
longer be regarded as raising any arguable issue that the ratio in N is  not
of general application including application  to  suicide  risk  claims.  In
order to succeed under  Article  3  a  claimant's  case  would  have  to  be
exceptional in the way found by the European Court in D v United Kingdom.

Paragraphs 48 onwards consider the  Article  8  claim,  again  by  extensive
reference to the guidance in Razgar. At paragraphs 58 to 63  the  degree  of
deference  to  be  accorded  to  the  Secretary  of  State'  views  and  the
continuing effect of the starred decision of the Tribunal in M (Croatia)  is
considered. Paragraphs 64 to 71 are concerned with  the  speculative  nature
of claimed suicide risk by reference to  Tribunal  jurisprudence  (paragraph
67 and 71) with fuller consideration  of  the  ratio  of  Bensaid  v  United
Kingdom  in this respect at paragraphs 68 to 70 below.

It is hoped that the sub-headings will be of some assistance in  conjunction
with this note in identifying the issues considered but  neither  form  part
of the determination itself.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity born on  2
    August 1978 in Chankanai in northern Sri Lanka.  He entered the  United
    Kingdom illegally on 15 March 1998 from  Belgium  and  made  an  asylum
    claim in his real identity.  He had previously made an asylum claim  in
    the false identity of  Silvan  Nadaraja  in  Belgium  on  or  about  11
    February 1998 and the Belgian authorities accepted that they  were  the
    state responsible for examining his asylum  application  under  Article
    10(1))(e) under the provisions of the Convention  for  Determining  the
    State Responsible for Examining Applications for Asylum Lodged  in  One
    of  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Communities   (the   Dublin
    Convention).  Accordingly the Secretary of State  gave  notice  of  his
    intention to issue directions for  the  removal  of  the  appellant  to
    Belgium under paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 by letter dated 8 January 1999.  It transpired that the  appellant
    had  in  fact  arrived  in  Germany  on  24  September  1997  and   had
    subsequently twice tried to apply  for  asylum  in  Switzerland  during
    October 1997 under various aliases, and also in  Germany  when  he  was
    returned there by the Swiss authorities for the second  time.   It  was
    only then that he travelled to Belgium intent, as he says, on trying to
    reach the United Kingdom but claimed asylum in Belgium also when he was
    arrested in the course of his journey.

2.    The appellant then initially instructed his  solicitors  to  make  an
    application for judicial review which was ultimately  withdrawn  on  16
    January  2001  by  which  time  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  and  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 had come into force leading to a  claim
    that his removal to Belgium would be in breach of Articles 3, 5, 6  and
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  That claim  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 1  August  2001  and  the  appellant  then
    exercised his right of appeal against that decision under Section 65 of
    the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The  grounds  of  appeal  were
    submitted on 15 August  2001  by  his  solicitors  who  had  previously
    submitted a psychiatric report on the  appellant  made  by  Dr  Coleman
    dated 14 July 2000, diagnosing him as  suffering  from  post  traumatic
    stress disorder (PTSD) and severe depression with suicidal ideation  as
    a result of his experiences in Sri Lanka and his fears of removal  from
    the United Kingdom.

3.    Nothing further then happened for a little over two years  until  the
    Home  Office  referred  the  appeal  to   the   Immigration   Appellate
    Authorities on 11 November 2003. The  appeal  was  listed  for  hearing
    shortly thereafter on 8 January 2004  before  Mr  Warren  L  Grant,  an
    Adjudicator.

4.    The basis of the appellant's asylum application has, of course, never
    been substantively considered because of the steps  which  he  took  in
    order to seek to avoid removal to Belgium when the initial decision was
    issued in 1999.  That is, perhaps, unfortunate from his point  of  view
    because if his account of his history in  Sri  Lanka  is  credible,  he
    might well at that  time  have  been  successful  had  he  pursued  his
    application in  the  country  which  had  accepted  responsibility  for
    dealing with his claim.

The Appellant's claim

5.    In brief, his claim was that his sister had started helping the  LTTE
    in northern Sri Lanka and had in the following year been  arrested  and
    tortured by the Indian Peace-keeping Force  (IPKF).   When  the  family
    arranged for her to be moved away  on  her  release  this  led  to  the
    detention and torture by the IPKF of his father  in  1989.   Thereafter
    the family suffered as part of the civil population in a war situation.
    his grandmother was killed in an air raid in 1995 within sight  of  him
    and other members of his family.  They moved away from their home  area
    and from November 1995 the appellant assisted the  LTTE  by  collecting
    money and food,  distributing  leaflets  and  putting  up  posters;  an
    activity which he continued until in mid 1996  the  family  decided  to
    return to Chankanai. He was detained for the purposes of  interrogation
    with other youths in the course of that journey on suspicion that  they
    might be LTTE supporters.  In the  course  of  that  detention  he  was
    severely beaten and ill-treated.  He was photographed and fingerprinted
    and released on payment of a bribe.  He then returned to the family  in
    the village and resumed his studies. But, within a few  months  rumours
    were circulating that he had helped the LTTE whilst he  had  been  away
    from the village and in November 1996 the family home was searched  and
    he was detained for  25  days  at  Manipay  Camp  where  he  was  again
    interrogated regarding suspected LTTE support  and  tortured.   He  was
    released from that detention after a further bribe had  been  paid  and
    the village headman had assured the army that he would  be  responsible
    for the appellant's good behaviour, at a time when the  Red  Cross  had
    apparently also intervened.  The LTTE were concerned, however, to  find
    out whether he had given any information  during  his  detention  about
    their activities, but this came to nothing further until  in  May  1997
    one of his relatives was detained and identified LTTE supporters to the
    army under torture, resulting in the torture of  the  LTTE  members  so
    identified and the revealing of the location of  an  LTTE  arms  store.
    Although the appellant was not directly connected with this event,  his
    mother was concerned that it would reawaken possible  interest  by  the
    LTTE in the family and lead to possible adverse interest  in  him.  She
    made arrangements for him to move to Colombo and to leave the  country,
    which he did on 12 July 1997.  We have  already  noted  his  subsequent
    stays in several European countries before he finally  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in March 1998.

Effect of changed situation in Sri Lanka

6.    The position in Sri Lanka changed  dramatically,  however,  following
    the ceasefire brokered between the authorities and the LTTE in February
    2002.  It  is  quite  clear  from  the  Tribunal   jurisprudence   from
    Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869 and Brinston [2002] UKIAT 01547 onwards
    that, taken his claims at their highest, there is no prospect that  the
    appellant's history in Sri Lanka would  give  rise  to  any  successful
    claim that his return from mid 2002 onwards to Sri Lanka  would  engage
    either the Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the European  Convention.
    He clearly falls into the category of those now regarded as  having  no
    current well-founded fear of persecution by reason of  their  ethnicity
    or imputed political opinion or of  breach  of  their  protected  human
    rights under Article 3 on the basis of their past history.

7.    Whilst  the  removal  directions  against  which  the  appellant  has
    appealed are to Belgium, it has been his  consistently  expressed  fear
    that the effect of removal  there  would  simply  be  a  stage  in  his
    ultimate return to Sri Lanka.  We cannot think that on the basis of his
    past history, taken at its highest, that is an unrealistic view on  his
    part in relation either to his asylum claim or, so far as based on that
    history, his Article 3 claim.

8.    The basis of his appeal both before the Adjudicator and before us  is
    that his removal from the United Kingdom would  be  in  breach  of  his
    protected  human  rights  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention.  He relies in this respect on his current mental  condition
    and the expressed views of two psychiatrists from Dr Coleman's  initial
    report in July 2002 until the present time that  removal  would  breach
    his human rights by reason of  the  real  risk  that  he  would  commit
    suicide rather than be removed either to Belgium or to Sri Lanka.

Dr Botting's report

9.    Before the Adjudicator there were a number of medical  reports.   The
    earliest in point of time was a report by Dr  Jonathan  Botting  of  29
    June 1999 and was concerned with the physical scars and markings on the
    appellant.  He claimed expertise in  dermatological  surgery  at  Queen
    Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, with expertise in skin wounds,  scars  and
    their healing, additionally to his general practice of some nine years'
    standing.  He had worked as a dermatological surgeon for five years and
    lectures on this subject at the Chelsea  and  Westminster  Hospital  as
    well as preparing frequent medical reports on skin injuries claimed  to
    result from assaults, minor and major.  It was on  the  basis  of  this
    expertise that he recorded a large number of scars on  the  appellant's
    head and neck, upper limbs and lower legs.  He  noted  the  appellant's
    explanation for different scars based upon what he said had happened to
    him during his two periods of  detention  and  concluded,  by  detailed
    reference to their nature, that the  scars  were  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of his torture in detention.  He noted also a  scar
    over the right upper arm and various indistinct  scars  over  the  left
    wrist which would all be entirely  consistent  with  superficial  burns
    caused by cigarettes and were, in his view,  further  evidence  of  the
    likelihood of past torture.

Dr Coleman's reports

10.   There were then two  reports  by  Dr  Coleman  who  is  a  consultant
    psychiatrist for the East London and the City NHS Mental  Health  Trust
    at East Ham Memorial Hospital.  The first is dated 14 July 2000 and was
    based on examinations both in February and June 2000,  a  consideration
    of the appellant's asylum statement of 11 July 1999  and  Dr  Botting's
    report.  He describes his mental state on examination  on  17  February
    2000 as one of severe depression in which  he  found  it  difficult  to
    speak to him about the details of his experiences in  Sri  Lanka  which
    caused him to become "very distressed,  panicky,  severely  despondent,
    and obviously quite agitated".  He concluded  at  that  time  that  the
    appellant suffered from a profound  and  deep  depressive  illness  and
    severe PTSD.  When he re-examined him on 15 June 2000 this was  because
    it was said there had been a  marked  deterioration  in  his  condition
    consequent upon a letter from the Immigration Service of  3  June  2000
    stating that he should be returned to Belgium for the  asylum  process.
    He said that the appellant "expressed a profound and deep shock at  the
    possibility that he would be returned to Belgium" and Dr Coleman  found
    it very difficult to  deflect  his  mind  from  the  "severe  sense  of
    despondency that had  occurred  as  a  result  of  this  letter".   Mrs
    Verisingham was acting as his interpreter and she gave  an  account  of
    how he had suffered a virtual emotional collapse following  receipt  of
    that letter.  Since  the  assessment  in  February  2000  he  had  been
    receiving regular treatment in the form of counselling for PTSD  and  a
    considerable degree of psychological support and educational help.  The
    report continues:

      "He described to me how he had settled down to live in Newham  at  39
         Melford Road where he had been helped considerably by a  group  of
         friends who were very supportive towards him.  He told me  how  he
         had been registered since June 1998 with  Dr  Venugopal,  a  well-
         known General Practitioner in Newham.  He said that  he  had  with
         the help of the London Oriental Academy  enrolled  in  a  computer
         class and also English classes.  Of perhaps  greater  significance
         he described to me a very supportive uncle who lived in East  Ham,
         and whom he was able  to  visit  on  a  regular  basis  to  obtain
         whatever help he needs whether financial or social. ...   He  said
         that if he were forced to go to Belgium he would  lose  everything
         and have to restart his life all over again.  He said that he  had
         no friends in Belgium, did not know the language,  had  no  social
         connections, no relatives and no hope of setting up  the  networks
         of social support that he had developed here  in  Newham.  ...  He
         said that he felt a sense of despair and  suicidal  thoughts  were
         prominent.  He  said  to  me  without  hesitation  that  he  would
         certainly attempt suicide in this country before  his  removal  to
         Belgium."

11.   Dr Coleman was of the view that the appellant was  then  in  a  worse
    state than  when  he  originally  saw  him;  there  was  a  significant
    deterioration in his mental state  which  the  doctor  related  to  the
    arrival of the letter.  He gave as his opinion that:

      "Mr Gopalasingham suffers from severe post traumatic stress  disorder
         (PTSD), as evidenced by a history  of  both  physical  and  mental
         torture, followed by the development  of  nightmares,  flashbacks,
         hyper-vigilance,  phobic  avoidance   and   the   development   of
         depressive illness."

      Mr Gopalasingham suffers from severe depressive illness, as evidenced
         by a deeply despondent state of mood, suicidal thoughts,  loss  of
         energy, lethargy, physical retardation, social withdrawal,  severe
         insomnia,  loss   of   appetite,   loss   of   concentration   and
         forgetfulness.

      As described above, Mr Gopalasingham has suffered from an episode  of
         torture within circumstances  which  were  not  only  designed  to
         inflict physical pain and agony, but also to  ensure  that  mental
         torture occurred at the same time."

      The report then goes on to deal with the views of Dr Coleman that  on
    the basis of his account the dehumanisation  process  during  detention
    was particularly severe in that he was  treated  with  utter  contempt,
    forced to stay in the torture room after the period of torture, refused
    toilet facilities, refused hygiene and given little in the way of  food
    or fluid.

      He then deals with suicide risk in the following terms:

      "When studying  suicide  risk  one  has  to  consider  various  'load
         factors' which progressively increase the risk  of  an  individual
         committing suicide.  Depressive illness in itself is probably  the
         major cause of the vast majority of suicides.    The  addition  of
         another mental illness, such as post  traumatic  stress  disorder,
         adds to the suicide risk.  Chronic  physical  disability  as,  for
         example,  caused  by  torture,  once  again  adds  to  the   risk.
         Unemployment, isolation from family and being a single  male,  are
         other factors adding to the risks.  Mr Gopalasingham therefore has
         all the factors that make him  a  very  high  risk  suicide.   The
         change from potential suicide to  actual  suicide  usually  occurs
         when a person feels that he is placed in intolerable circumstances
         from which there is no way out, or there is a certainty that  they
         will be placed back in  circumstances  which  they  know  will  be
         intolerable to bear.  In the case of Mr Gopalasingham, there is  a
         substantial risk that he will commit suicide if he  believes  that
         he is going to be removed to Belgium  or  Sri  Lanka.   The  whole
         point about suicide is that it is based on the distorted  judgment
         of the future.  The suicide occurs because the  individual  has  a
         conviction, sometimes a greatly distorted  conviction,  that  only
         endless mental anguish awaits him in the future.  He does not wait
         for this anguish to arrive.  In effect, the individual has reached
         a point of total despair about the future and cannot see  any  way
         out  except  suicide.   Mr   Gopalasingham,   therefore,   has   a
         substantial risk of committing  suicide  in  this  country  if  he
         believes that he is going to be removed to Belgium or  Sri  Lanka.
         To  the  rational  mind,  Belgium  may  seem  like  a   reasonable
         destination  for  Mr  Gopalasingham.   Mr  Gopalasingham's   mind,
         however, is not rational, it is grossly distorted by  the  effects
         of progressive illness and post traumatic stress  disorder.   When
         an individual suffers  from  a  severe  mental  illness,  such  as
         depressive illness, a secure and stable  locality,  with  friends,
         familiar faces and sights, supportive  carers,  a  caring  General
         Practitioner and, in time, a local care and psychiatric unit,  are
         absolutely vital in the treatment of  the  illness.   However,  Mr
         Gopalasingham's  worst  fear,  and  his  most  likely  reason  for
         attempting suicide in this country if sent to Belgium, is that  he
         is convinced that he will be transferred from Belgium back to  Sri
         Lanka.  In my opinion Mr  Gopalasingham  has  a  total  conviction
         about his fate in Sri Lanka."

12.   Dr Coleman then finally deals with the importance of community  care,
    saying  that  modern  treatment  in  psychiatry   involves   not   only
    medication, but also the setting up of what in effect is a  'community'
    to enable the patient to recover fully from whatever mental illness has
    afflicted him.  He says this is the most  fundamental  reason  for  the
    development of community care  in  psychiatry  and  that  the  task  of
    setting up a 'community' for a patient  usually  takes  a  considerable
    amount of time and effort by those involved in his care,  often  taking
    several years for it to be done successfully.  He then continues:

      "In the case of Mr Gopalasingham a 'community' has gradually been set
         up consisting  of  a  network  of  friends,  Mrs  Verisingham,  Dr
         Venugopal,  a  group  of  friends  in  Melford  Road  and  regular
         treatment in the form of counselling  for  post  traumatic  stress
         disorder.  The overwhelming consensus in  psychiatry  would  agree
         that this 'community', set up to ensure the rehabilitation  of  Mr
         Gopalasingham, is critical for the resolution of his severe mental
         illnesses, and also  his  eventual  rehabilitation  in  the  wider
         community.  The consensus view in psychiatry would also agree that
         his enforced removal to Belgium would be regarded as a  shattering
         blow to his treatment and rehabilitation, not  simply  because  of
         his arrival in a strange country, but because his 'community'  was
         being shattered causing a critical dispruption  of  the  treatment
         and rehabilitation processes at a  very  important  stage  in  his
         rehabilitation.   For  self-evident  reasons  Mr   Gopalasingham's
         'community' cannot be transferred to Belgium and as a  result  his
         progress and treatment and rehabilitation will  be  set  back  for
         many years.  Indeed, many experts in community psychiatry will say
         that it  is  the  shattering  of  this  'community',  rather  than
         anything  else  which  is  the  main  risk  factor  in   potential
         suicides."

13.   There is a  further  report  from  Dr  Coleman  dated  25  July  2001
    following a further assessment on  4  June  2001.   This  report  again
    reiterates the continuing effect of PTSD and depressive  illness;  that
    the appellant had said that he would commit suicide here if  there  was
    any prospect of his being returned either to Sri Lanka  or  to  Belgium
    and that there was now nobody in Sri Lanka who could help him where  he
    had no friends or relatives.  Whilst he described a desire to do things
    with his life he had no motivation to carry them out.  Beyond that  the
    position had not changed from the earlier report and it  was  his  view
    that the appellant still had all the factors that make him a very  high
    risk of suicide and that there was a substantial  risk  that  he  would
    commit suicide if he believed that  he  was  going  to  be  removed  to
    Belgium or Sri Lanka.

Dr Patterson's report of 13 December 2003

14.   The final report before the Adjudicator was  one  dated  13  December
    2003  made  by  Dr  Anne  Paterson,  a   consultant   psychiatrist   in
    psychotherapy at the South Kensington and  Chelsea  Hospitals  who  has
    been  concerned  in  psychotherapy  since  1996,  initially  as  Senior
    Registrar in psychotherapy in the west of Scotland.  She  has,  to  our
    knowledge, provided expert reports  for  other  appellants  before  the
    Tribunal.  She had considered the two reports by Dr Coleman  and  other
    relevant papers as well as interviewing  the  appellant.   She  records
    that he told her that he was convinced that the Sri Lankan  authorities
    and the LTTE would both pursue him and that he would be safe nowhere in
    Sri Lanka, to which he was unable to contemplate return.   He  regarded
    being sent back to Belgium as tantamount to  being  sent  back  to  Sri
    Lanka and said that he would kill himself rather than  be  returned  to
    either country.  She records:

      "He said that about eighteen months ago he had  become  so  convinced
         that he would be deported that he took an overdose of Anadin Extra
         intending to kill himself.  He told me: 'It was all  too  much  to
         bear.'  He said that his flatmate had discovered the empty  packet
         and taken him to Accident and Emergency.  [He] said that he  would
         take another overdose if he were told for  certain  that  he  must
         return to Sri Lanka.  He recounted that his 'worst worry' is  that
         he would not be able to stay in the  UK.   He  told  me  that  the
         support that he has in the  UK  from  his  flatmates  and  several
         others, including Mr Sivasubramanian and Ms Veerasinngham ....  is
         keeping him alive.  He said that in Sri Lanka he does not know the
         whereabouts of his family and fears that he would have  no-one  to
         turn to.  In Belgium he told me that he does not know anyone.   He
         recounted  that,  because  of  the  uncertainty  of   his   asylum
         situation, he is unable to escape from the  endless  fear  of  the
         future.  He said that as  time  elapses  he  becomes  increasingly
         hopeless about his situation. ...  [He]  related  that  he  is  so
         preoccupied by the past and terrified of the  future  that  he  is
         unable to concentrate upon the present in the UK.  He told me, for
         example, that he forgets what he has been asked to  do  and  loses
         his possessions.  He related that his concentration is so bad that
         he has hardly learned any English in six years and has now stopped
         trying to study.   He  related  that  he  is  always  afraid  that
         something bad will happen to him again.   Mr  Gopalasingham  said,
         for example, that he is easily startled by the slightest noise and
         badly frightened by loud noises in the  street  or  the  sound  of
         raised voices.  He also says that he is  afraid  that  the  police
         would arrest him every time he signs on and he would be sent  back
         to Sri Lanka. ...  He said that he often bangs doors and hits  his
         head  and  arms  against  the  wall.  [His  evidence  before   the
         Adjudicator was that he had done this on one  occasion.]  He  told
         me: "I just want to smash something."  He explained that his  mind
         seems to go blank in the aftermath of his rage.  He said: "At  the
         time I think that I know what I am doing when I hit the  wall  and
         then afterwards I think: 'Why am I doing this, what have I  done?'
         ".  Mr Gopalasingham also recounted pervasive sadness.  He told me
         that he is unable to take pleasure or find meaning in anything  in
         life.  He related that he has lost interest in everything."

15.   As to the current situation, he told Dr Patterson that  he  does  not
    feel capable of working but he does not have a work permit  or  receive
    any benefits and is entirely dependent upon his  flatmates  for  money,
    food and accommodation, spending most of his time  alone  in  his  room
    since he does not want to  join  in  with  the  other  members  of  the
    household and prefers not to go out of the  house.   He  said  that  Ms
    Veerasingham, to whom Dr Coleman refers in his report, continues to see
    him weekly although he has dropped out of his studies.  He told me that
    Mr Premathas [who lives in the same flat] accompanies him to the  place
    where she works.  He told me that she sometimes takes him to sign on at
    the police station, monthly.  He said that she remains one of his  main
    supports, together with his flatmates and Mr Sivasubramanian.  He  told
    me, repeatedly, that he could  not  survive  without  their  help.   He
    explained that the people he has met in the UK are more of a family  to
    him than his own relations.  Mr Gopalasingham related that he  was  not
    in contact with his parents in  Sri  Lanka  and  does  not  know  their
    whereabouts.  He told me: "They haven't bothered to get in touch." ..."



16.   He was not receiving any current treatment at the date of that report
    and had been prescribed paracetamol by his  General  Practitioner.   Dr
    Patterson also saw Mr Premathas and Mr Sivasubramanian.  Since there is
    a statement from Mr Premathas,  but it is right to record at this point
    that he did refer to and confirm the taking of the  Anadin  tablets  by
    the appellant and that he subsequently  went  with  him  to  the  local
    Accident  &  Emergency  Department.   Dr  Patterson  records  that  the
    appellant found the interview difficult and that  he  became  forgetful
    and lacking in concentration and finally fell asleep at the point where
    she was speaking to Mr Sivasubramanian.  He had told her  that  he  did
    not think any treatment would be effective unless his anxiety of  being
    deported was resolved and he was allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.
     He was adamant he could not present himself to a doctor in Sri  Lanka.
    She says that he  was  not  actively  suicidal  at  the  interview  but
    repeatedly told her that he continued to think of  suicide,  especially
    after waiting so long to  hear  the  outcome  of  his  application  for
    asylum.  She gives it as her diagnostic  view  that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from  PTSD,  that  diagnosis  being  made  according  to  the
    recognised  international  classification  of  diseases,  and  that  he
    exhibits  the  characteristic  phenomena  of  PTSD  including  a  self-
    protecting dissociative reaction from  his  earlier  experiences.  ....
    Also he has characteristic intrusive recollections of the past  traumas
    which led to that condition with typical symptoms of  autonomic  hyper-
    arousal and pervasive anxiety, such as  hyper-vigilance,  an  increased
    startle response, panic and insomnia.   His  emotional  withdrawal  was
    evident upon examination and punctuated with angry outbursts  which  is
    also characteristic of survivors of trauma.  He also describes  himself
    as feeling guilty that he survived the bombing in which his grandmother
    and many others died and "survivor guilt" was again commonly  found  in
    victims of severe trauma.  The result of any  traumatic  experience  is
    recognised, she says, to be an intricate, dynamic  interaction  between
    the nature and the traumatic event, the personal  meaning  ascribed  to
    the trauma and  the  individual's  capacity  to  cope,  based  on  past
    experiences, personality traits and social  systems  of  support.   She
    noted that he stated his current symptoms began  following  his  second
    detention, although his mind had been disturbed ever since  the  church
    bombing, and it was significant that his detentions occurred within six
    months of one another and less than  a  year  after  he  witnessed  the
    carnage of the bomb blast so that there was little chance  for  him  to
    recover psychologically after each traumatic event.  She considered the
    cumulative effect of a number of  significant  traumatic  episodes  was
    likely to have successively eroded his  psychological  resilience.   It
    was also relevant  that  he  had  these  experiences  when  he  was  an
    adolescent of 17 not yet independent from his family.   There  were  no
    predisposing factors for PTSD which antedated the traumatic experiences
    which gave rise to them and it was her opinion that the  current  delay
    was acting as a perpetuating factor for the trauma syndrome because the
    possibility of return acted as a powerful precipitant  of  "flashbacks"
    with subsequent panic, headaches and association.  The  uncertainty  of
    his situation and the threat of being sent back continually  undermined
    his capacity to develop adult autonomy.  She also  considered  that  he
    was suffering from depression which was one of the most  common  mental
    disorders found in survivors of  trauma.   This  was  characterised  by
    pervasive  low  mood,  guilt,  low   self-esteem,   marked   ideas   of
    hopelessness, helplessness and pessimism together with disturbed sleep,
    reduced appetite, fatigue, decreased social  and  domestic  functioning
    and the inability to take pleasure or find meaning in anything in  life
    together with ongoing suicidal ideas.  Again  the  uncertainty  of  his
    current status acted  as  a  perpetuating  factor  for  his  depressive
    illness.

17.   Dr Patterson's prognosis was as follows:

      "First, from his account he has suffered  severe,  cumulative  trauma
         during late adolescence.

      Secondly, he was not assured of being allowed to remain in the UK.

      Thirdly, he may have to face further  trauma  with  regard  to  being
         separated  from  the  supportive  community   in   the   UK   that
         constitutes, in my opinion, a surrogate family  upon  whom  he  is
         crucially reliant.

      Fourthly, he is still faced with negotiating adolescent developmental
         tasks, at the later age of 25, underlined by the  vicissitudes  of
         cultural displacement.

      Without treatment, he is unlikely to  recover  or  to  negotiate  the
         transition from adolescence to adult  independence.   There  is  a
         risk that he  will  develop  an  enduring  change  of  personality
         because of the trauma he has recounted.

      Finally, his mental state is deteriorating, untreated, over time.

      If he can be helped to engage in treatment, in the UK, it is probable
         that, in  time,  his  symptoms  of  depression  and  PTSD  may  be
         partially alleviated.  It is unlikely that he  will  ever  recover
         completely, however, particularly if  he  has  to  endure  further
         trauma and loss."

18.    Dr  Patterson  then  went  on  to  recommend  both   anti-depressant
    medication  and  psychological  intervention  to  treat  his   symptoms
    although it was likely to be difficult for him to engage in any type of
    treatment while he remained terrified of being returned.
19.   Dr Patterson was asked for her views on the risk of  suicide  and  we
    set out what she then said in full:

      "In my opinion, his repeated statements that he would  kill  himself,
         in the UK, rather than be returned to  Belgium,  should  be  taken
         very seriously.

      Mr Gopalasingham explained his conviction that being sent to  Belgium
         would only be a short step in the process of returning him to  Sri
         Lanka.  From his account, he equates being sent  to  Belgium  with
         being returned to Sri Lanka.

      In evaluating the risk of suicide it is important to consider, first,
         that suicide is  significantly  more  frequent  in  patients  with
         severe  depression,  like  Mr  Gopalasingham,  compared  with  the
         general  population.   Approximately  15%  of  severely  depressed
         patients go on  to  kill  themselves  (Gelder,  Mayou  and  Geddes
         [1999]).

      Secondly, Mr Gopalasingham describes two previous suicide attempts in
         the context of being told that he was unlikely to be successful in
         his  application  for  asylum.   Individuals  with  a  history  of
         deliberate self-harm have a 100-fold  increased  risk  of  suicide
         compared to the general  population.   The  presence  of  previous
         suicide attempts is a high-risk factor for later suicide.

      Thirdly,  Mr  Gopalasingham  has  described  the  intensification  of
         suicidal ideation with the continual delay in  deciding  upon  his
         asylum claim.

      Finally, for Mr Gopalasingham, faced with  being  sent  back  to  Sri
         Lanka via Belgium, committing suicide, in the  UK,  is  likely  to
         represent the only way in which he is able to try  to  assert  the
         vestiges  of  his  arrested  personal  autonomy  that   has   been
         devastated by his ordeal and to  save  himself  from  the  further
         torture and death that he is convinced awaits him."

20.   Dr Patterson was also  asked  what  would  be  the  position  of  the
    appellant if returned to Belgium  without  committing  suicide  in  the
    United Kingdom. She said that she was of the view that it was extremely
    unlikely that he would be equal to the challenges of being sent back to
    Belgium and managing to cope alone and  that  there  was  the  risk  of
    exacerbating his depression and the existing  suicidal  ideation  being
    greatly  increased  because  he  is  likely  to  have  lost  all  hope:
    hopelessness has  a  serious  significant  association  with  completed
    suicide.  As he saw return to Belgium as facilitating his return to Sri
    Lanka "where he believes he is in mortal danger" it was her  view  that
    if he were prevented from killing himself either in the United  Kingdom
    or while being returned it was likely that he would commit suicide upon
    his arrival in Belgium to avoid being sent back to  Sri  Lanka.   Asked
    about his ability to access treatment for his mental  condition  either
    here or in Belgium, Dr Patterson said this:

      "First, from his account, he is overwhelmed by profound hopelessness.
          In  my  opinion,  this  was  confirmed  by  his  presentation  at
         interview in which I noted his despair and passivity.

      Secondly, he was clear, at interview, that he  did  not  believe  any
         treatment could help him while he was afraid of being sent back to
         Sri Lanka.  As I have already described, Mr Gopalasingham  equates
         being sent back to Belgium with an inevitable return to Sri Lanka.

      Thirdly, in my opinion, Mr Gopasalingham  has  become  trapped  in  a
         vicious circle from which he is unable  to  see  any  escape.   He
         recognises that he needs treatment but the symptoms of his  mental
         illness, such as  the  predominant  experience  of  himself  as  a
         passive  victim,  characteristic  of  PTSD  and  the  hopelessness
         characteristic of severe depression, prevent him from seeking  the
         help he needs.

      These dilemmas have prevented him from effectively seeking  treatment
         in the UK  where  any  contact  with  medical  services  has  been
         initiated by his flatmate, Mr Premathas.

      The vicious circle I have described is likely to  be  exacerbated  by
         the deterioration in his mental state on being sent to Belgium."

21.   Dr Patterson next dealt with a view as  to  the  effect  of  actually
    being returned to Sri Lanka and, again, we think it appropriate to  set
    out the relevant passage in full:

      "I have already described the delay in deciding his claim for  asylum
         and the consequent current uncertainty of the asylum situation  as
         significant factors that perpetuate Mr  Gopalasingham's  disturbed
         state of mind, maintaining his symptoms of PTSD and depression and
         increasing the risk of suicide.

      Being sent back to Sri Lanka will  undoubtedly,  in  my  opinion,  be
         experience  of  yet  another  life-threatening   ordeal   for   Mr
         Gopalasingham.

      Mr Gopalasingham told me that he is unable even to contemplate  going
         back to Sri  Lanka.   He  maintains  that  he  will  be  arrested,
         tortured and murdered by the SLA or LTTE if he  is  returned.   At
         interview, with me, it was difficult to explore  his  ideas  about
         any future in Sri Lanka because he continued to say:  "I  will  be
         killed."

      First, this may be understood  as  a  rational  fear  of  what  might
         actually happen in the future based upon his history  of  previous
         traumatic  experiences   in   several   episodes   of   detention,
         interrogation and multiple torture.  His conviction that he is  in
         danger is strengthened by the knowledge that the LTTE are free  to
         operate throughout Sri Lanka, following the ceasefire and by  news
         from Sri Lanka that he recounts of the continuing murder of Tamils
         by the security forces in the north of Sri Lanka.

      Secondly, Mr Gopalasingham's perception of the danger that awaits him
         may also be understood as an unresolved symptom of PTSD, a further
         "flashback" phenomenon, in which the past  trauma  is  alive,  not
         only in the present but is also projected into  the  future.   His
         evaluation of the danger awaiting him is also based, therefore, on
         perceptions that are distorted by symptomatic mental illness.

      Thirdly, for Mr Gopalasingham, being sent back to Sri Lanka is likely
         to be experienced  as  a  further  major,  stressful  life  event,
         removing any vestiges of hope and personal autonomy that remain to
         him.

      From his account, he will also lose the physical sanctuary of the  UK
         where he feels safe from the constant danger that he perceives  of
         being arrested, tortured and murdered by the SLA or  LTTE  in  Sri
         Lanka.

      He will also lose contact with his small community in the UK who  are
         providing the only support for his fragile mental functioning.

       In  my  opinion  being  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  would,  therefore,
         precipitate a worsening of both PTSD and  depression  and  further
         undermine  his  already  vulnerable  mental  state   substantially
         increasing the risk of suicide."

22.   Finally, we note that Dr Patterson said  that  she  agreed  with  the
    diagnosis made by Dr Coleman and that, since  the  appellant  had  been
    seen by him, his social and  domestic  functioning  had  declined  with
    increasing self-isolation.  She therefore thought it  likely  that  his
    depressive  symptoms  had  deteriorated   since   Dr   Coleman's   last
    assessment, noting that he had attempted suicide  since  then  and  was
    increasingly preoccupied with his uncertain future.

23.   That was the extent of the medical and  psychiatric  evidence  before
    the Adjudicator at the date of hearing.  It appears that pages 20-23 of
    Dr Patterson's report were not produced to the Adjudicator and  neither
    have they been produced to us.

Sustainability of the Adjudicator's findings

24.   We now turn to  consider  the  Adjudicator's  determination  and  the
    challenges to it.  This is an appeal to which the provisions of Section
    101 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are applied  by
    virtue of the provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 (Commencement No 4) Order 2003 so that an appeal will  lie  to  us
    only on the basis that there has been a material error of  law  on  the
    part of the Adjudicator in reaching his findings. (See CA v SSHD [2004]
    EWCA Civ 1156).

25.   In reaching his decision the Adjudicator considered the  main  thrust
    of the Appellant's claim at paragraphs 13 and 14 of  his  determination
    in relation to Article 3 and at paragraph 16 in relation to Article  8.
    He did not consider at all whethter the Appellant's core claims  as  to
    what had happened to him in Sri Lanka might be true. Whilst  we  accept
    that there was no requirement for any formal findings in  this  respect
    as he was not called upon to decide the asylum and Article 3 claims  in
    relation to  that  history,  it  nevertheless  seems  to  us  that  the
    challenge in the grounds of appeal  in  this  respect  has  some  force
    insofar as the possibility that the history was credible has  relevance
    to the way in which the medical evidence needs to be addressed. Perhaps
    because of limiting himself in this way, and possibly  also  by  simply
    factually misconstruing the effect of the timing of the medical reports
    and of the onset of the trauma which had led to the PTSD diagnosis,  as
    he clearly did at paragraphs  13  and  14,  the  Adjudicator's  primary
    finding was that no weight at all was to be placed on  the  psychiatric
    reports before him. Given the clear diagnoses in those reports and  the
    absence of any countervailing evidence  from  the  Respondent,  it  was
    simply not open to the Adjudicator to approach  his  findings  on  that
    basis as this Tribunal and the higher courts have  so  frequently  made
    clear. Such an approach clearly demonstrates a fundamental and material
    error of law on  the  Adjudicator's  part  to  his  evaluation  of  the
    evidence before him.

26.   Given the changes that have taken place in Sri Lanka, however, as  Mr
    Middleton recognised, there was no arguable basis for  seeking  to  run
    the Article  3  claim  on  the  footing  that  the  appellant  required
    international surrogate protection from either the Sri Lankan state  or
    the LTTE.  He could not hope to  succeed  on  such  a  basis  were  his
    substantive claims to be considered in  this  country  and  we  see  no
    reason to suppose that he would have any better chance  of  success  in
    that part of his claim in Belgium.  It seems to us, therefore, that  it
    is entirely rational for the appellant to consider  that  a  return  to
    Belgium will not result in his being able to establish  refugee  status
    or breach of Article 3 by reason of his past experiences and  that,  to
    that extent, return would be but a stage in  the  process  of  ultimate
    return to Sri Lanka.  Belgium is, however, a signatory to the  European
    Convention and there was no  evidence  before  us  that  Belgium  would
    regard its obligations under that Convention differently from  the  way
    in which the United Kingdom courts would regard them.  In  that  sense,
    therefore, removal to Belgium will  not  prejudice  this  appellant  as
    regards the basis on which he currently seeks to put forward his  claim
    and this is a relevant consideration in relation to his claim that  his
    protected human rights under Article 3 would be breached by his removal
    from the United Kingdom.  There is no evidence before us  that  similar
    medical treatment would not be available to him in Belgium and the only
    distinction between his situation in the United Kingdom and in  Belgium
    is that his existing local support network would not  be  available  to
    him there, a consideration which may have more relevance in relation to
    his claim that removal would be  in  breach  of  Article  8  rights  to
    private life.

27.   The Adjudicator's reasoning in paragraphs 13 and 14 is  in  our  view
    rightly the subject of challenge in the grounds of appeal.   Since  the
    appellant left Sri Lanka in July 1997 and was first seen by Dr  Coleman
    on 17 February 2000 there  is  nothing  to  show  "that  the  appellant
    managed to cope with life out of Sri Lanka  for  at  least  four  years
    before he  attended  Dr  Coleman  for  his  first  assessment"  as  the
    Adjudicator states.  The period is some two and  a  half  years  before
    that first attendance.  Equally, the Adjudicator's  statement  that  he
    does not believe the symptoms described to the psychiatrists  can  have
    began only since arrival in the United Kingdom must be correct but  not
    in the sense in which the Adjudicator means it.  It is quite clear from
    Dr Patterson's report  that  she  regards  the  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder diagnosed as having commenced  within  a  few  months  of  the
    detentions in Sri Lanka and, indeed, that would be an  essential  point
    for  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  which  according  to  the  international
    standards which she applied must manifest itself within  twelve  months
    of the trauma which gives rise to it in  order  to  be  so  classified.
    Whilst Dr Coleman fails to make any reference  to  the  internationally
    recognised diagnostic criteria on which  he  bases  his  diagnoses,  Dr
    Patterson does and has expressed her agreement with his diagnosis as we
    have noted above.  There is no challenge to the medical  qualifications
    of Dr Coleman and Dr Patterson and although this Tribunal  has  in  the
    past commented critically upon Dr  Coleman's  reports  because  of  the
    excessive language which they sometimes  contain  and  the  failure  to
    identify the diagnostic approach taken, we  see  no  basis  for  simply
    rejecting the diagnoses of two experienced psychiatrists in the absence
    of any contrary medical evidence submitted on the part of the Secretary
    of  State.   Whether  or  not  the  appellant's  account  of  his  past
    experiences giving rise to the symptoms observed by the two doctors was
    true, those clinically observed symptoms cannot simply be dismissed  in
    the way in which the Adjudicator has sought to do.  Whilst  it  is  not
    appropriate for us  to  make  any  specific  findings  in  relation  to
    credibility, we observe that there is nothing in the detailed statement
    of the appellant which is contrary to the well-known objective  country
    evidence as to the way in which Tamil suspects were treated by the  Sri
    Lankan authorities at the relevant times and the  corroborative  effect
    of both Dr Botting's  and  the  psychiatric  reports  as  to  the  past
    existence of traumatic events giving rise to what  they  observed,  has
    been totally ignored.  For  those  reasons  the  Adjudicator's  primary
    findings in relation to Article 3 are in our view  unsustainable  as  a
    matter of law.


28.   The Adjudicator's reasoning inn relation to the Article  8  claim  is
    again, in our view, simply inadequate.  It ignores the real  issues  as
    to the effect of deprivation of the existing support network on removal
    to Belgium on the assumption that the appellant can immediately replace
    this by contact amongst the Tamil community  there,  where  he  assumes
    that his uncle and friends will be able to  visit  the  appellant.   It
    seems to us that those two assumptions are at best speculative  on  the
    part of the Adjudicator. The appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom
    for almost six years at the date of the hearing before the Adjudicator.
    It was certainly arguable that he had established a private  life  here
    which would, by reference to the appropriate weight to be given to  the
    psychiatric reports, be breached by his removal from the United Kingdom
    in terms of  its  effect  on  his  mental  and  physical  integrity.  A
    consideration  of  his  potential  suicide  risk   coupled   with   the
    deprivation of his existing network of support  is  essential  in  this
    respect.  These issues, as we say, are simply not adequately  addressed
    by the Adjudicator by reference to the evidence before him and for that
    reason are also in our view unsustainable as a matter of law.

Further evidence before the Tribunal

29.    It  is,  therefore,  appropriate  that  we  should  reconsider   the
    appellant's claim as at the  present  date  and  for  that  purpose  we
    consider it appropriate to take into account two later reports made  by
    Dr Patterson dated 29 January and 3 November 2004 respectively as  well
    as the statements of 28 January and 21 October 2004 of Mr Premathas.

30.   The area of Dr Patterson's reports is  really  in  the  nature  of  a
    commentary upon the Adjudicator's findings.   She  restates  the  point
    that the appellant's perceptions of the dangers that await him "are not
    based upon rational thinking alone but  are  distorted  by  symptomatic
    mental illness".  She says that it is upon his perception of return  to
    Sri Lanka which would lead to further  torture  and  his  being  killed
    "that the substantial risk of suicide is  based".   Pausing  there,  we
    note that in the passage from her original report which we have  quoted
    at length that it was difficult to explore the appellant's ideas  about
    any future in Sri Lanka because he had effectively closed his  mind  to
    this on the basis that he would be killed.   Insofar  as  Dr  Patterson
    considered this to be a rational fear, we attach no weight to this part
    of her opinion.  Such  a  fear  is  not  objectively  well-founded  for
    reasons which we have already stated and must be regarded as irrational
    on his part.  It was  a  common  thread  between  all  the  psychiatric
    reports that the irrationality of his perception of what  would  happen
    to him in Sri Lanka did not detract from its genuine nature  and  ought
    to be considered on that basis as something which he  really  believed.
    As to the Adjudicator's views of the suicide attempts, she says:

      "I note further, Mr Gopalasingham's additional statement (not  before
         the Adjudicator) that he thought that  ten  Anadin  tablets,  five
         times the recommended dose, would be sufficient to kill  him.   In
         assessing the seriousness of the suicide attempt, it is crucial to
         determine the perception of the patient as to the lethality of the
         method.  Mr Gopalasingham states that he  thought  that  it  would
         kill him.  In my opinion, this adds  significant  gravity  to  his
         attempt.

      I note Mr Gopalasingham's further statement in which he recounts that
         the medication that he was given in hospital was to make him sick.
          In my  opinion,  this  would  be  in  keeping  with  the  routine
         treatment for overdose."

      We note at this point that similar statements as to his intention  to
    kill himself by taking the Anadins are in any event  contained  in  the
    report which was before the  Adjudicator  on  the  basis  of  which  Dr
    Patterson had concluded in her earlier report that  the  appellant  had
    made "two previous serious suicide attempts", a view which we assume to
    be entirely dependent on the way in which he describes  his  intentions
    as opposed to the reality that neither  of  the  two  "attempts"  could
    rationally be regarded as likely to have led to death or  serious  harm
    to him.

31.   Dr Patterson summed up her views as follows:

      "In my opinion, Mr Gopalasingham's understanding of the  consequences
         of his appeal being dismissed is NOT that he would be returned  to
         Belgium but that he would be returned via Belgium to Sri Lanka.  I
         think that this is based upon his symptoms of PTSD and depression.

      In conclusion, I do not think that the  Adjudicator  has  taken  full
         account of the meaning and gravity of  Mr  Gopalasingham's  mental
         state.  In particular, the effect of his mental illness  upon  his
         capacity for thinking and  making  rational  decisions  about  any
         matter relating to  his  previous  ordeal  or  being  returned  to
         Belgium.  I think, furthermore, that  he  has  not  considered  my
         account of how the trauma has seriously  arrested  his  adolescent
         development and left  him  highly  dependent  upon  his  surrogate
         family in the UK, especially with regard to his capacity to manage
         the everyday tasks of living and attend for the treatment that  he
         requires.  In my opinion, there remains a high risk of suicide  in
         the UK as I describe fully in my previous report, if  he  is  told
         for certain that he is to be sent back to Belgium or Sri Lanka."

32.   In her final report of 3 November 2004 Dr Patterson  said  in  effect
    that there  had  been  little  practical  change  since  the  appellant
    repeatedly told her that he would commit suicide in the UK rather  than
    being sent back either to Belgium or Sri Lanka and that although he had
    not made any further attempts to kill  himself  he  continued  to  have
    suicidal ideas and impulses.  In the  meantime,  he  had  attempted  to
    return to college  on  the  advice  of  his  counsellor  and  with  the
    encouragement of Mr Premathas.  He was on anti-depressant which  helped
    him  to  sleep  a  little  better  and  was   attending   his   General
    Practitioner's  counsellor  every  fortnight.   Her  conclusions  were,
    however, unchanged from those described in the first report  which  she
    had made.

33.   Although he was not called to give oral  evidence  before  us,  there
    were two statements by  Mr  Premathas,  the  first  shortly  after  the
    Adjudicator hearing and the second made in October last.  Mr  Premathas
    describes how he and the appellant share a bedroom in the flat in which
    they live together with a female Sri Lankan asylum  seeker  and  her  4
    year old daughter.  It is not clear whether he has known the  appellant
    for two and a half years since living in that flat or  for  five  years
    because he says both in the course of his statement.   He  is  also  an
    asylum seeker.  In  general  terms  he  supports  the  appellant's  own
    account of his life there and the local community or network  on  which
    he depends.  He confirms the occasion on which the appellant took  some
    ten Anadin tablets and because of his concern about their  effect  that
    he called an ambulance  and  accompanied  him  to  the  Newham  General
    Hospital where he was treated in Accident and Emergency over  a  period
    of some four hours.  The appellant told him he had  taken  the  tablets
    because the war film that they had  been  watching  on  television  had
    really upset him  and  brought  to  mind  the  incident  in  which  his
    grandmother was killed.  He also refers to the second incident which he
    says took place about three months afterwards, just after the appellant
    had received a letter from his solicitors which he construed as meaning
    that he would no longer be allowed to stay in the United  Kingdom.   He
    says that he heard the sound of the sitting room windows  being  opened
    and went to see what was happening.   The  appellant  was  on  a  small
    balcony trying to climb over the railings to jump off but he pulled him
    back.  The window was on the first floor.

34.   We have not, of course, had the benefit of hearing any oral  evidence
    capable of being tested by cross-examination to enable us  properly  to
    evaluate the various statements and reports which are before  us.   The
    situation as to the appellant's living conditions in the United Kingdom
    are dealt with in all the psychiatric reports and the two  attempts  at
    self-harm are dealt with in  Dr  Patterson's  initial  report  at  some
    length by way of cross-reference also to what Mr Premathas said to  her
    then.  These all remain largely consistent save as  to  the  length  of
    time which Mr Premathas has known the appellant.  For the  purposes  of
    this appeal, we accept that the appellant has given  an  account  of  a
    past history of some support for the LTTE and we see no reason to doubt
    that his claims as to the death of his grandmother in an air raid,  and
    his own two periods  of  arrest  and  detention  with  consequent  ill-
    treatment are not reasonably likely  to  be  true.   His  accounts  are
    generally consistent both in his  own  statement  and  in  the  various
    medical reports. Dr Botting's report provides  corroboration  that  the
    nature of the scarring observed is consistent with his detailed account
    and,  in  particular,  shows  scarring  probably   inflicted   by   the
    application of cigarettes to the skin which was a noted form of torture
    on the part of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  at  the  relevant  period.
    Similarly, we have no reason to question  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and
    depression which we have recorded fully above, and that the  effect  of
    the appellant's mental condition leads him irrationally to believe that
    ultimate removal to Sri Lanka would  expose  him  to  a  real  risk  of
    torture and possible death at the hands of the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    or the LTTE.  There is, however, no evidence that he does not  have  an
    immediate and extended family available to him in Sri Lanka in his home
    area.  When he left his parents and his two younger siblings were there
    and the family were clearly able to  command  support  from  the  local
    community.  If he and those upon whom he depends in this  country  have
    failed to make appropriate efforts to establish contact with his family
    in Sri Lanka, that is a matter which we regard  with  some  scepticism,
    particularly as he procured a letter in  November  2000  from  the  Sri
    Lanka Red Cross Society purporting to confirm his own  then  danger  in
    Sri  Lanka  based  on  his  past  history  there.   Given  that   clear
    connection, we are unimpressed  by  a  failure  to  seek  to  establish
    contact with his family in Sri Lanka and there  is  no  reason  why  an
    appropriate support network should not continue to exist there  in  our
    judgment.  The other matter about which we  have  reservations  is  the
    current degree of  risk  of  suicide  for  this  appellant  given  that
    although he has frequently  expressed  intentions  of  suicide  over  a
    number of years we do not  consider  that  the  evidence  supports  the
    conclusion that it is reasonably likely that he has taken  any  serious
    steps to that end to date.  We are not persuaded,  even  to  the  lower
    standard applicable in human rights  appeals,  that  the  two  episodes
    which took place now some two years ago can be placed in that  category
    having regard to  the  consistent  degree  of  hopelessness  which  the
    appellant is said to express and his belief that he remains  likely  to
    be removed from this country in accordance with a decision taken nearly
    six years ago. Although the Appellant may be irrational in his fear  of
    what may happen to him in Sri Lanka, there is no evidence  that  he  is
    generally otherwise irrational or that his condition is  psychotic.  We
    are not prepared to accept that taking  10  Anadin  tablets  or  making
    sufficient noise in opening a window which was normally kept closed  so
    as to alert his flatmate as to something unusual, demonstrate a serious
    attempt at completed suicide. Its  acceptance  in  those  terms  by  Dr
    Patterson in her reports does not appear to be to be  clinically  based
    but simply to rely on an unquestioning acceptance of what the Appellant
    claims,  as  Mr  Premathas  also  appears  to  have  done.   Like   the
    Adjudicator, we do not regard his past history of a willingness to seek
    to deceive the immigration authorities of various European countries as
    irrelevant to issues of personal credibility.

The Convention basis of the human rights claims

35.   The appellant's first claim is that his removal will be in breach  of
    his protected human rights under Article 3 of the  European  Convention
    which provides as follows:

      "No-one shall be subjected to torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

      That is an unqualified right.

36.   The second basis of claim is that removal will be in  breach  of  his
    rights under Article 8 and this is a qualified right in  the  following
    terms:

         "(i)     Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private  and
             family life, his home and his correspondence.


         (ii)     There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
             the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
             with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interest of national security, public safety or  the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."


      If Article 8 is as a matter of fact engaged it is  accepted  that  the
    regular enforcement of immigration control is one of the bases on which
    removal in breach of the protected human  right  may  be  proportionate
    under the derogation provisions of Article 8.2.

The Article 3 claim

37.   We deal first with the  appellant's  claim  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention.  In this respect Mr Middleton adopted  a  skeleton
    argument before the Adjudicator in relation  to  the  law  relating  to
    Article 3 and the risk of suicide which we think it appropriate to  set
    out in full here:

      "In N [the reference is to the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  [2003]
         EWCA Civ 1369], the Court of Appeal considered an Article  3  claim
         based on the fact that the applicant could not afford HIV treatment
         in the destination country.  The court rejected the claim.  Laws LJ
         held that in cases dependent on the difference in treatment between
         the UK and the destination country, recourse to Article 3 was  only
         justified 'where the humanitarian appeal of the case is so powerful
         that it could not reasonably be assisted by the  authorities  of  a
         civilised country'.  That standard was not met in that case.

       In  Kurtolli  [full  reference   [2003]   EWHC   2744   (Admin)],   a
         certification case, the respondent sought to extend this  reasoning
         to suicide risk cases.  Silber J firmly rejected that argument,  on
         two broad bases: first, the facts in the N were of a very different
         nature.  The issue of the difference between standards of care  and
         the availability of psychiatric care in the UK and the  destination
         country did not arise.  Secondly, the law continued to be  governed
         by the Court of Appeal's decision in Soumahoro, one  of  the  cases
         conjoined with Razgar (see paragraph 79 for a summary of Silber J's
         reasons for not extending N to suicide cases).

      In Soumahoro, which was  also  a  manifestly  unfounded  certification
         case, the facts were somewhat similar to the present case (they are
         summarised in Silber J's consideration of the case at paragraph  44
         of his judgment).  Dyson LJ, who was part of  the  majority  in  N,
         noted in Soumahoro that there was uncontroverted evidence  that  if
         removed to France, there was a real risk that the  appellant  would
         commit suicide:

      'If it was arguable on the evidence that there was a real  risk  of  a
             significantly increased risk that,  if  she  were  removed  to
             France, the appellant would commit suicide, then in  our  view
             her claim based  on  Article  3  could  not  be  certified  as
             manifestly unfounded.' (Paragraph 85).

      Whilst all cases must depend on their specific facts and the  evidence
         in support, the above cases  suggest  that  where  there  is  clear
         evidence that removal will give rise to a serious risk of  suicide,
         an appeal under Article 3 should be  allowed.   If  this  were  not
         correct, both of the appeals in Soumahoro and Kurtolli  would  have
         failed."

38.   Mr Middleton then went on to submit that by reason of the  Appellant's
    medical condition as diagnosed and that "his very fragile mental health
    is largely dependent on the 'community' of support  he  enjoys  in  the
    UK", combined with his own declared intention to kill himself  and  the
    two previous attempts, there was a serious  significant  risk  that  he
    would in fact kill himself in the United Kingdom. Further, that, absent
    his support community in Belgium, it was 'likely' that  he  would  kill
    himself there according to Dr Patterson if he  failed  in  his  appeal.
    The medical evidence was not controverted by the Secretary of State and
    the fact that the appellant was not currently receiving  treatment  was
    not significant at the date of  the  hearing  before  the  Adjudicator.
    Before us, Mr Middleton emphasised that it was  not  whether  the  fear
    that gave rise to  his  suicidal  ideation  was  rationally  based  but
    whether it did, on the basis of the medical reports, exist as a  matter
    of fact in his mind irrespective of the  fact  that  it  was  based  on
    irrationality rather than any objectively sustainable basis.

39.   It is a frequent submission to this Tribunal that the decision of  the
    Court of Appeal in N should be regarded as confined to  its  own  facts
    but that is not a proposition which we  accept.   In  contrast  to  the
    other cases cited, N was dealing with a  substantive  appeal  from  the
    decision of the Tribunal that removal of a Ugandan  national  suffering
    from full-blown AIDS and in receipt of triple  combination  therapy  in
    the United Kingdom would not be in  breach  of  her  Article  3  rights
    notwithstanding the fact that she was unlikely to  be  able  to  access
    similar treatment in Uganda and would suffer a very early and degrading
    death there in contrast to her position in the United Kingdom where her
    life expectancy and health would be  dramatically  maintained  for  the
    better.   To  that  extent,  the  reality  of  N's  situation  was  not
    speculative save in relation to the time which would elapse before  her
    death in Uganda following  the  inability  to  access  similar  medical
    treatment as she was receiving here.  The medical evidence was that her
    life expectancy would be under twelve months if she  were  returned  to
    Uganda as opposed to her position here where with appropriate treatment
    she was likely to remain well for decades.   Before  the  Adjudicator's
    N's appeal had been allowed following D v United Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR
    423, another case in which the claimant  was  suffering  from  terminal
    AIDS and said to be likely to die in the very near future,  whether  or
    not he remained in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 39 of the judgment
    of Laws LJ in N, he points out that since D was decided the  Strasbourg
    court had effectively been at pains, in  decisions  cited  by  him,  to
    avoid any extension of the exceptional category which D represents  and
    then continues:

      "This view is not I think shifted, but if anything confirmed, by  what
         was said by the court in Pretty v United Kingdom [2002] 35  EHRR  1
         at para 52:

      'The suffering which flows from naturally occurring illness,  physical
             or mental, may be covered by Article 3, where it is, or  risks
             being,  exacerbated  by  treatment,   whether   flowing   from
             conditions of detention,  expulsion  or  other  measures,  for
             which the authorities can be held  responsible  (see...D...and
             also Bensaid...)'

      This court's obligation under Section 2(1) of  the  Human  Rights  Act
         1998 is to 'take into account' (rather than follow) the  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence.  However, despite my reservations I am clear that it
         would not be right to hold that D v United Kingdom...should not  be
         followed in our domestic jurisdiction.  No such submission was made
         to us, and we must surely bear in mind what was said by Lord  Slynn
         of Hadley...

      'In the absence of some special circumstances it seems to me that  the
             court should follow any clear and  constant  jurisprudence  of
             the European Convention on Human Rights.'

40.   Laws LJ then continued in paragraph 40:

      "But I am no less clear  that  D  v  United  Kingdom  should  be  very
         strictly confined.  I  do  not  say  that  its  confinement  is  to
         deathbed cases; that would be a course  rule  and  an  unwise  one:
         there may be other instances which press with  equal  force.   That
         said, in light of the considerations I have described I would  hold
         that the application of Article 3 where the complaint in essence is
         of want of resources in the applicant's home country  (in  contrast
         to what has been available to him in the country from which  he  is
         to be removed) is only justified where the humanitarian  appeal  of
         the case is so powerful that it could not in reason be resisted  by
         the  authorities  of  a  civilised  state.   This   does   not,   I
         acknowledge, amount to a sharp legal test; there are no sharp legal
         tests in this area.  I intend only to emphasise that an  Article  3
         case of this kind must  be  based  on  facts  which  are  not  only
         exceptional, but extreme; extreme, that is, judged in  the  context
         of cases all or many of which (like this one) demand one's sympathy
         on pressing grounds.  On its facts, D was such a case.  I  consider
         that any broader view distorts the balance between the  demands  of
         the  general  interest  of  the   community,   whose   service   is
         conspicuously the duty of elected government, and the  requirements
         of the protection of the individual's fundamental rights.  It is  a
         balance inherent in the whole of the Human Rights Convention:  see,
         for example Soering v United Kingdom [1989] 11 EHRR  439,  at  para
         89."

41.   That Dyson LJ had in mind such a wider application is made  abundantly
    clear by what he says a little later at paragraph 42 where he refers to
    the existence of a line of cases concerning Article 8  rights  said  to
    arise where the person in question claims that his mental  health  will
    be compromised or damaged if he is returned by the Secretary of  State.
    He notes that that position  has  recently  been  examined  in  Razgar,
    Soumahoro and Nadaraja [2003] EWCA Civ 840  and  that  there  are  also
    material passages in Bensaid v United Kingdom [2001] 33  EHRR  10.   He
    continues:

      "We have not heard extended argument upon this appeal as to the  scope
         of Article 8 in such circumstances.  While I apprehend with respect
         that nothing I have said here  is  inconsistent  with  the  court's
         reasoning in Razgar, it may be that the position regarding  Article
         8 will want some further scrutiny if my view of this case  were  to
         prevail."

42.   It is to be noted that the other  cases  referred  to  are  all  those
    where  the  appeal  has  lain  against   the   Secretary   of   State's
    certification that the claim in question was  manifestly  unfounded  so
    that if it could properly be concluded that there was  nevertheless  an
    arguable case, the certificate  could  not  stand.   The  certification
    cases do not go to a merits conclusion  but  simply  to  the  issue  of
    arguability of the claim.

43.   As we have said, we see no arguable basis for seeking to  confine  the
    principles enunciated in N, an Article 3 case, to its  specific  facts.
    We have now the benefit of the judgments of the House  of  Lords  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  Whilst that was a  certification  case
    concerned primarily with Article 8, we derive  support  for  the  views
    that we have expressed in relation to N from the judgment  of  Baroness
    Hale of  Richmond  at  paragraphs  41-65  of  Razgar.   She  draws  the
    important distinction between 'foreign'  and  'domestic'  human  rights
    cases and says this at paragraph 42:

      "The distinction is vital to the present case.  In  a  domestic  case,
         the state must always act in a way which  is  compatible  with  the
         Convention rights.  There is  no  threshold  test  related  to  the
         seriousness of  the  violation  or  the  importance  of  the  right
         involved.  Foreign cases, on the other hand, represent an exception
         to the general rule that a state is only responsible for what  goes
         on within its own  territory  or  control.   The  Strasbourg  Court
         clearly  regards  them  as  exceptional.   It  has   retained   the
         flexibility to consider violations of Articles other than  Articles
         2 and 3 but it has not so far encountered another  case  which  was
         sufficiently serious to justify imposing upon the contracting state
         the obligations to retain or  make  alternative  provisions  for  a
         person who would otherwise have  no  right  to  remain  within  its
         territory.  For the same reason, the Strasbourg Court has  not  yet
         explored the test for imposing this obligation in any detail.   But
         there clearly is some  additional  threshold  test  indicating  the
         enormity of the violation to which  the  person  is  likely  to  be
         exposed if returned. ..."

44.   After reviewing the Strasbourg Jurisprudence in relation to Article  8
    cases and the degree to which they are to be regarded  as  domestic  or
    foreign or hybrid in nature,  the  judgment  continues  as  follows  at
    paragraphs 54-59 which illustrates the difference in  approach  between
    Article 3 and Article 8:

         "54.     How then should  the  health  cases  be  regarded?   By  a
              'health case', I mean one in  which  the  applicant's  health
              needs are being properly or at least adequately met  in  this
              country and the complaint is that they will not be adequately
              met in the country to which he is to be expelled.  Thus  far,
              in my view, these have all been regarded as 'foreign'  cases.
              They date back  to  D  v  United  Kingdom...,  in  which  the
              proposed expulsion of a drugs smuggler apprehended on arrival
              but in the terminal stages of AIDS after serving his sentence
              was found in breach of Article 3:


            'Aliens who have served their prison sentences and  are  subject
                   to expulsion cannot in principle claim any entitlement to
                   remain on the territory of a Contracting State  in  order
                   to continue to benefit  from  medical,  social  or  other
                   forms of  assistance  provided  by  the  expelling  state
                   during their  stay  in  prison.   However,  in  the  very
                   exceptional circumstances of  this  case  and  given  the
                   compelling humanitarian considerations at stake, it  must
                   be concluded that the implementation  of  a  decision  to
                   remove the applicant would be a violation of Article  3."
                   (Paragraph 54).


         55.      This principle is repeated in the  very  similar  case  of
              Henao v Netherlands (application no.  13669/03  (unreported))
              24  June  2003,  where  there  was  no  breach  because   the
              humanitarian considerations were not as strong.  It has  also
              been applied in cases where the applicant has  been  properly
              resident for some time  but  remains  subject  to  expulsion,
              either because of criminal  offences,  as  in  BB  v  France,
              Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998 - VI, page  2595,  or
              because of immigration control, as in SSC v Sweden [2000]  29
              EHRR CD 245.  In all of these the health  complaint  depended
              on Article 3, although in BB  v  France,  there  was  also  a
              complaint of potential deprivation of moral support of family
              and friends.


         56.      This brings us to Bensaid v United Kingdom.  ...  As  with
              the HIV/AIDS cases, this was a case based upon  the  risk  of
              injury to health in removing someone from a place  where  his
              health needs were being adequately addressed to a place where
              it was alleged that they would not be.  As for  the  HIV/AIDS
              cases, the main complaint was raised under  Article  3.   The
              applicant  was  a  schizophrenic  who  required   medication.
              Without it, there was a risk of relapse  into  hallucinations
              and delusions involving a  risk  of  self-harm  and  harm  to
              others  both  here  and  in  Algeria.   The  fact  that   his
              circumstances in Algeria would be less favourable  than  here
              was not decisive.  The risks were speculative.  There  was  a
              high threshold, especially when the case did not concern  the
              direct responsibility of the state for inflicting  harm.   It
              did not fall into the exceptional category  covered  by  D  v
              United Kingdom.


         57.      The court's case law did "not exclude that treatment which
              does not reach  the  severity  of  Article  3  treatment  may
              nonetheless breach Article 8 in its private life aspect where
              there are sufficiently  adverse  effects  upon  physical  and
              moral integrity" (paragraph 46).  "Mental health must ...  be
              regarded as a crucial part of private  life  associated  with
              the aspects of moral integrity... The preservation of  mental
              stability is...an  indispensable  precondition  to  effective
              enjoyment of the right to respect for private life [protected
              by  Article  8]"  (paragraph  47).   But  it  had  not   been
              established  that  the  risk  of  damage  to  his  health  in
              returning him to his country  of  origin  will  substantially
              affect his moral integrity to a  degree  falling  within  the
              scope of Article 8.  Even assuming the dislocation caused  by
              his removal could be regarded as affecting his private life -
              the relationships and  support  established  here  -  it  was
              justified under Article 8(2) (paragraph 48).


         58.      In my view, the  court  was  here  drawing  a  distinction
              between the 'foreign' and 'domestic'  aspects  of  the  case.
              The  'foreign'  aspect  was  the  difficulty   in   accessing
              appropriate psychiatric  treatment  in  Algeria.   This  fell
              mainly to be dealt with under Article 3, although  the  court
              did not rule out that it might be dealt with under Article  8
              if the threat to moral  integrity  was  sufficiently  severe.
              The  court  did  not  in  so  many  words  repeat  the  'high
              threshold' point made in relation to  Article  3  but  if  it
              applies to Article 3 it ought logically to apply  to  Article
              8,  unless  this   is   thought   unnecessary   because   the
              interference will always  be  justified  under  Article  8(2)
              unless the high threshold is reached.  The "domestic" aspects
              might have been the dislocation  in  his  private  life  here
              caused by removing him, but that was clearly justified  under
              Article 8(2).


         59.      Although the possibility cannot be  excluded,  it  is  not
              easy to think of a foreign health care case which would  fail
              under Article 3 but succeed under Article 8.   There  clearly
              must be a strong case before the Article is even engaged  and
              then a fair balance must be struck under  Article  8(2).   In
              striking that balance, only the most compelling  humanitarian
              considerations are likely to prevail over the legitimate aims
              of immigration control or public safety.  The expelling state
              is required to assess the strength of the threat  and  strike
              that balance.  It is not required to compare the adequacy  of
              the health care available in the two countries.  The question
              is whether  removal  to  the  foreign  country  will  have  a
              sufficiently adverse effect upon the applicant.  Nor can  the
              expelling state be  required  to  assume  a  more  favourable
              status in its own territory than the applicant  is  currently
              entitled to.  The applicant remains to be treated as  someone
              who is liable to expulsion, not as someone who is entitled to
              remain."


45.   Although Baroness Hale makes no specific reference to N, it  seems  to
    us implicit that she did not disagree with the views there expressed by
    the majority in the  Court  of  Appeal.   That  decision  is,  however,
    specifically referred to and approved in the judgment of Lord Walker of
    Gestingthorpe at paragraphs 30-32 of  his  judgment  in  the  following
    terms:

         "30.     In his clear  and  comprehensive  opinion  in  the  linked
              appeals of R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator and Do v Secretary
              of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 26, Lord Bingham
              has drawn attention to the wholly exceptional nature  of  the
              deporting state's responsibility for  ill-treatment  or  harm
              subsequently  suffered  in  the  receiving  state.    It   is
              unnecessary to repeat all the citations but it is relevant to
              note that the Strasbourg Court's insistence on the  need  for
              "very exceptional circumstances" continues to  be  maintained
              in the  most  recent  jurisprudence:  see  the  admissibility
              decision in Henao v Netherlands...


         31.      In N v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department...Laws
              LJ  (with  whom  Dyson  LJ  agreed,  although  Carnworth   LJ
              dissented)  accepted  the  submission  of  Counsel  for   the
              Secretary of State that the well-known case  of  D  v  United
              Kingdom...was an "extension of an extension". (Para 37).   He
              concluded (paras 40 and 42):


            "...that the application of Article 3  where  the  complaint  in
                   essence is of want of resources in the  applicant's  home
                   country (in contrast to what has been available to him in
                   the country from which he  is  to  be  removed)  is  only
                   justified where the humanitarian appeal of the case is so
                   powerful that it could not in reason be resisted  by  the
                   authorities of a civilised state".


            and


            "...that the position regarding Article 8 will want some further
                   scrutiny if my view of this case were to prevail".


            In my opinion those conclusions are justified by the  Strasbourg
              jurisprudence.


         32.      In his opinion in Ullah and Do Lord Bingham  approved  the
              formulation of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  Devaseelan
              v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ([2002]  UKIAT
              00702*):


            "The reason why flagrant denial or  gross  violation  is  to  be
                   taken into account is that it is only in such  a  case  -
                   where the right will be completely denied or nullified in
                   the destination country  -  that  it  can  be  said  that
                   removal  will  breach  the  treaty  obligations  of   the
                   signatory  state  however  those  obligations  might   be
                   interpreted or whatever might be said by or on behalf  of
                   the destination state".


            I respectfully agree.   I  also  respectfully  agree  with  Lord
              Bingham's observation in this appeal  (para  10  above)  that
              where the appellant's case is based on his need  for  medical
              treatment or on his welfare, he could never  hope  to  resist
              expulsion without showing "something very much  more  extreme
              than relative disadvantage" (as between the  deporting  state
              and the receiving state)."


46.   Although N is not otherwise referred to in  the  judgments  in  Razgar
    there is nothing inconsistent in the other judgments with the  approval
    which both implicitly and explicitly has been accorded to its ratio  in
    the judgments of Baroness Hale and Lord Walker.  Razgar was, of course,
    a certification case concerning third country removal  to  Germany  for
    processing of Mr Razgar's asylum claim and included the claim  that  he
    was so opposed to being removed there that medical opinion supported  a
    high risk of suicide.  The context in which these references to  N  and
    its ratio are made seems to us to confirm that it would be wholly wrong
    to regard N as limited to its own particular facts and  not  to  be  of
    general application where Article 3 is prayed in aid. Following Razgar,
    and for the reasons which we have expressed, we do not consider that an
    argument based on what was said in Kurtolli raises any  arguable  issue
    as to the wide nature of the application of the principle he enunciated
    in N.

47.   Taking the appellant's case at its highest it  does  not  seem  to  us
    that it is of such an exceptional compassionate and  compelling  nature
    in relation to his mental condition as  to  reach  the  high  threshold
    needed to engage Article 3 and for these reasons we dismiss the Article
    3 appeal.

The Article 8 claim

48.   Turning to Article 8, we find that it  is  capable  of  being  engaged
    both by reason of the nature of the private life  which  the  appellant
    has, irrespective of its precarious nature, been permitted to establish
    in this country by reason of the support  network  which  he  currently
    enjoys  and  also  because,  following  Bensaid,  his  current   mental
    condition is in principle capable of engaging the Article  also.   This
    is one of the hybrid  cases  to  which  Baroness  Hale  refers  in  her
    judgment in Razgar because the way in which removal will impinge on his
    mental condition constitutes the 'foreign' element, whilst his  removal
    from the support network which has  been  created  over  the  years  is
    referable to the 'domestic' element involved.
49.   The majority view in Razgar was that the claimed breach of  Article  8
    by his removal to a third country, namely Germany,  for  evaluation  of
    his asylum and human rights claims, could not as a matter  of  fact  be
    said to be manifestly  unfounded  as  it  would  need  to  be  for  the
    certification by the Secretary of State to be effective.  In  the  lead
    judgment, Lord Bingham gives important guidance as to the  function  of
    the Adjudicator and the Tribunal in considering Article  8  appeals  at
    paragraphs 17-20 of the judgment which we now set out in full:

         "17.     In considering whether a challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
              State's decision to remove a person must  clearly  fail,  the
              reviewing court must, as it seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
              appeal would be likely to fare before an Adjudicator, as  the
              Tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were an
              appeal.  This means that the reviewing court must ask  itself
              essentially the questions which would have to be answered  by
              an Adjudicator.  In a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
              reliance on Article 8, these questions are likely to be:


              (i)      Will the proposed removal be an  interference  by  a
                   public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                   right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                   family life?


              (ii)     If so, will such interference have  consequences  of
                   such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                   Article 8?


              (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance  with  the
                   law?


              (iv)      If  so,  is  such  interference  necessary   in   a
                   democratic society in the interests of national security,
                   public safety or the economic well-being of the  country,
                   for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
                   protection of health or morals, or for the protection  of
                   the rights and freedoms of others?


              (v)      If so, is such  interference  proportionate  to  the
                   legitimate public ends sought to be achieved?


         18.      If the reviewing  court  is  satisfied  in  any  case,  on
              consideration of all the materials which are  before  it  and
              would be before an Adjudicator, that the answer  to  Question
              (i) clearly would or should be  negative,  there  can  be  no
              ground  at  all  for  challenging  the  certificate  of   the
              Secretary of State.  Question (ii)  reflects  the  consistent
              case law of the Strasbourg Court, holding that  conduct  must
              attain a minimum level of severity to engage the operation of
              the Convention: see, for example, Costello Roberts  v  United
              Kingdom [1993] 19  EHRR  112.   If  the  reviewing  court  is
              satisfied that the answer to this question clearly  would  or
              should  be  negative,  there  can  again  be  no  ground  for
              challenging the certificate.  If Question (iii)  is  reached,
              it is likely to permit of an affirmative answer only.


         19.      Where  removal  is  proposed  in  pursuance  of  a  lawful
              immigration policy, Question (iv) will almost always fall  to
              be answered affirmatively.  This  is  because  the  right  of
              sovereign states, subject to treaty obligations, to  regulate
              the entry and  expulsion  of  aliens  is  recognised  in  the
              Strasbourg Jurisprudence (see  Ullah  and  Do,  para  6)  and
              implementation of a firm and orderly immigration policy is an
              important function of  government  in  a  modern,  democratic
              state.  In the absence  of  bad  faith,  ulterior  motive  or
              deliberate  abuse  of  power  it  is  hard  to   imagine   an
              Adjudicator answering this question other than affirmatively.


         20.      The answering of Question  (v),  where  that  question  is
              reached, must always involve the striking of a  fair  balance
              between the rights of the individual and the interests of the
              community which is inherent in the whole of  the  Convention.
              The severity and consequences of the interference  will  call
              for careful assessment at this stage.  The Secretary of State
              must exercise his judgment in the first instance.  On  appeal
              the Adjudicator must exercise his or her own judgment, taking
              account of any material which may not have  been  before  the
              Secretary of  State.   A  reviewing  court  must  assess  the
              judgment which would or might be made by the  Adjudicator  on
              appeal.  In Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v
              Kacaj [2002] Imm AR 213, paragraph 25, the Immigration Appeal
              Tribunal...observed that:


            "although the [Convention] rights  may  be  engaged,  legitimate
                   immigration  control  will  almost  certainly  mean  that
                   derogation from the rights will be proper and will not be
                   disproportionate."


            In the present case, the Court of Appeal had no doubt (paragraph
              26 of its judgment) that this  overstated  the  position.   I
              respectfully consider the  element  of  overstatement  to  be
              small.  Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful  operation  of
              immigration control will be proportionate in all save a small
              minority of exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by
              case basis."


50    In this passage of his judgment Lord Bingham  restates  the  basis  of
    approach which has long been observed by Adjudicators and the  Tribunal
    on the basis of its own earlier jurisprudence.   In  making  the  above
    formulation, we note that the only authority  cited  to  the  House  of
    Lords concerning the nature of the exercise of those functions,  taking
    into account the deference to be shown to the executive decision of the
    Secretary of State, was Razgar itself in the Court of Appeal  since  it
    does not appear that either Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  716  or  the
    starred decision in [2004]  UKIAT  00024  M  (Croatia)  were  cited  in
    argument.

51.   In Razgar, however, the Court of Appeal deal with  this  issue  partly
    by reference to the ratio of Edore and the earlier  judgment  which  it
    adopted of Moses J in R (Arlech) v SSHD [2003] EWCA 521  Admin.   There
    Moses J held that in a case 'where there is no issue of fact' and where
    the only question is 'whether the Secretary of  State  has  struck  the
    right balance between the need for effective  immigration  control  and
    the claimant's  rights  under  Article  8'  it  was  not  open  to  the
    Adjudicator to substitute his own decision for that of the Secretary of
    State  unless  the  latter  was  'outwith  the  range   of   reasonable
    responses'.  Moses J put it in the following terms:

      "It is the Convention  itself  and,  in  particular,  the  concept  of
         proportionality which confers upon the decision-maker a  margin  of
         discretion in deciding where the balance should be  struck  between
         the interests of an individual and the interests of a community.  A
         decision-maker may fairly reach one of  two  opposite  conclusions,
         one in favour of a claimant, the other in favour  of  his  removal.
         Of neither could it be  said  that  the  balance  had  been  struck
         unfairly.  In such circumstances, the mere fact that an alternative
         but favourable decision could reasonably have been reached will not
         lead to the conclusion that the decision-maker has acted in  breach
         of the claimant's human rights.  Such  a  breach  will  only  occur
         where the decision is outwith the range of reasonable responses  to
         the  question  as  to  where  a  fair  balance  lies  between   the
         conflicting interests.  Once it is accepted that the balance  could
         be struck fairly either way,  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  be
         regarded as having infringed the claimant's  Article  8  rights  by
         concluding that he should be removed."

52.    In  Edore  the  Court  of  Appeal  found  that   analysis   'entirely
    convincing' and said that  where  the  decision  was  one  which  could
    reasonably be regarded as proportionate and as striking a fair  balance
    between the competing interests in play:

      "...then the Adjudicator cannot characterise that a decision  'not  in
         accordance with the law' and so, even if he personally  would  have
         preferred the balance to have been struck differently (i.e. in  the
         appellant's favour), he cannot substitute his  preference  for  the
         decision in effect taken."

53.   Both those cases had  dealt  specifically  with  the  situation  where
    there was no factual issue not available to be taken  into  account  by
    the Secretary of State.  In Razgar the Secretary of State had not  even
    considered the application  of  Article  8  and  the  Court  of  Appeal
    therefore considered the position where on  his  findings  of  fact  an
    Adjudicator came to the conclusion that the balancing exercise  carried
    out by the Secretary of State  had  been  on  'a  materially  incorrect
    and/or incomplete factual basis'.  They then dealt with this  different
    situation in the following terms at paragraph 41  of  the  judgment  of
    Dyson LJ:

         "41.     Where the essential facts found by the Adjudicator are  so
              fundamentally  different  from  those   determined   by   the
              Secretary of State as substantially to undermine the  factual
              basis of the balancing exercise performed by him, it  may  be
              impossible for  the  Adjudicator  to  determine  whether  the
              decision is proportionate otherwise than by carrying out  the
              balancing exercise himself.  Even in such  a  case,  when  it
              comes to deciding how much weight to give to  the  policy  of
              maintaining an effective immigration policy, the  Adjudicator
              should pay very considerable deference to  the  view  of  the
              Secretary of State as to the importance of maintaining such a
              policy.  There is obviously a conceptual difference between:


              (a)      deciding whether the decision of  the  Secretary  of
                    State was within the range or reasonable responses; and


              (b)      deciding  whether  the  decision  was  proportionate
                    (paying deference to the Secretary of State so far as is
                    possible).  In the light of Edore v SSHD...we would hold
                    that the correct approach is (a)  in  all  cases  except
                    where this is impossible because the  factual  basis  of
                    the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  has   been
                    substantially  undermined  by  the   findings   of   the
                    Adjudicator.  Where (a) is impossible, then the  correct
                    approach is (b).  But we doubt whether, in practise, the
                    application of the two approaches  will  often  lead  to
                    different outcomes."


54.   As we have  derived  all  this  material  from  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgments in Razgar, it is apparent that all such matters  were  before
    and taken into account by the House of Lords in their judgments.  There
    is nothing in any of  those  judgments  which  suggests  that  the  two
    alternative approaches set out in Razgar are in any  way  wrong.   They
    must, therefore, in our view be taken as an authoritative statement  of
    the law as considered and reviewed by the House of Lords in Razgar.

55.   The factual basis of Mr Razgar's claim bears a striking similarity  to
    that of this appellant.  He claimed to  have  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated in Iraq and that this had resulted in his suffering  from  PTSD
    which led to a  need  for  pharmacotherapy  and  cognitive  behavioural
    therapy, and a happy and safe environment  in  which  to  receive  such
    treatment.  The psychiatric report considered by the Secretary of State
    said this:

      "Incarceration and custody is causing a relapse  on  the  progress  Mr
         Ali has made during treatment.  He would be deprived of his support
         network from family [cousin and friends], when  he  is  removed  to
         Germany.  He would not  have  access  to  medication  or  Cognitive
         Behaviour Therapy as he would only be given  temporary  immigration
         status by the authorities.  His accommodation  in  a  refugee  camp
         will cause flashbacks of his incarceration in prison  in  Iraq  and
         worsen his depressive mood and  sense  of  despair.   I  feel  that
         sending him  back  to  Germany  of  even  to  Iraq  would  be  very
         detrimental to his mental and  physical  well-being.   I  think  he
         would make a serious attempt to kill himself."

56.   In the House of Lords it is right to say  that  Mr  Razgar's  position
    was not regarded with any particular enthusiasm from the point of  view
    of  his  likely  success  in  relation  to  his  Article  8  claim   if
    substantively considered.  Having concluded that an  Adjudicator  might
    well answer the first four questions which he posed in the affirmative,
    Lord Bingham concluded at paragraph 24 as follows:

      "... Question (v), being more judgmental, is more  difficult  and,  as
         already observed, the Secretary of State  and  the  judge  did  not
         consider it.  The Secretary of State, moreover,  failed  to  direct
         himself that Article 8 could in principle apply in a case  such  as
         this.  Question (v) is a question which,  on  considering  all  the
         evidence before him, an Adjudicator might well  decide  against  Mr
         Razgar.  If, however, his phobia of returning to Germany were found
         to be genuine (whether well-founded or not), and if his account  of
         his previous  experience  (including  his  account  of  the  severe
         brutality he claims to have suffered) were found to be true,  I  do
         not think one can rule out in limine the possibility of a  finding,
         properly made, that return to Germany  would  violate  Mr  Razgar's
         rights under Article 8.  It follows that  in  my  opinion  ...  the
         Secretary of State would not properly  certify  this  claim  to  be
         manifestly unfounded."

      Lord Steyn simply agreed with the judgment of Lord Bingham but  in  so
    doing Lord Carswell gave a reasoned judgment. It is appropriate that we
    should quote at some length from his judgment because of the  light  it
    sheds on the general approach both under Article 3 and Article 8:

         "72.     For the reasons given by your Lordships in the appeals  of
              R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator and Do v SSHD [2004] UKHL 26,
              it must now be accepted that in  principle  Article  8  could
              exceptionally be engaged by the foreseeable consequences  for
              health of removal from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  an
              immigration decision, even though they do  not  amount  to  a
              violation of Article 3.  In order  to  bring  himself  within
              such an exceptional engagement of Article 8 the applicant has
              to establish a very grave state of affairs,  amounting  to  a
              flagrant or fundamental  breach  of  the  Article,  which  in
              effect constitutes a complete denial of his  rights.   It  is
              necessary accordingly to consider the present case  in  order
              to determine whether an Adjudicator could arguable find  that
              the removal decision is a breach of Article 8.


         73.      I would not regard the conditions in which  the  appellant
              may be detained in Germany, taking the case at its height  in
              his favour, as capable in themselves of constituting  such  a
              flagrant breach.  They may be regarded  as  somewhat  Spartan
              and it would be legitimate to argue that they are repressive,
              but in my judgment they fall a long way short of  a  flagrant
              violation of the appellant's Article 8 rights.  If he  is  to
              make out any case under Article 8 I consider that it must  be
              founded on the possible effect on his mental health.


         74.      The precise extent of the interests  which  Article  8  is
              capable of protecting still remains to some degree  uncertain
              and,  as  my  noble  and  learned  friend  Lord   Walker   of
              Gestingthorpe pointed out  in  his  opinion  in  the  present
              appeal, the  language  of  some  of  the  statements  in  the
              Strasbourg Jurisprudence must be treated with  some  caution.
              It does appear to be clear enough, however, from  pages  219-
              220 para 47 of the judgment in Bensaid v United  Kingdom  ...
              that the preservation of mental stability can be regarded  as
              a right protected by  Article  8.   The  issue  therefore  is
              whether the removal of the  appellant  to  a  third  country,
              Germany, could arguably be  said  to  amount  to  a  flagrant
              denial of his Article 8 right  to  the  preservation  of  his
              mental stability.


         75.      It is, I think, important to  note  that  the  deleterious
              effects on the appellant's  mental  health  described  by  Dr
              Sathananthan appear to stem from his fear that  Germany  will
              decide to return him to Iraq.   It  is  to  be  assumed  that
              Germany  will  observe  its  obligations  under  the   Geneva
              Convention and the European Convention on  Human  Rights  and
              will properly and conscientiously apply their provisions.  If
              that be so, then the appellant's fear should be  regarded  as
              lacking in rational foundation.  If they  nevertheless  exist
              in an extreme form, sufficient to make him  suicidal  at  the
              prospect of  removal  to  Germany,  even  if  unjustified  or
              irrationally held, the question has to be considered  whether
              that may arguably be sufficient to found an  allegation  that
              his Article 8 rights have been violated.


         76.      In my opinion it could in principle  be  sufficient  on  a
              tenable view of the facts placed before us.  It seems  to  me
              that the decider, whether it be the Secretary  of  State,  an
              Adjudicator or the court,  should  base  a  decision  on  the
              actual state in which the appellant may find himself, whether
              or not it is rationally  justifiable.   This  appears  to  be
              consistent with the emphasis in the judgment of the  E  Court
              HR in  Tomic  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no  17837/03)
              (unreported) 14 October 2003 upon the risk of harm capable of
              engaging the responsibility  of  the  respondent  government.
              That decision concerned the admissibility of  an  application
              founded on the claim that Article  3  was  engaged,  but  the
              principle seems to me to be the same, founded upon the effect
              of powerful humanitarian considerations.  Similarly, in  D  v
              United Kingdom ... the court,  in  admitting  a  claim  under
              Article 3, was concerned with the effects upon the  applicant
              and the certainty  that  he  would  suffer  severely  in  the
              absence of suitable medical facilities in St Kitts  to  treat
              his condition.  I would mention also  that  this  should  not
              entail the adoption of a process of comparing levels of  care
              in the expelling country and the  receiving  country,  and  I
              fully agree with the observations of  my  noble  and  learned
              friend Baroness Hale of Richmond in that respect in paragraph
              63 of her opinion.


         77.      On the facts which were before your Lordships  -  which  I
              would emphasise are far from up-to-date - I am  compelled  to
              conclude that an  Adjudicator  might  arguably  hold  that  a
              sufficiently fundamental breach of the appellant's Article  8
              right to the preservation of his mental  stability  had  been
              established to engage that Article.   The  Adjudicator  would
              then have to consider the effect of Article 8(ii), which will
              require the  striking  of  a  fair  balance,  in  the  manner
              referred to by Lord Bingham of Cornhill in  paragraph  20  of
              his opinion.  This has  not  received  consideration  by  the
              Secretary of State or the judge.   The  factors  which  would
              have to be assessed on the application of Article  8(ii)  are
              potent indicators in favour of  upholding  the  operation  of
              immigration control and affirming decisions to  refuse  entry
              to persons such as the  appellant.   I  could  not  be  fully
              satisfied, however, that the case is so clear  in  favour  of
              upholding the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  that  no
              reasonable Adjudicator could hold otherwise.


         78.      I accordingly  conclude,  not  without  very  considerable
              hesitation, that for the  reasons  which  I  have  given  the
              decision of the Secretary of State must be set aside.  In  so
              holding, however, I have to emphasise that  the  decision  of
              the House goes no further than to determine the  question  of
              law submitted to  it  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  was
              justified in ruling out an appeal in  limine  on  the  ground
              that the appellant's allegation was manifestly unfounded.  We
              cannot attempt to say how the  case  will  appear  before  an
              Adjudicator who has full information of the current state  of
              the appellant's mental health and the facilities  which  will
              be available to him in Germany and is in a position  to  test
              the evidence of the appellant  and  the  reliability  of  any
              medical  opinions  adduced.   Still  less  can  we  give  any
              indication how we think the Adjudicator is likely  to  decide
              the substantive issue  if  an  appeal  is  brought  from  the
              decision to remove the appellant."


      Both Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe and Baroness Hale of  Richmond  took
    a different view in favour of allowing the appeal of the  Secretary  of
    State upholding his decision that the certification of Mr Razgar's case
    as manifestly unfounded was properly issued.  After dealing with issues
    as to the likely  treatment  of  Mr  Razgar  in  Germany,  Lord  Walker
    continued as follows at paragraphs 37-39 of his judgment:

         "37.     ... Even in  the  most  enlightened  host  country  asylum
              seekers often have to deal with bleak accommodation  or  even
              loss of liberty, public hostility  and  material  deprivation
              and these (on top of  their  earlier,  sometimes  horrendous,
              experiences)  naturally  lead  to  anxiety,  depression   and
              feelings of hopelessness.  But neither the  truism  of  human
              imperfection, nor the evidence  (taken  at  its  highest)  of
              conditions in Germany,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the
              appellant's treatment in Germany would probably  be  so  much
              worse in his present condition as to  amount  to  a  flagrant
              infringement of his human rights - an infringement so serious
              as would (in the language used in Devaseelan) result  in  the
              rights in question being completely denied or nullified.   In
              my view, it would  need  much  clearer  and  more  compelling
              evidence to lead to that conclusion.


         38.      The Court of Appeal ... referred to the Dublin  Convention
              but did not discuss its significance.  It treated this  as  a
              "mixed" case to which it proposed (pages 538-539 para  22)  a
              novel  three-stage  test  requiring  the  prospect  of   harm
              sufficiently serious for Article 8 to be engaged, but not (as
              I  read  the  judgment)  anything  wholly  exceptional.   The
              relevant paragraph is set out by Lord Bingham in his  opinion
              (para 4 above).  Lord Bingham  does  not  consider  that  the
              Court of Appeal fell into the error of  comparing  levels  of
              psychiatric care available in the United Kingdom and  Germany
              respectively.  But for my part I cannot avoid the  conclusion
              that that  was  the  Court  of  Appeal's  only  or  principle
              concern, and that it did amount to a mistaken  approach.   On
              this point I respectfully prefer the analysis of my noble and
              learned friend Baroness Hale of  Richmond,  whose  opinion  I
              have also had the advantage of reading in draft.


         39.      Had the Court of Appeal not (as  I  think)  erred  in  its
              approach, I would not  differ  from  the  experienced  judges
              below  in  their  rejection  of  the  Secretary  of   State's
              assessment of the facts and his consequent certificate  under
              Section 72(ii)(a).  As it is, I differ from the courts  below
              and from the majority in this House only  with  the  greatest
              possible diffidence.  I do so because in my opinion (even  if
              it seems callous) this case is simply not exceptional in  the
              way that the Strasbourg court had  in  mind  in  Bensaid  and
              Henao.  It is, sadly, all too common."


57.   Finally  we  refer  again  to  the  judgment  of  Baroness  Hale  who,
    following from the  analysis  which  she  had  made  as  summarised  at
    paragraphs 54-59 of her judgment (which we  have  quoted  above),  then
    noted that Mr Razgar's degree of social integration into  this  country
    was nowhere near strong enough to make this  a  'domestic'  case.   She
    then continues as follows:

         "61.     ... This is a 'foreign' case in which the United Kingdom's
              responsibility is only indirectly engaged as a result of what
              might happen to him if removed.  The meat  of  his  case,  as
              summed up by Richards J,  'was  that  the  claimant's  health
              would suffer a serious  decline  in  Germany  by  reason,  in
              particular, of the lack of appropriate  treatment;  it  would
              have to deteriorate to the  point  where  his  condition  was
              acute, that it so say where he became a suicide risk,  before
              treatment could be assured.  By contrast, if he stayed in the
              United  Kingdom  he  could  expect  to  receive   appropriate
              treatment and to make progress.' (Paragraph 51).


         62.       Dr  Sathananthan  had  diagnosed  post  traumatic  stress
              disorder and depression, for which the appropriate  treatment
              was  medication  and  cognitive  behavioural  therapy.    The
              claimant had been receiving medication and  some  counselling
              but not the cognitive behavioural therapy, apparently because
              his English was not yet good enough.  Such therapy is in  any
              event in short supply, so  that  whether  it  would  actually
              become available is a matter of speculation.  But clearly, he
              was currently managing without it.  Its aim would be to  make
              him better, not to prevent a  serious  deterioration  in  his
              mental state.  The fact that it might not be available to him
              in Germany does not engage his Convention rights under either
              Article 3 or Article 8.  Nor does the evidence  suggest  that
              the  medication   is   essential   to   prevent   a   serious
              deterioration: this is not a case of psychosis in which there
              is a  very  real  risk  of  a  return  to  hallucinations  if
              medication is not available.


         63.      Similarly, the complaints he makes about life  in  Germany
              compared with life here cannot be sufficient  to  engage  his
              Convention rights....The issue is whether  his  situation  in
              Germany would raise the serious humanitarian concerns  raised
              in D v United Kingdom ...  or  otherwise  constitute  such  a
              serious threat to his physical and moral integrity as  to  be
              disproportionate to the  legitimate  aim  which  his  removal
              would serve.


         64.      Dr Sathananthan was of the opinion that 'sending him  back
              to Germany or even to Iraq would be very detrimental  to  his
              mental and physical well-being.  I  think  he  would  make  a
              serious attempt to kill himself.'  I accept entirely that the
              risk of suicide is capable of engaging the claimant's  rights
              under Articles 2 and 3 and Article 8 and must be  given  very
              serious consideration by  the  decision-maker.   There  is  a
              positive obligation under the Convention to  take  reasonable
              steps  to  prevent  a  vulnerable  person  in  custody   from
              committing suicide: see Keenan v  United  Kingdom  [2001]  33
              EHRR 913.  If there were substantial grounds to believe  that
              the authorities responsible for him in Germany would not take
              such steps, then I would accept that  his  Convention  rights
              were engaged and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  not
              properly certify that his claim was manifestly unfounded,  at
              least without making further  enquiries  or  seeking  further
              assurances from the German  authorities.   This  is  not  the
              case.  Mr Koestler's report specifically  states  that  'your
              client will only receive medical treatment in case of  actual
              danger to himself or to others'.  The Secretary of  State  is
              entitled to asylum that the German authorities  will  observe
              their Convention obligations to the claimant unless there  is
              better evidence than this that they will not.


         65.      For these reasons, I would  hold  that  the  Secretary  of
              State was entitled to reach the  conclusion  he  did  on  the
              material before him and would therefore allow this appeal.  I
              appreciate that this may seem a  harsh  conclusion  to  draw.
              But this is a field in which harsh decisions  sometimes  have
              to be made.  People have to be returned to  situations  which
              we would find appalling.  The United Kingdom is not  required
              to keep people here who have no right be here unless to expel
              them would be a breach of its international obligations.   It
              does the cause of human rights no favours  to  stretch  those
              obligations further than they can properly go.  In  my  view,
              those obligations are not  such  as  to  require  the  United
              Kingdom to refrain from returning Mr  Razgar  to  Germany  in
              accordance with the Dublin Convention."




The approach to proportionality of removal

58.   It is in our view implicit in all the passages from  Razgar  which  we
    have quoted that the degree of deference to be accorded to the decision
    of the Secretary of State where he has  made  a  decision  on  accepted
    facts which are not contentious, is that stated in Edore  but  that  in
    the view of those who dismissed the Secretary of State's  appeal,  such
    an approach was not justified because the Secretary of  State  had  not
    applied his mind to the question of Article 8  rights  for  Mr  Razgar.
    That is not the position in the present case because in  his  extensive
    correspondence  with  the  respondent  the  appellant's  solicitor  had
    submitted Dr Coleman's psychiatric report of 14 July 2000 as  a  result
    of which the respondent had on 17 July  2000  informed  his  solicitors
    that they did not now require to interview the appellant.  At that time
    his  representatives  believed  that  the  appellant's  case  would  be
    substantively considered in this country  for  which  he  continued  to
    press.  This resulted in the following response on 1 August 2001:

      "Your letter of 9 July 2001 to the South-East Ports Surveillance  Team
         refers.  You claim that your client's return to Belgium would be in
         breach of his human rights under Articles 3, 5,  6  and  8  of  the
         ECHR.

      The Secretary of State has given express considerations as to  whether
         your client's return to Belgium would breach the  United  Kingdom's
         obligations under the ECHR and is confident that this would not  be
         the case.

      Your client now has a right of appeal  against  this  decision  under
         Section 65 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   I  attach  the
         necessary appeal form should  you  wish  to  take  this  course  of
         action."

59.   The only differences which  have  occurred  since  then  are  the  two
    incidents which it is claimed were attempted suicides by the  appellant
    - in respect of which we have already stated our  findings  -  and  the
    reports of Dr Patterson which in  all  material  respects  confirm  the
    diagnosis and opinion previously given by  Dr  Coleman,  including  his
    views as to suicide risk which  were  based  upon  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's diagnosed mental condition.   These  do  not  in  our  view
    amount to changes of any real substance from the position which existed
    at the date of the respondent's decision where he makes it  clear  that
    he has taken into account  the  Articles  upon  which  the  appellant's
    representatives had  placed  reliance  before  confirming  his  earlier
    decision for removal to Belgium under the Dublin Convention.

60.   Although we consider that the appellant has  no  greater  prospect  of
    succeeding in his claim under the Refugee Convention on  the  basis  of
    his past history taken at its highest in Belgium than he would in  this
    country by reason of  the  substantial  change  in  country  conditions
    there, this does not mean that there is any reason to consider that the
    Belgian authorities would not,  as  they  are  bound  to  do  by  their
    signature to the European Convention, properly consider whether removal
    from Belgium to Sri Lanka would lead to a  breach  of  the  appellant's
    protected human rights under either Articles 3 or  8  of  the  European
    Convention.  For the reasons which we have already explained, we do not
    consider that on the evidence currently  before  us  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom to Belgium or even to Sri Lanka would engage Article  3.
    Insofar  as  we  are  concerned  with  the  'foreign'  aspect  of   the
    appellant's Article 8 claim - namely the deterioration  in  his  mental
    condition with the attendant risk of  completed  suicide  which  it  is
    claimed would apply if he were removed to Belgium  -  that  also  is  a
    matter which would be properly for the  consideration  of  the  Belgian
    authorities who would be in a position to assess whether  indeed  there
    had been the adverse effect for which  Doctors  Coleman  and  Patterson
    contend in their various medical reports by  the  removal  to  Belgium.
    There is no evidence before us to suggest that the Belgian  authorities
    would not take into account the medical reports which we have seen  and
    we would certainly expect by reason of their nature that the  Secretary
    of State would ensure that they were brought to the  attention  of  the
    Belgian authorities  who  have  accepted  the  responsibility  for  the
    consideration of the appellant's asylum and human rights  claims.   The
    major difference is that  the  'domestic'  nature  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim - namely the level of support which he currently enjoys
    from those with whom he lives and is in  close  contact  as  previously
    identified - would have no application in Belgium because  his  removal
    would deprive him of that current support  network.   Accordingly,  the
    area for our consideration is  whether  the  actual  removal  would  be
    disproportionate by reason of the loss to the appellant of that support
    network and that removal of itself would so enhance the claimed suicide
    risk as to make this one of those  truly  exceptional  cases  where  it
    would amount to a flagrant denial of his  human  rights  under  Article
    8(i).

61.   We have already referred to M (Croatia) which is  a  starred  decision
    of the Tribunal and as such binding both upon us and upon Adjudicators.
     In that decision the Tribunal reviewed  the  proper  approach  on  the
    basis of the judgments in the Court of  Appeal  in  Edore,  Razgar  and
    Djali v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1371.  In the latter  case  the  Court  of
    Appeal considered the third possible situation where the  Secretary  of
    State had not taken any decision on proportionality  of  removal  under
    Article 8 because it had not been raised with him.  The guidance  given
    by the Tribunal is set out at paragraphs 27 and 28 of its  decision  in
    the following terms:

         "27.     In each case, however, the  appellate  body  has  to  have
              regard to the interests of immigration control, and  it  will
              usually be a very weighty consideration indeed.  In  view  of
              the consistent recognition by the Court of Appeal  in  Edore,
              Razgar and Djali  that  the  proportionality  of  removal  is
              essentially a matter for the Secretary of  State  within  the
              limits  of  individually  defined  reasonableness,  the   two
              approaches which we have discussed should not yield differing
              results as Dyson LJ expected.  It  was  a  pragmatic  aim  of
              enabling  the  decision-making  process  to   proceed   which
              underlay those decisions and not a desire for  the  judiciary
              to determine how  significant  immigration  control  and  its
              procedure was.  The way in which that independent decision is
              reached must reflect the Secretary of State's primary role in
              the assessment  of  proportionality,  the  fact  that  it  is
              pragmatism which puts the judiciary in the position of making
              the assessment in  certain  circumstances  and  the  judicial
              expectation that the two sources of assessment  would  rarely
              lead to different answers.  In  our  judgments,  Adjudicators
              and  the  Tribunal  should  grapple   with   the   issue   of
              proportionality in the following way,  so  as  to  achieve  a
              degree of consistency and  to  recognise  the  weight  to  be
              attached to  immigration  control  and  the  system  for  its
              maintenance.


         28.      The starting point should be that if in the  circumstances
              the removal could reasonably be  regarded  as  proportionate,
              whether or not the Secretary of State has actually said so or
              applied his mind to the issue, it is  lawful.   The  Tribunal
              and Adjudicator should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali  as
              providing clear exemplification of  the  limits  of  what  is
              lawful and proportionate.  They should normally hold that the
              decision to remove is unlawful only when the disproportion is
              so great that no reasonable Secretary of State  could  remove
              in those circumstances.   However,  where  the  Secretary  of
              State, e.g. through a consistent decision-making  pattern  or
              through decisions in relation to members of the same  family,
              has clearly  shown  where  within  the  range  of  reasonable
              responses  his  own  assessment  would  lie,  it   would   be
              inappropriate to assess proportionality  by  reference  to  a
              wider range of possible responses than he in fact  uses.   It
              would  otherwise  have  to  be  a  truly  exceptional   case,
              identified and reasoned, which would justify  the  conclusion
              that the removal decision was unlawful  by  reference  to  an
              assessment that removal was within the  range  of  reasonable
              assessments of proportionality.  We cannot think  of  one  at
              present; it is simply that  we  cannot  rule  it  out.   This
              decision is starred for what we say about proportionality."


62.   It was Mr Middleton's submission to us  that  M  (Croatia)  should  no
    longer be regarded as good law and binding upon us  by  reason  of  the
    passage at paragraphs 16-20 of Lord Bingham's judgment in Razgar  which
    we have set out earlier in this determination.  For the  reasons  which
    we have explained, that in our judgment is to take far too  superficial
    a view of the scope of that passage.  The arguments as to the weight to
    be  given  to  the  Secretary  of   State's   executive   decision   on
    proportionality are fully set out in the Court of Appeal  judgments  in
    Razgar which were the subject of consideration in the House  of  Lords.
    Although what was said in  the  Court  of  Appeal  is  the  subject  of
    criticism on various points in the course of the judgments in the House
    of Lords, there is no suggestion that such an approach to the weight to
    be given to an executive decision is in principle wrong.   As  we  have
    observed the issues to be considered set out at paragraph  17  of  Lord
    Bingham's judgment are in all respects similar to those set out by  the
    Tribunal  as  the  step-by-step  approach   in   Nhundu   and   Chiwera
    [01/TH/00613].  The passage in Razgar on which Mr Middleton  relies  is
    taken from paragraph  20  where  Lord  Bingham  says:  "On  appeal  the
    Adjudicator must exercise his or her own judgment,  taking  account  of
    any material which may not have been before the  Secretary  of  State".
    Immediately after saying that "the Secretary of State must exercise his
    judgment in the first instance".  We do not read the  passage  relating
    to the task of the Adjudicator to be  treated  otherwise  than  on  the
    basis that it  is  the  task  of  the  Adjudicator  to  reach  his  own
    conclusion on the issue of proportionality, paying due deference to the
    executive decision of the Secretary of State already  taken  or,  where
    none has been taken or its  factual  basis  is  so  undermined  by  the
    Adjudicator's subsequent factual findings that he must  substitute  his
    own decision as to proportionality, reaching it on  the  basis  of  the
    considerable weight to  be  paid  to  the  public  interest  which  the
    executive decision of the Secretary of State represents.  That this  is
    the proper approach of  the  court  to  executive  decisions  is,  with
    respect to Mr Middleton's argument, trite law which extends  to  issues
    with which administrative courts and Tribunals are concerned generally.
     We see no arguable basis for suggesting that the words of Lord Bingham
    are to be construed as giving an Adjudicator an unfettered  discretion.
    It seems to us that it clearly follows that this cannot be  the  proper
    interpretation having regard to the approval with which  he  cites  the
    words of the Tribunal in Kacaj at the end of the passage  in  question.
    It  remains,  therefore,  that  the  approach  to  be  applied  by  the
    Adjudicator and the Tribunal is that set out in M (Croatia).

63.   The difficulties of an appellant in the present  type  of  appeal  are
    clearly underlined by the language used in the judgments in  the  House
    of Lords in Razgar and it is for that reason that we have set them  out
    in such detail above.  The whole tenor of the  judgments  is  that  the
    interest of the state in effective  immigration  control  will  usually
    outweigh or trump the private rights of the individual  appellant  save
    in the most exceptional circumstances where removal  would  effectively
    result in the complete denial of those rights.

64.    As  Mr  Middleton  acknowledged  in  his  oral  submissions,  it   is
    inevitable  that  medical  opinion  as  to  suicide   risks   will   be
    speculative.  It is those opinions which are central to this  case  and
    it is only if no reasonable Secretary of State could have  reached  the
    conclusion that removal was  a  proportionate  response  to  the  facts
    before him that the appellant  can  succeed  before  us,  whether  this
    appeal is approached on the basis that the Secretary of State has  made
    an informed decision on the essential factual basis  of  the  claim  or
    that what has occurred since his decision is additionally to  be  taken
    into account as fresh and different evidence.

65.    The  'domestic'  element  of  disruption  of   his   current   living
    arrangements could not of itself make removal disproportionate save  by
    reference to the  effect  anticipated  on  his  mental  state  and  the
    consequences of this.

66.   Where an appellant claims that he will kill  himself  rather  than  be
    removed, as has this appellant, the  Tribunal  or  the  Adjudicator  is
    bound to exercise considerable care in evaluating  the  effect  of  the
    evidence before him.

67.   The issue of potential suicide has been considered by the Tribunal  on
    a number of occasions.  First in  [2003]  UKIAT  00017  P  (Yugoslavia)
    where it was accepted that it could, as now  universally  acknowledged,
    potentially engage Articles 3 and 8  by  reference  to  the  Strasbourg
    Jurisprudence and in particular D v UK and Bensaid  v  UK,  to  further
    consideration of which we shall return shortly.  It was next considered
    in [2004] UKIAT 00053 N (Kenya) where the Tribunal took the  view  that
    there would need to be the clearest possible evidence of  a  real  risk
    that suicide would occur which would not otherwise  be  preventable  by
    appropriate medical supervision  both  on  the  part  of  the  removing
    country and having regard  to  facilities  which  might  reasonably  be
    expected to exist in the country of  destination  (paragraph  21  of  N
    (Kenya).  Most recently the Tribunal considered this issue in KK (Risk-
    return-suicide-Roma) Serbia and Montenegro  [2004]  UKIAT  00228.   The
    appellant was not successful in any of those appeals.

68.   In Article 2 claims, the Tribunal has held that the  threshold  to  be
    reached before that Article is engaged is a  near  certainty  of  death
    (see Minakovo [01/TH/1400]).  In the claimed suicide cases, it seems to
    us that a similar rigorous approach is required as was reflected in the
    passage in N (Kenya) to which  we  have  referred.   Evidence  of  past
    attempts at self-harm and the seriousness of such attempts  is  clearly
    highly  relevant  to  the  assessment  to  be  made  depending,  as  is
    acknowledged, on evidence which must be  regarded  as  to  some  degree
    speculative.  In this connection it  is  instructive  to  consider  the
    medical evidence which was before the European court in  Bensaid  where
    Mr Bensaid was a diagnosed schizophrenic  suffering  from  a  psychotic
    illness which can result in delusions,  hallucinations,  disordered  or
    fragmented thinking and catatonic movements as positive symptoms during
    acute psychotic episodes.  Negative symptoms, associated with long-term
    illness,  include  feelings  of  emotional  numbness,   difficulty   in
    communicating with others, lack of motivation  and  inability  to  care
    about or cope with everyday tasks (paragraph 7).  At paragraph  16  the
    judgment records:

      "The applicant obtained opinions  from  his  psychiatrist  as  to  the
         likely effect of removal to Algeria.  In a letter  dated  24  March
         1998, Dr Johnson stated  that  there  was  a  high  risk  that  the
         applicant  would  suffer  a  relapse  of  psychotic   symptoms   on
         returning.  The  requirement  regularly  to  undertake  an  arduous
         journey through a  troubled  region  would  make  the  risks  still
         higher.  She pointed  out  that  when  individuals  with  psychotic
         illnesses relapse, they commonly have  great  difficulty  in  being
         sufficiently organised to seek help with themselves or  to  travel.
         For this reason, it  was  necessary  for  the  management  of  such
         illnesses to be local and readily  accessible.   It  was  therefore
         very unlikely in  these  circumstances  that  any  relapse  of  the
         applicant would be effectively treated.  In a supplementary  report
         of 7 July 1998, Dr Johnson stated that any  suffering  which  might
         accompany a relapse would be likely to be  substantial.   When  the
         applicant's illness had been severe, he had lost all  insight  into
         the fact that he was ill and believed the persecutory delusions and
         abuse which he experienced, including voices telling  him  to  harm
         other people.  He had previously felt  sufficiently  depressed  and
         hopeless that he contemplated suicide."

69.   At paragraph 21 of the judgment it says:

      "In a further opinion dated 20 May  1999  sought  by  the  Immigration
         Service with the applicant's consent,  Dr  Johnson  reported  that,
         when seen in February 1999, the  applicant  showed  some  signs  of
         deterioration, with his auditory hallucinations having become  more
         intrusive and  with  thoughts  about  harming  himself  and  voices
         telling him to harm himself ('positive  symptoms').   He  had  been
         unable to sleep because of this.  His Olanzapine had been increased
         and he had responded  to  this.   However,  he  continued  to  have
         considerable difficulties with  motivation  and  social  withdrawal
         ('negative symptoms').  The applicant's mental illness  was  likely
         to be a long-term one.  She would expect that he would continue  to
         have positive symptoms,  which  would  persist  and  could  worsen,
         though controlled to a substantial degree by Olanzapine.  At times,
         he might require urgent help with these symptoms.  There had been a
         significant deterioration in his level of social functioning likely
         to be attributable to negative symptoms and which was likely to  be
         significantly handicapping in the coming  years.   With  continuing
         medication and support from the mental health services, however, he
         would be likely to remain at the same level and  not  require  very
         long periods of institutionalisation.  Nor was he at a very serious
         risk of suicide.  If however the applicant was returned to Algeria,
         she stated that she would be more uncertain of the prognosis.   She
         thought it was:

       'highly  likely  that  stressful  life  events  such  as  deportation
             together with the  more  stressful  environment  he  would  be
             likely to encounter in Algeria would trigger  exacerbation  of
             his symptoms as occurred on his last  visit  to  Algeria...his
             fearfulness when unwell and also the motivational difficulties
             and flatness of affect makes it very difficult for him to seek
             appropriate help when  he  does  become  unwell...If  he  were
             unable to obtain appropriate help, if he began  to  relapse  I
             think that there would be a great risk that his  deterioration
             would be very great and he would  be  at  risk  of  acting  in
             obedience  to  the  hallucinations  telling  himself  to  harm
             himself  or  others...  Thus  I  do  think  that  there  is  a
             substantial likelihood that forcible repatriation would result
             in significant and lasting adverse effect'.

70.   Notwithstanding that medical  evidence,  at  paragraph  49  the  court
    found that the risk that the applicant would suffer a deterioration  in
    his condition if he were returned to Algeria and that, if  he  did,  he
    would not receive adequate support  or  care  was  to  a  large  extent
    speculative.  Dealing with the Article 8 claim and having accepted that
    "mental health must also be regarded as a crucial part of private  life
    associated  with  the  aspect  of  moral  integrity"  and   that   "the
    preservation of mental stability is in that  context  an  indispensable
    precondition to effective enjoyment of the right to respect for private
    life", the court continued at paragraph 48 as follows:

             "Turning to the present case, the court recalls  that  it  has
             found above that the risk of damage to the applicant's  health
             from return to his country of  origin  was  based  on  largely
             hypothetical factors and that it was not substantiated that he
             would suffer inhuman and  degrading  treatment.   Nor  in  the
             circumstances has it been established that his moral integrity
             would be substantially affected to a degree falling within the
             scope of Article 8 of the Convention.  Even assuming that  the
             dislocation caused to the applicant by  removal  from  the  UK
             where he has lived  for  the  last  eleven  years  was  to  be
             considered by itself as affecting his  private  life,  in  the
             context of the relationships and support  framework  which  he
             enjoyed there, the court considers that such interference  may
             be regarded as complying with the requirements of  the  second
             paragraph of Article 8, namely as  a  measure  'in  accordance
             with the law', pursuing the aims  of  the  protection  of  the
             economic well-being of  the  country  and  the  prevention  of
             disorder  and  crime,  as  well  as  being  'necessary  in   a
             democratic society' for those aims.

71.   It seems to us that a consideration of the factual basis of the  claim
    in Bensaid and the approach of the European Court  strongly  underlines
    the degree to which evidence which is by its very nature speculative as
    to future intention must be approached with great caution, particularly
    when it is to be weighed against the state interest in the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control.  In dealing  with  the  risk  in  the
    United Kingdom the Tribunal in KK,  where  the  appellant  had  made  a
    similar claim that he would kill himself rather than be removed,  dealt
    with this aspect of his case as follows:

         "23.     ... This part of the appellant's  case  does  not  revolve
              upon the adequacy of the facilities in the  receiving  state.
              Rather, it seeks to prevent the Secretary of State  informing
              the appellant of an event that the appellant  would  construe
              as adverse.  In our judgment, this is a  far-reaching  claim.
              It presupposes that the medical facilities within the  United
              Kingdom  will  not  be  sufficient  to  contain   the   risk.
              Furthermore, it presupposes that, if the Secretary  of  State
              chooses to  arrest  and  detain  the  appellant,  the  secure
              accommodation in which he will be kept will  be  insufficient
              to contain the threat of suicide.


         24.      We are bound to express our  reservations  as  to  whether
              this permits the appellant to prevent the Secretary of  State
              (or the Adjudicator or the Tribunal)  threatening  to  remove
              him.  It is not a claim that is often raised in  the  context
              of civil litigation.  If, for example, a person is threatened
              with eviction upon service of  a  notice  to  quit  or  court
              order, we doubt whether, if the litigant  threatens  suicide,
              Article 3 of the ECHR would prevent the service of  either  a
              notice to quit  or  a  court  order.   We  would  expect  the
              response to be that  there  are  adequate  medical  or  legal
              facilities in the United Kingdom capable  of  minimising  the
              risk, albeit without preventing it completely.  The  risk  of
              suicide cannot, in our judgment, be separated from the  means
              of preventing it.  In the case of this  appellant  the  means
              are limited to the provision  of  medication,  the  level  of
              which has varied from time  to  time  as  his  condition  has
              altered.


         25.      We do not think that the threat of removal or detention or
              the commencement of the process  of  removal  in  the  United
              Kingdom would violate the appellant's human rights."


72.   The evidence before us is that this appellant  receives  some  limited
    counselling but that any effective treatment of his  condition  depends
    upon his being assured that he will not be removed from  this  country.
    We see no reason to differ from the approach taken by the  Tribunal  in
    KK as to the risk here.  It depends essentially,  as  we  have  already
    said, upon a  stated  claim  of  an  intention  to  commit  suicide  in
    circumstances which in  truth  differ  little  from  those  which  have
    applied to this appellant since his arrival here or,  at  least,  since
    the initial decision of the Secretary of State to remove him to Belgium
    under the Dublin Convention.  Looking at the totality of  the  evidence
    before us, we differ, as we have said, from Dr Patterson in that we  do
    not view  the  two  claimed  suicide  attempts  as  evidencing  a  real
    intention on the part of the appellant to do himself  irreparable  harm
    and we take into account that had this been his real  intention,  there
    has been ample opportunity to do so over a period of many  years.   The
    risk, it seems  to  us,  is  more  properly  to  be  ascribed  to  that
    applicable to anyone suffering from PTSD  and  depression  in  the  way
    which the medical reports make clear.  It is a function,  according  to
    the reports, of those conditions that there is an enhanced suicide risk
    in comparison with the degree of risk of suicide to the  generality  of
    the population.  That statistic is not quoted but it seems to  us  that
    it must be very low. It is crucial to the consideration of whether  the
    individual claimant can be said to fall into one of  those  exceptional
    cases where relief should be given that the risk arising  from  suicide
    is said initially to arise purely on a statistical basis  by reason  of
    the mental  condition  diagnosed,  rather  than  by  reference  to  the
    individual characteristics of the  particular  claimant.  This  appears
    quite plainly from the passages from Dr Coleman's first  report  quoted
    at paragraph 11 above and from Dr Patterson's report  at  paragraph  19
    above. In other words, from a clinical point of view, the suicide  risk
    exists statistically as an effect of  the  diagnosed  mental  condition
    alone. That is not exceptional but the norm  and  must  on  that  basis
    apply to a substantial number of asylum seekers. It cannot, of  itself,
    lead either to a breach of  Article  3  or  of  Article  8,  either  by
    engaging it or, where it is engaged, in  terms  of  proportionality  of
    removal in the public interest. Much more is  needed  relative  to  the
    individual claimant alone in order to lift  his  or  her  case  to  the
    wholly exceptional level necessary to  engage  either  Article,  or  to
    render removal in the public interest  disproportionate  under  Article
    8(2).  Save  possibly  in  the  most  exceptional  case,  any  suicidal
    ideation is in any event a matter which the Secretary of State is  able
    to take fully into account in the  way  in  which  he  deals  with  the
    removal of the appellant in order  to  minimise  any  such  risk  being
    carried into practical effect.  In Belgium, there is no evidence before
    us which suggests that similar medical provision  cannot  be  made  for
    this  appellant  or  that  the  Secretary  of  State  will  not   fully
    communicate the extent of his current condition  as  disclosed  by  the
    reports to the Belgian authorities.  They will be able  to  make  their
    own judgment as to whether the effect of removal is such that  this  is
    one of those very rare cases where the pressing humanitarian needs  are
    of such exceptional and compelling strength as to engage either Article
    3 or Article 8 of the European Convention so as to prevent  removal  to
    Sri Lanka.  At the present time, it seems to  us  that  any  such  risk
    arising from the lawful removal of this appellant  to  Belgium  remains
    speculative in the sense that such issues were approached in Bensaid.

73.   As the House of Lords judgments  in  Razgar  make  plain,  exceptional
    cases  engaging  Article  8  to  the  degree  that  removal   will   be
    disproportionate need to be identified on a case-by-case  basis.   But,
    whilst we are certainly not unsympathetic to the appellant, we  do  not
    regard his case as being of such an exceptional and  compelling  nature
    as would render removal to Belgium in pursuance of lawful public policy
    disproportionate.

74.   It follows that for somewhat different reasons, which we have felt  it
    necessary to explain at greater length than the Adjudicator,  we  reach
    the same conclusion as he did.  This appeal is dismissed.





                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT







