
ar

 JM (Sufficiency of protection - IFA - FGM) Kenya [2005] UKIAT 00050

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                         Date of Hearing : 24 September 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                        22nd  February 2005.................

                                   Before:

                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)
                                Miss K Eshun
                              Miss R Emblin, JP




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant :  Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by South West Law
For the respondent : Miss S Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Kenya, appeals  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator (Miss A.E. Baker) who dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  her  application  for
      asylum.


2.    The case was set down in order that the Tribunal could  give  guidance
      on the effect of the practice of female genital mutilation   (FGM)  in
      Kenya, and in particular on the question  whether  someone  sought  by
      the Mungiki would have a sufficiency of protection from the  sect  and
      related issues such as the possibility of internal relocation.   By  a
      respondent's notice the Secretary of State sought to  argue  that  the
      Adjudicator had erred by failing to  identify  the  Convention  reason
      applicable to the appellant. Reliance was placed on RM (Sufficiency of
      protection - IFA - FGM) Kenya CG [2004] UKIAT 00022.
3.    At the hearing before us Mr Fripp indicated  he  did  not  resist  the
      respondent being allowed to argue the social group point, although  it
      was acknowledged by Miss Sigley that the respondent's notice  was  out
      of time.  We gave leave accordingly.

4.    The appellant was born in Kenya in 1978.  The  appellant's  claim  was
      summarised by the Secretary of State in  paragraph  2  of  the  letter
      giving reasons for refusing her application dated 31 January  2003  as
      follows:

             'You claim that you are unable to  return  to  Kenya  as  your
             family have converted to the Mungiki sect and  are  trying  to
             forcibly circumcise you, make you convert  to  their  religion
             and make you marry an old man. You  claim  that  due  to  your
             refusal you were beaten and ill-treated by  your  family.  You
             claim that you once reported them to the police  in  1997  but
             claim that they were unwilling  to  help  unless  you  paid  a
             bribe. You claim that they returned you  to  your  family  who
             kept you under guard.  You claim that  you  successfully  fled
             from  your family in 1998 but that you were traced and  forced
             to return by your family as people from your congregation  had
             visited you. You claim that the  mistreatment  continued  when
             you returned. You claim that you were used as a slave,  beaten
             and were raped by your brother's friends. You claim  to  never
             have reported this to the authorities. However you claim  that
             you managed to escape from there and moved to Nairobi in  July
             2000 where you  claim  you  lived  until  you  left  Kenya  in
             December 2002.  You claim that your  family  never  caught  up
             with you in this period.'

5.    The Secretary of State did not consider  that  the  appellant's  claim
      engaged the Convention - she was not  a  member  of  a  social  group.
      Furthermore, it was the Secretary of State's opinion that  the  Kenyan
      authorities would afford her effective  protection.  Action  had  been
      taken to curb  the  activities  of  the  Mungiki  sect.  FGM  was  not
      widespread in all areas of Kenya and the numbers of  girls  undergoing
      FGM were falling. The Kenyan court system could protect the appellant.
       The appellant had only claimed to have attempted to seek  redress  on
      one occasion Kenya and that was in 1997.  She had  not  exhausted  the
      means  of  redress  and  protection  available  to   her   in   Kenya.
      Furthermore, the internal relocation option was  reasonably  available
      to her.

6.    Unfortunately, when the matter came before  the  Adjudicator  in  June
      2003, the Secretary of State  did  not  field  a  representative.  The
      Adjudicator records  on  two  occasions  in  her  determination  -  in
      paragraph 4 and paragraph 12 - that the  appellant's  credibility  was
      not challenged in any sense by the refusal letter, either by inference
      or in fact. That is of course true - the Secretary of  State  did  not
      state that he disbelieved the appellant's account. However, it is also
      fair to say that there is not any suggestion  in  the  refusal  letter
      that he accepted it.  The Secretary of State is saying, in effect,  'I
      hear what you say' rather than 'I  accept  what  you  say'.   Had  the
      Secretary of State sent a representative to  the  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator, he would not have been prevented from cross-examining the
      appellant and testing her account. No concessions had been made in the
      refusal letter.  The  Adjudicator's  approach,  however,  is  not  the
      subject of any challenge. She accepted and was entitled to accept  the
      account given by the appellant. If the Secretary of  State  wishes  to
      take a more active part in the appellate system he knows what he  must
      do. We proceed on the basis that the appellant's account was  accepted
      in its entirety.

7.    The Adjudicator considered the medical evidence  before  her  but  was
      not satisfied that the appellant suffered from any mental disorder  or
      illness which would require treatment in Kenya or indeed in the United
      Kingdom. Medical services were indeed available in Kenya  should  they
      be required and it was not established that she would not be  able  to
      access such medical treatment should she require it - see paragraph 12
      of the determination. The  Adjudicator's  determination  concludes  as
      follows:

            '13.  The  appellant  challenges  the  Secretary   of   State's
                 conclusions that she could seek effective  protection  from
                 the state, in the light of her history and in the light  of
                 the background evidence itself. Accepting  her  account  of
                 having remained with a lady from the church, but in hiding,
                 and thus able to avoid the  continuing  attentions  of  her
                 family, accepting that her family would  remain  interested
                 in obtaining her whereabouts and again  kidnapping  her  as
                 the had done in the past more than once,  I  conclude  that
                 were  the  appellant  to  return   to   Kenya,   aged   25,
                 notwithstanding the trauma  she  has  undoubtedly  suffered
                 there, she could live within a church community, as she did
                 previously, but not in hiding and that, from the background
                 evidence, the church and the state, acting in  concert  are
                 more than capable  of  protecting  her  from  the  unwanted
                 attentions of her family, should she then be identified  by
                 her family as to her whereabouts.
            14.   My reasons for this conclusion and  my  reasons  for  not
                 accepting the  views  expressed  by  the  experts  provided
                 concerning the  safety  of  the  appellant  in  Kenya,  the
                 ability of the state to protect her are to be found in  the
                 background evidence :


                 (i)  The Mungiki are referred to in the US State Department
                    Report under  "Freedom  of   Religion"  as  having  been
                    joined by some members of the "Tent of the Living  God".
                    I note that the government allows traditional indigenous
                    religious organisations to register although many choose
                    not to do so.  The  police  forcibly  disrupted  several
                    meetings of the Mungiki religious and  political   group
                    during the year. In May 2000,  President  Moi  had  been
                    quoted widely in the press calling  for  action  against
                    the  Mungiki religious and political groups. When police
                    forcibly disrupted the group's meetings during that year
                    they injured several persons.  Police had used tear  gas
                    and batons to  forcibly  disperse  a  march  by  Mungiki
                    members and numerous people were injured. The government
                    also arrested numerous Mungiki members during 2001.


                 (ii) On the issue of female circumcision, the  Report notes
                    under "women" that President Moi issued two Presidential
                    decrees  banning  FGM  and  the   government   prohibits
                    government  controlled  hospitals   and   clinics   from
                    practising it. According to the statistics compiled by a
                    group of NGOs in  Marakwet, only  169 girls were subject
                    to  FGM in 1999, compared with  12,000 girls during  the
                    same amount in  the  previous  for  years.  The  reports
                    conclude that  women  do  experience  a  wide  range  of
                    discriminating practices, limiting their  political  and
                    economic  rights  and  effectively  relegating  them  as
                    second  class  citizens  and  that   FGM  is   practised
                    commonly on girls by certain ethnic groups, particularly
                    in rural areas.


                 (iii) I find that although female  circumcision  is  widely
                    practised had the appellant sought  the  protection   of
                    the authorities in respect of  the  activities   of  the
                    Mungiki sect and the threats and attacks made on her  by
                    them she could have and would  have  obtained  effective
                    protection. Had  she  found  protection   not  available
                    locally she could and would have been able to access  in
                    Nairobi effective protection from the state when  living
                    with the lady from the church.


                 (iv) The activities of the Mungiki sect  are  frowned  upon
                    and disliked very much by the government. Even  had  she
                    not been able to obtain effective protection in the area
                    in which she then lived, had she then moved  to  another
                    area or were she now to do so, were she to be in fear of
                    her family and the Mungiki sect, I find that  she  would
                    find effective support. This would also be  additionally
                    supported by  her  commitment  to  the  church  and  its
                    activities  in  Kenya  and  the  additional   protection
                    afforded to her by her church links and faith.


            15.  For the above reasons I dismiss her  asylum  appeal.  With
                 regard to the human rights grounds of  appeal,  I  consider
                 both whether her Article 3 rights would be  infringed  such
                 that that Article would be breached  and  also  whether  to
                 return her  would  be  disproportionate  under  Article  8,
                 infringing her private and family life, physical and  moral
                 integrity. On the background evidence, despite  the  tragic
                 history of the appellant, support is  available  in  Kenya.
                 There are medical facilities available should  they  become
                 necessary for the treatment of depression or  other  mental
                 illness.'


      Accordingly the Adjudicator dismissed both the appellant's asylum  and
      human rights appeals.

8.    Mr Fripp  adopted  as  the  basis  for  his  submissions  his  helpful
      skeleton argument, in paragraph 5 of which he summarised  the  grounds
      of appeal. It was submitted that the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  the
      objective evidence was unfair and rendered her  conclusions  perverse.
      Her  finding  as  to  sufficiency  of  protection  was  unsustainable,
      particularly given her factual findings. The  appellant's  experiences
      in the past indicated that she had not  previously  had  access  to  a
      sufficiency of protection.  The  argument  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to take into account  all  the  material  and  failed  to  give
      proper reasons for her decision was developed and reference  was  made
      to Horvath [2001] 1AC 489 on  the  sufficiency  of  protection  issue.
      Reference was also made in this context to the case  of  Noune  [2001]
      INLR 526 and Bagdanaviciene [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605.   Mr  Fripp  also
      referred to the case of  Gomez  -  the  persecutor  might  have  mixed
      motives for persecuting an individual. The motives of the  family  for
      persecuting the  appellant  might  include  an  element  of  political
      opinion. The Mungiki sect had elements of a political opinion.

9.    Miss Sigley referred  to  her  skeleton  argument  and  developed  her
      submissions and took us through the objective material. She  submitted
      that the Adjudicator's determination was not wrong in  law  given  the
      objective and expert material before her. She pointed out  that  there
      was protection available for the  appellant.  She  had  in  the   past
      enjoyed the protection of the church.  She referred to paragraph 22 of
      the appellant's statement. She had been protected by the church  until
      someone accidentally let slip her whereabouts. Absent that, her family
      would not have found out where she was.  It was to be noted  that  the
      appellant had  not  merely  received  shelter  and  accommodation  and
      protection from the church in Kenya, she had also received counselling
      - see the report of the psychiatrist Dr Lillywhite at age  21  of  the
      appellant's bundle. Again, turning to  the  appellant's  bundle,  Miss
      Sigley submitted that the report of the Immigration and Refugee  Board
      of Canada published on 16 December 2002, at page 26 of the appellant's
      bundle, spoke of the culture of circumcising  women  being  entrenched
      among most women and young girls living  in  rural  Kenya  where  many
      people still highly value female circumcision 'despite efforts by  the
      government, churches and civic groups to stamp out the practice'.

10.   Miss Sigley submitted that  the  appellant  would  not  be  traced  on
      return. She had been away for some years and had not seen  her  family
      for four years. They would not be aware of her return and would not be
      able to trace her.  She had lived unnoticed by them between June  2000
      and 2002. Kenya was a large country with a population of  30  million.
      The Mungiki were not prevalent throughout Kenya. They would  not  have
      any resources or the ability to trace the appellant.

11.   The evidence about the  size  of  the  Mungiki  was  conflicting.  The
      Amnesty International  material described the Mungiki as being a small
      sect - see the letter of 27 May 2003 at  page  5  of  the  appellant's
      bundle.  The sect was believed to draw most  of  its  membership  from
      marginalised segments of society. It  remained  a  very  secret  group
      according to the report and 'it is difficult to know exactly what they
      stand for and how they are organised'.

12.   The Canadian Report, however, put their  membership  at  four  million
      whereas the expert Dr Aguilar stated that they had been described as a
      terror gang which apparently had 300,000 followers - see  page  16  of
      the appellant's bundle.

13.   Dr Nelson in his report darted 14 June 2003 stated

             'The fact that this  woman's  brothers  tracked  her  down  in
             Nairobi once is symptomatic that  Kenya  is  not  a  very  big
             country and the number of cities where  such  a  single  woman
             could hope to live and  support  herself  would  be  small  in
             number.'

14.   Miss Sigley submitted that it followed  that  there  would  be  cities
      where the appellant could live. It was odd that Kenya was described as
      not being a very big country. The expert had gone on to  say  that  it
      would be 'inevitable that her brothers would track  her  down  again'.
      This was a bold assertion to make given that she had stayed in Nairobi
      and had not been tracked down for a considerable period of time before
      her departure.

15.   The expert has also described the appellant as being obviously  poorly
      educated.  This was again surprising given the fact that the appellant
      had had a full education and had passed all her exams - see page 19 of
      the appellant's bundle where Dr Lillywhite describes  the  appellant's
      education. The appellant was described as being very bright at school.
      Miss Sigley submitted that the appellant's employment prospects  would
      be good in the circumstances.

16.   Miss Sigley submitted there would be a sufficiency of  protection  for
      the appellant. She referred to the Secretary of State's bundle and the
      US State Department Report  covering  events  in  Kenya  in  2003  and
      published on 25 February 2004.  The law prohibited FGM for girls under
      eighteen and prohibited forced FGM on women of any age. The fact  that
      38% of  women  had  undergone  FGM  demonstrated  that  a  significant
      proportion had not. The practice was more widespread in some provinces
      than in others. A  report  from  the  German  Development  Corporation
      entitled 'Promotion of Initiatives to end FGM and Country Fact Sheet -
      Kenya GTZ' gave statistics for  the  prevalence  rates  among  various
      ethnic groups. FGM prevalence rates in Kenya were  declining  on  that
      material. The prevalence rate among the Kikuyu  was  43%.  The  report
      showed that the Kenyan Ministry of Health was coordinating  activities
      in order to launch the national plan to abolish  FGM.  The  government
      were working with the NGOs and gave the  project  effective  political
      and administrative  support.   'By  means  of  networking  with  local
      authorities  it  was  possible  to  save  girls  from  the  threat  of
      circumcision'.  The achievements were listed on page 78 of the  bundle
      - the prevalence rate of FGM in Koibatek district,  for  example,  had
      declined to 2.2%. The report demonstrated the  positive  impact  where
      the project had been undertaken. Societal attitudes had  changed.  One
      of the most successful education programmes aimed at  eradicating  FGM
      in Kenya involved an alternative right of passage in which girls  were
      taken through all the formalities attending FGM but without undergoing
      the actual cut - see page 80 of the  report  prepared  by  the  German
      Development Organisation. Some five thousand girls  had  participated.
      Those who had been circumcised were now condemning FGM  in  impressive
      numbers.

17.   Safe havens were available for women in Kenya - see a  Reuters  Report
      dated 9 April 2002.  The Centre for Rehabilitation  and  Education  of
      Abused Women - a non-governmental organisation founded in  1999  by  a
      group of women lawyers -  ran  a  refuge  for  survivors  of  acts  of
      violence although it was  hampered  by  lack  of  funding  -  see  the
      document at page 94 of which a translation has been provided.

18.   The Amnesty International Report at page T of the  appellant's  bundle
      referred  to  safe  houses  where  girls  could  obtain  shelter   and
      education.  The reference to the fact  that  there  were  a  very  few
      refuges for women in Kenya and those that existed tend  to  cater  for
      young girls and not mature women such as the appellant should be  seen
      in the context of her personal history. She was not a  young  girl  at
      the time she received assistance.

19.   It was also possible for an  individual  to  have  recourse  to  legal
      proceedings. Reference was made to a BBC online report at page  85  of
      the respondent's bundle.  A Kenyan  lawyer  had  employed  injunctions
      protecting individuals from  undergoing  FGM.   He  had  won  nineteen
      protection orders in total. The government's aim  was  to  reduce  the
      number of girls and women undergoing FGM by 40% by 2019.  The Canadian
      Report at page 26 of the bundle referred to an  article  in  the  East
      African Standard reporting that government  officials  had  ordered  a
      crackdown on Mungiki members  in  parts  of  Kiambu  district,  and  a
      similar report appeared at page 127 of the bundle - a report dated  25
      April 2002.  The government had the ability  and  the  willingness  to
      protect the appellant. If necessary she could relocate.  The appellant
      had referred to the fact that the police had asked  for  a  bribe   in
      1997/1998. This was before FGM was outlawed in Kenya.  Although  there
      was police corruption in Kenya - see the Canadian Refugee Board report
      dated 23 April 2002 at page 32 of the appellant's bundle  -  an  anti-
      corruption police unit had been established by the government in early
      2002 and three British experts had been  enlisted  to  assist  in  the
      initiative.  Although the practice still existed, bribery had declined
      - see a news  report  dated  24  January  2003  at  page  126  of  the
      appellant's bundle.  The police acted  against  the  Mungiki  and  the
      Adjudicator's decision and been correct. There was  a  sufficiency  of
      protection. Alternatively internal relocation was available.

20.    On  the  social  group  issue,  it  was  not  demonstrated  that  the
      authorities  sanctioned  or  tolerated  the  practice.  The  objective
      material did not  support  this.   There  was  discrimination  against
      women, as appeared  from  the  US  State  Department  Report  but  the
      situation was not the same as in Pakistan. Reference was made  to  the
      decision of the Tribunal in RM which we have cited above.

21.   Mr Fripp argued that the case of RM  was  not  a  human  rights  case.
      There had been no expert evidence in that  case.  The  Mungiki  was  a
      politically relevant group. It might be  that  there  was  a  societal
      change of attitude towards the practice.   The  case  of  RM  did  not
      address the political opinion aspect. Reference was also made  to  the
      case of JW (Fear,  sufficiency  of  protection  -  Mungiki)  Kenya  CG
      [2002] UKIAT 03402.  In that case the appellant  had  never  willingly
      been a member of the Mungiki. The police  had  intervened  to  disrupt
      Mungiki meetings using teargas and batons.  However,  they  would  not
      intervene to help the appellant in her situation. The  Amnesty  letter
      should be read as a whole. The  situation  was  complex.  The  Amnesty
      material was balanced. It deserved to be given due weight. The  police
      were not interested in protecting women - they were only interested in
      dealing with the Mungiki when  they  created  trouble.  The  appellant
      would be traced on return. Internal relocation would be unduly  harsh.
      Reference was made to AE and FE [2003] ImmAR 609.  There  had  been  a
      material error in law in the Adjudicator's conclusions.  This had been
      accepted by Miss Sigley - the Adjudicator had not dealt with a  social
      group issue.

22.   Miss Sigley submitted that the error made by the Adjudicator  was  not
      material to her conclusions. On the question of  opinion,  no  opinion
      was imputed to the appellant by her father.  The Mungiki  were  simply
      anxious  to  revive  lapsed  customs,  of  which  FGM  was  one.   The
      Adjudicator's decision should be upheld.

23.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      We are very  grateful  to  both  the  representatives  for  having  so
      succinctly dealt with their arguments on the basis  of  their  written
      material and for presenting their arguments so clearly.

24.   The Adjudicator is criticised  for  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
      objective and expert material in her determination.  We  do  not  find
      this contention made out.  The  Adjudicator  summarises  the  material
      before her in paragraph 5  of  the  determination,  referring  to  the
      opinion of the experts and the medical material.  She also  refers  to
      the objective reports in summary.

25.   In paragraph 14 of the determination, which we have reproduced  above,
      the Adjudicator makes it quite clear what the  reasons  were  for  not
      accepting the views expressed by the experts. We have been taken  very
      carefully through the objective material in the large bundle lodged by
      the appellant together with the material relied on by the  respondent.
      Mr Fripp invites us to  place  weight  on  the  Amnesty  International
      document dated 27 May 2003.  He submits that it is a fair and balanced
      assessment. It is plain from  that  document  that  not  only  is  the
      Mungiki sect banned in Kenya, with some of its alleged  leaders  being
      reported in hiding, but  also  that  the  Kenyan  government  recently
      ordered a police crackdown on the movement and - to use the  words  of
      the Amnesty Report - 'police and security forces  are  not  known  for
      their leniency towards this sect'.  When the  Mungiki  issued  threats
      possibly to circumcise women in 2002 the Kikuyu district police raided
      the places where the families ceremonies were supposed to  take  place
      and held a public meeting to declare that no-one would be  allowed  to
      scare and threaten the population.

26.   We have referred  during  the  course  of  summarising  Miss  Sigley's
      submissions to extracts from the background material  and  it  appears
      plain to us that there is no official tolerance of the Mungiki. On the
      contrary, the Mungiki sect is harried - see, for example, the case  of
      JW to which we have made reference. It is recorded in that  case  that
      on two occasions Mungiki meetings were dispersed by the  police  using
      teargas and weapons.

27.   Not only is there police action against the Mungiki, the  practice  of
      FGM is declining - the Amnesty International  report states this,  and
      it is borne out by the other material to which we have made reference.
      Moreover, the Kenyan authorities advocated its abandonment and support
      the  efforts  of  non-governmental  organisations  to  have  the  rite
      replaced  by  alternative  rites  of  passage.  Again,   the   Amnesty
      International  Report is supported by other material before us.  While
      the report states that  'It  is  therefore  not  impossible  that  the
      practice [of FGM] would be imposed on a twenty-five year old woman  as
      in the case of [the appellant]',  it  is  acknowledged  that  forcibly
      imposing FGM on  an  adult  woman  could  still  be  prosecuted  under
      criminal law.  We  note  the  view  of  Amnesty  about  it  not  being
      impossible for FGM to be imposed. We do  not  find,  however,  on  the
      totality of the material, that there is a real risk of this happening.

28.   Miss Sigley has  drawn  our  attention  to  material  suggesting  that
      recourse to the courts is both available and effective. She points  to
      changes in societal attitudes towards FGM. Apart from the  matters  to
      which  we  made  reference  during  the  course  of  summarising   her
      submissions, the document at page 79 of her bundle entitled 'Increased
      Public Awareness of FGM' dated 11 February 2003 refers to the  use  of
      slang among young men revealing a change in attitude: an uncircumcised
      girl has come to be referred to as the Kiswahili equivalent for  young
      or new, while a circumcised one is described as second-hand  or  used.
      One high profile case involved two girls taking their father to  court
      to avert forcible circumcision and winning the case - see page  81  of
      the respondent's bundle.

29.   Mr Fripp acknowledges the governmental attitudes but submits that  the
      situation is unchanged on the ground.  We  do  not  believe  that  the
      evidence supports this submission. First of all, there is evidence  of
      decline  of  the  practice  reflected  in  the  Amnesty  International
      letter.  There is a change in societal attitudes - the evidence of the
      use of legal procedures and the take-up of  the  alternative  rite  of
      passage following years of research assisted by a  US-based  programme
      for appropriate technology in health.  The programme  officer  at  the
      Kenyan National Focal  Point  for  FGM  -  a  body  which  coordinates
      nationwide activities against the practice - stated indeed 'We think a
      lot is happening on the ground' - see a news  report  dated  10  March
      2004 at page 82 of the respondent's bundle. This report refers to  the
      alternative  rite  although  it  makes  clear  there  are  pockets  of
      resistance to the alternative in areas where FGM is deeply rooted. The
      officer stated this was a major challenge but they were  working  with
      the Ministry of Education to include messages about FGM in the  school
      curriculum so children can learn about their rights early  enough.  It
      refers to the  practice  being  outlawed  under  the  Children's  Act,
      enacted in 2002, although that Act appeared to leave the  question  of
      sentencing to the discretion of magistrates.

30.   Miss Sigley submits that it is unclear precisely what  the  extent  of
      the membership of the Mungiki is in Kenya - the material before us  is
      not entirely consistent. However, it is clear that the authorities  in
      Kenya are by no means tolerant of  the  Mungiki  or  their  practices.
      Despite the practice of FGM being deeply ingrained, efforts are  being
      made with some success to reduce the practice or to provide acceptable
      alternatives.

31.   The appellant on return to Kenya  could  live  in  one  of  the  major
      cities as she did before.  We do not consider that the  report  by  Dr
      Nelson establishes that the appellant would not be  safe  in  Nairobi,
      for example. Kenya is not a small country. It has a large  population.
      As Miss Sigley points out, the appellant has been away from Kenya  and
      away from her family for a number of years. It would not be clear  how
      they would know of her  arrival  in  the  country,  for  example.   It
      appears that her whereabouts was divulged to the family by accident on
      the occasion when they tracked her down.  Accordingly we do  not  feel
      that it is demonstrated that her family would discover where she  was.
      The appellant was previously sheltered by the church and looked  after
      and provided with counselling on the evidence before us.  Although  it
      is said that there are very few  refuges  for  women  in  Kenya,  Miss
      Sigley points out that the appellant did have shelter in  Nairobi  and
      she was not then a young girl.

32.   It is pointed out that the request for police assistance in  1997/1998
      was made prior to the ban on the practice of FGM. It is clear that the
      appellant  could  seek  assistance,  for  example   by   using   legal
      procedures.  There are a number of  non-governmental  organisations  -
      see the German report at page 75 of the bundle.  The  Kenyan  Ministry
      of Health coordinates the activities in order to launch  the  national
      plan to abolish FGM. It appears to us that the authorities are  making
      a concerted effort to deal with the  practice  and  that  the  efforts
      translate  into  changes  on  the  ground,  contrary  to  Mr   Fripp's
      submissions. Societal attitudes are slowly but surely changing.

33.   We find that the Adjudicator's approach  to  the  background  material
      before  her  was  perfectly  correct.  It  is  not  necessary  for  an
      Adjudicator to refer to each and every item before her. We have to say
      we are not particularly impressed by Dr Nelson's report -  we  do  not
      know what material was in front of him. The reference to the appellant
      being 'obviously poorly educated' is quite plainly wrong.  She  was  a
      bright young girl who had been fully educated  and  passed  her  exams
      entirely successfully.  She was able to live in Nairobi without coming
      to the attention of her family for a considerable period of  time.  On
      the occasion that she was traced it was through a slip. There has been
      considerable progress in Kenya and we find that there is a sufficiency
      of protection given the material that has been placed before us.   The
      state is both willing and able to afford protection.  The practice  of
      FGM is in decline  though  in  certain  areas  there  are  pockets  of
      resistance.  Dr Nelson states that the number of cities where a single
      woman could hope to live and support herself would be small in number.
      That may be but we see no reason why the appellant could not return to
      Nairobi, and we bear in mind that the expert  misdirected  himself  on
      the  appellant's  educational  attainments.   We  do   not   find   it
      established on the evidence that it  would  be  'inevitable  that  her
      brothers would track her down again'. The Adjudicator found  that  she
      would not need to live in hiding. That finding was open to her on  the
      evidence before her.   Her finding that there was effective protection
      for the appellant was open to her also, as was her  finding  that  she
      could relocate internally should that be necessary.

34.   We find that the appellant would not be at risk on return.  She  would
      not be at risk because it is not established that she would be located
      by her family. She would be sheltered and as  an  educated  individual
      would be able to seek employment. She would have the  support  of  the
      church. There is moreover a sufficiency of  protection  available  for
      her.  It would not be unreasonable for her  to  relocate  should  that
      become necessary.

35.   The Tribunal in the case of RM  dealt  with  the  question  of  social
      group.  Nothing that we have heard persuades that  the  appellant  can
      bring herself within a group. Mr Fripp sought to argue that an opinion
      would be ascribed to the  appellant.  The  Mungiki  were  a  political
      organisation and the father's motivation  would  include  imputing  an
      opinion to the appellant.  We do not believe this is a  realistic  way
      of looking at it. The appellant's father wants to get   his  hands  on
      her to force her to undergo FGM and marriage. There is no question  of
      any opinion being  imputed  to  the  appellant.  We  do  not  see  any
      religious aspect to the matter either - the  appellant  is  not  being
      persecuted because she is a Christian or for any religious reason. She
      is persecuted because she resists FGM and forced  marriage.  We  adopt
      the conclusions of the Tribunal in the case of RM - see, for  example,
      paragraph 16:

             'The Tribunal are not satisfied that  this  evidence  indicate
             that within  society in Kenya there is either a  social  group
             of Kenyan or Kikuyu women under the  age  of  sixty-five.  The
             risk does not arise from being a woman or a Kikuyu  woman  but
             from being a member of or closely related to a member  of  the
             Mungiki movement.   The appellant does not claim herself to be
             a member of the Mungiki movement. the risk to her arises  from
             the fact that her father wanted her to undergo FGM.'

 36.  We are not satisfied that the Tribunal's view was flawed in the  light
      of the material before us, including the expert evidence. We  are  not
      satisfied that it is arguable  that  the  persecution  apprehended  is
      based on any other Convention relevant  reason  -  either  opinion  or
      religion.

37.   For the reasons we have given, this appeal is dismissed.




                                   G. WARR
                               VICE PRESIDENT



                    Approved for electronic distribution


-----------------------
      1


