
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                                                         |
|                  |AR (Christians - risk in Kabul) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT |
|                  |00035                                                    |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:|                  |
|Heard on:         |10 November 2004      |Appeal number:  |                  |
|Date typed:       |27 November 2004                                         |
|Date promulgated: | 4 February 2005                                         |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS D K GILL (VICE PRESIDENT)                                                |
|MR. P S AUJLA                                                               |
|MR A. E. ARMITAGE                                                           |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. O'Callaghan, of Counsel, instructed by  Bhogal
                        Lal Solicitors.
For  the  Respondent:           Mr.  D.  W.  Saville,  Senior  Home   Office
                        Presenting Officer.

1.     The  Appellant  (a  national  of  Afghanistan)  has  appealed,   with
     permission, against the  determination  of  Mr.  P  J  Bryant  OBE,  an
     Adjudicator, who (in a Determination promulgated on  17  December  2003
     following a hearing on 2 December 2003 at Hatton Cross)  dismissed  his
     appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  against  the  Respondent's
     decision of 24 February 2003 to give directions for  his  removal  from
     the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    In this case, the Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited  by  Section  101
     of the 2002 Act. This confers  jurisdiction  to  entertain  appeals  on
     points of law only. The Tribunal cannot allow an appeal unless it holds
     that the Adjudicator had perpetrated a material error or mistake of law
     (see CA v. SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165).

3.    At the hearing before us,  Mr.  O'Callaghan  withdrew  the  Article  8
     grounds. This means that the  sole  issue  before  us  is  whether  the
     Adjudicator erred materially in law in finding that  the  Appellant  is
     not at real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment  on  account
     on of being a Muslim who has converted to Christianity. If he did  make
     a material error of law, then the Tribunal  would  consider  the  fresh
     evidence submitted to reach its own conclusion.

4.    The Appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  28  July  1999.  He
     claimed asylum on 23 July 1999.

5.    The Adjudicator considered the risk to the Appellant  as  a  Christian
     convert at paragraph 40 of the Determination, which we now quote:

      40.   I accept the appellant's  evidence  that  he  has  converted  to
         Catholicism  and  I  acknowledge  the  baptism  certificate,   the
         relevant photograph, and  the  letter  from  Rev.  Moroney  of  14
         October 2003. The appellant is married to  a  Pakistani  national,
         who herself was born into Catholicism, and that, therefore, he and
         his wife form a Christian family. On any  return  to  Afghanistan,
         therefore, the appellant would be in the Christian faith  and  the
         position of Christians in Afghanistan was considered by the IAT in
         [2003[ UKIAT 00081 R (Afghanistan), which was heard only in August
         2003.  I  find  that  Determination  useful  in  considering   the
         objective evidence before the hearing but, of course, I have  also
         considered the objective evidence  in  this  case  that  has  been
         placed before me. I do not find relevant objective material on the
         position  in  Afghanistan  of  those   who   have   converted   to
         Christianity within the appellant's objective bundle. I do note at
         paragraphs 6.55 - 6.56 of the  CIPU  report  that  the  UNHCR  was
         unaware of any death sentence since the establishment of  the  new
         administration in Afghanistan for having converted from  Islam  to
         Christianity. I note that religious freedom in Afghanistan is part
         of the 2001 Bonn Agreement and that the 1964  Constitution  states
         that non-Muslim citizens shall be free to  perform  their  rituals
         within the limits determined by the laws  on  public  decency  and
         public peace. I note that the US Department  of  State  report  of
         2002, referred to  within  paragraph  6.35  of  the  CIPU  report,
         reported that the central government in Afghanistan has  begun  to
         pursue a policy of religious tolerance. It is for the appellant to
         prove his case, and I find, taking into account  the  findings  in
         [2003] UKIAT 00081 R (Afghanistan),  and  the  objective  evidence
         placed before me, that the appellant has not  proved  to  the  low
         standard required that he  would  be  persecuted  as  a  converted
         Christian and in the practice of Christianity,  whilst  living  in
         Kabul.

      (our emphasis)

6.1    Documents  before  the  Adjudicator:  Before  the  Adjudicator,   the
     Appellant relied on  a  126-page  bundle  of  documents.  The  specific
     documents which relate to the issue of  the  risk  faced  by  Christian
     converts and to which our attention was drawn are:

      (i)   an article by CBN  news  (the  Christian  Broadcasting  Network)
         entitled: "Afghan Iron  Curtain:  The  Post-Taliban  Islamic"  (at
         pages 84 to 87 of the Appellant's bundle); and
      (ii)  the report  of  the  ECRE  (European  Council  on  Refugees  and
         Exiles) dated April 2003 entitled: "Guidelines for  the  treatment
         of Afghan Asylum Seekers & Refugees in Europe" (at  pages  106  to
         110 of the Appellant's bundle).

      It is asserted in the grounds that the Adjudicator had  erred  in  not
     referring to, or considering, the  above  documents  to  which  (it  is
     asserted) his attention had been drawn.

6.2   Documents before the Tribunal: A bundle (paginated  127  to  212)  has
     been submitted to the Tribunal on the Appellant's behalf. The  specific
     documents which relate to the issue of  the  risk  faced  by  Christian
     converts and to which our attention was drawn are:

      (i)   paragraphs  5.2.2  and  5.4  of  the  2004  Danish  Fact-Finding
         Report. These are  to  be  found  on  pages  166  to  167  of  the
         Appellant's bundle and pages 172 and  173,  respectively,  of  the
         Appellant's bundle. They form part of the report dated  June  2004
         of the Danish Foreign Office Fact-Finding Mission to Kabul from 20
         March  to  2  April  2004  and  which  is   entitled:   "Political
         conditions, The Security Situation and Human rights conditions  In
         Afghanistan" (a copy of the entire report is before us); and

      (ii)  an "expert report" from a Dr. A. Wali Wardak  dated  31  October
         2004 (there is a typographical error as to the date on the   front
         cover of the report). This report has been  prepared  specifically
         for the Appellant.

      On behalf of the Respondent, Mr. Saville relied on the Report  of  the
     Country Information and Policy Unit of the Immigration and  Nationality
     Directorate (the CIPU Report) on Afghanistan dated April 2004.

7.1   At the hearing before us,  Mr.  O'Callaghan  suggested  that,  in  the
     event that the Tribunal concluded  that  the  Adjudicator  had  made  a
     material error of law, the Tribunal might wish to adjourn  the  hearing
     part-heard at that stage if we wished to hear oral  evidence  from  Dr.
     Wardak. His instructions were that Dr. Wardak would be willing to  give
     oral evidence.  Mr.  Saville  informed  us  that  he  was  prepared  to
     challenge the written evidence of Dr. Wardak, but he was content if the
     Tribunal wished to hear oral evidence from him. We were  not  persuaded
     that the Tribunal  should  adjourn  the  hearing  part-heard  for  oral
     evidence from the Dr. Wardak. The Appellant and his representatives had
     had sufficient notice of the hearing. If it  was  considered  that  the
     Tribunal should hear oral evidence from Dr. Wardak, then an application
     ought to have been made  for  permission  to  call  oral  evidence  and
     arrangements should have been made for Dr. Wardak to  be  available  on
     the hearing day. Adjournments part-heard by the Tribunal cause  immense
     problems, largely because it is often difficult to reconvene  the  same
     panel for a considerable period, especially if some panel members  have
     professional commitments  elsewhere.  Finally,  an  expert  gives  oral
     evidence principally to enable the opposing party to test his evidence.
     It should not be seen as a further  opportunity  for  the  "expert"  to
     improve the quality of the written report or its acceptability. As  Mr.
     Saville was prepared to challenge the written evidence, we informed Mr.
     O'Callaghan that we would not consider the option of adjourning for Dr.
     Wardak to give oral evidence in the event that we concluded that  there
     was a material error of law.

7.2   Before we commenced hearing  submissions,  Mr.  O'Callaghan  confirmed
     that the only issues before the Tribunal were the asylum and Article  3
     claims based on the fact that the Appellant is an apostate.

      Submissions

8.1   Mr. O'Callaghan submitted that the Adjudicator  had  made  a  material
     error of law because:

      (a)   he failed to consider appropriately  the  CBN  article  and  the
         extract of the ECRE report referred to above.  The word "relevant"
         in paragraph 40 of the  Determination  (see  the  emboldened  text
         above)  may  mean  that  the  Adjudicator  had  overlooked   these
         documents. This would be an error of law.  Alternatively,  it  may
         mean that the Adjudicator had considered the documents but had not
         found them relevant. In this event, the Adjudicator had  erred  in
         law by not giving reasons, or any adequate  reasons,  for  finding
         that the documents were not relevant. The failure to give adequate
         reasons is an error of law. In Mr. O'Callaghan's  submission,  the
         documents were relevant because:

            (i)  the article at page 85 states that Sharia law is  in  place
              in Afghanistan. The Deputy Minister of Justice is  quoted  as
              stating that Muslims are not allowed to  convert.  The  Chief
              Justice (Judge Shinwari) is quoted as  referring  to  extreme
              measures to deal with non-Muslims. He  is  quoted  as  saying
              that those found guilty in  his  courtroom  of  "sharing  the
              gospel" could face the death penalty. He is quoted as  saying
              that there are three ways to  deal  with  non-Muslims  -  the
              first, being a polite request to join the Muslim faith; if he
              refuses to do so, the second step would be to insist that  he
              obeys the laws of Islam; if he still refuses to do  so,  then
              the third step would be to behead the individual.

            (ii) page 86 gives the example of a Christian convert who  lives
              in Kabul in fear of being publicly executed.

            If the Adjudicator had referred to  this  material  and,  having
         considered it, concluded that there  was  no  real  risk  for  the
         Appellant, then Mr. O'Callaghan accepted that it would  have  been
         difficult for him to contend that the Adjudicator's conclusion was
         unreasonable. However, it was not open to the Adjudicator  to  say
         that the documents were not  relevant.  Mr.  O'Callaghan  accepted
         that the ECRE report at page 106 was not very helpful, in that, it
         makes no reference to Christians, nor does it refer to  apostates.
         However, in Mr. O'Callaghan's  submission,  this  is  because  the
         Christian community is very small in Kabul. It should be borne  in
         mind that the report states that religious minorities are at risk.
         The ECRE report, taken together with the  CBN  article,  may  well
         have led the Adjudicator to a different conclusion.

      (b)   the Adjudicator had relied on the No. 81 case. The Tribunal  had
         stated in that case that there was  not  much  objective  material
         before it on the issue of the risk facing Christians in Kabul. The
         Adjudicator had more objective material before him, which  he  did
         not consider.  Furthermore, the No. 81 case approached  the  issue
         of risk on the basis that the Bonn accord provided  for  religious
         tolerance, whereas it is clear now that Sharia law is in place  in
         Afghanistan.

8.2   If we were satisfied that the Adjudicator had made  a  material  error
     of law, then Mr. O'Callaghan relied on paragraph 10 (ii) onwards of the
     Skeleton Argument and also the documents  described  at  paragraph  6.2
     above. Paragraph 5.5.2 of the 2004  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report  shows
     that the constitution is read in line with Sharia law. The President of
     the Supreme Court is quoted as saying that the old law is  still  being
     used everywhere in the country. The law which  is  used  in  courts  is
     Sharia law and the Koran,  supplemented  by  secular  law  if  this  is
     necessary. In Mr.  O'Callaghan's  submission,  this  goes  against  the
     Adjudicator's finding and that of the Tribunal in the No. 81 case  that
     the Constitution provides for religious  tolerance,  whereas  paragraph
     5.5.2 of the 2004 Danish Fact-Finding Report  states  that  Sharia  law
     applies, and not the constitution, on the issue of apostasy. The  final
     paragraph of paragraph 5.5.2 (on page 167 of  the  Appellant's  bundle)
     makes it clear that Sharia law is used even in Kabul.

8.3   We asked Mr. O'Callaghan  to  draw  our  attention  to  any  objective
     evidence which  shows  that  there  is  in  practice  a  real  risk  of
     persecution for apostates. Mr. O'Callaghan acknowledged that  this  was
     his difficulty. As there are so few apostates in Afghanistan, there  is
     no objective evidence which shows that apostates are  being  persecuted
     in Kabul. We noted that the fourth paragraph of paragraph  5.4  of  the
     2004  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report  (which  corresponds  to  the  first
     paragraph on page 173 of the Appellant's bundle)  shows  that  the  CCA
     (Cooperation Centre for Afghanistan) are aware of people in Afghanistan
     who have converted from Islam to other religions.  We  noted  that  the
     CCA does  not  indicate  that  it  was  aware  of  any  problems  being
     experienced  by  these  converts.  Mr.  O'Callaghan  cautioned  against
     concluding, from  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  problems  being
     experienced by converts, that such converts are not  at  real  risk  of
     persecution. He asked us to bear in mind that the CBN article indicates
     that converts are living underground, although he acknowledged that, in
     the first paragraph on page 173 of the Appellant's bundle, the CCA does
     not state that converts are living underground and are fearful of being
     caught. He also asked us to bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  third
     paragraph of paragraph 5.4  of  the  2004  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report
     (which corresponds to the last paragraph on page 172 of the Appellant's
     bundle) states that  Christians  in  Afghanistan  form  "a  very  small
     group". This would include those born  into  Christianity  as  well  as
     those who have converted from other religions, including Muslims.  If a
     Muslim convert is caught, the objective evidence  indicates  that  they
     are at real risk of persecution, because conversions by Muslims are not
     allowed or accepted. In the 2004 Danish Fact-Finding  Report,  the  CCA
     makes clear (see the  fourth  paragraph  of  paragraph  5.4)  that  the
     surrounding community do  not  accept  apostasy.  Whilst  we  would  be
     entitled to place some weight on the fact that the  2004  Danish  Fact-
     Finding Report  does  not  make  mention  of  any  Muslim  converts  to
     Christianity experiencing any problems, we would also have to  bear  in
     mind that Sharia law is practised, that apostasy is against Sharia  law
     and that the courts have said that they will take action if an apostate
     is brought before them.

8.4   Mr. O'Callaghan asked us to  place  weight  on  Dr.  Wardak's  report.
     Although this is not stated in the latest  version  of  his  curriculum
     vitae, Mr. O'Callaghan's  instructions  were  that  Dr.  Wardak  visits
     Afghanistan regularly. Primarily, Mr. O'Callaghan relied  on  the  fact
     that Dr. Wardak is a lawyer. He is the holder of a "B.A. degree in (Law
     / Jurisprudence" from Kabul / King Abdul  Azia  Universities  in  1978.
     This means  that  he  knows  Sharia  law  and  the  1964  Constitution.
     Following  the  Bonn  Agreement,  Afghanistan  reverted  to  the   1964
     Constitution, although the transitional  administration  is  hoping  to
     amend it. Given that Sharia law  has  re-emerged  in  Afghanistan,  Dr.
     Wardak would know what Sharia law states with regard  to  apostasy.  In
     his report, Dr. Wardak explains that there are four schools of  thought
     in Sunni Islamic jurisprudence. Apostasy from  Islam  comes  under  the
     jurisdiction of the Hanafi school of jurisprudence. He states that  the
     consensus amongst all four  Sunni  schools  of  Islamic  jurisprudence,
     including the Hanafi school, is that apostasy should be  punished  with
     the death penalty. However, amongst  the  four  judicial  schools,  the
     Hanafi school insists that the apostate should be  given  a  chance  to
     repent and reconsider his/her position prior to the imposition  of  the
     sentence.

8.5   We noted that there was nothing in Dr. Wardak's report which  provides
     any anecdotal evidence of the problems experienced  by  apostates.  Mr.
     O'Callaghan acknowledged this, stating that the difficulty was that the
     number of apostates is so small and there  is  no  evidence  of  anyone
     having been tried in the last year or so since Sharia law re-emerged in
     Afghanistan.  Mr. O'Callaghan could only refer us to  the  CBN  article
     which quotes the Chief Justice  explaining  what  would  happen  to  an
     apostate if he/she were to be brought before a court.  Mr.  O'Callaghan
     acknowledged that there was no evidence before us that  apostates  have
     been taken to court.

9.1   Mr. Saville submitted that the Adjudicator had  not  made  a  material
     error of law.  The Adjudicator had  stated that he  did  not  find  any
     relevant objective evidence in the Appellant's bundle. In Mr. Saville's
     submission, the documents at pages 84 and 106 of the Appellant's bundle
     were not relevant because:

      (a)   the CBN article was not an article by an objective  source.  The
         CBN is a very  devout  Christian  organisation.  Page  87  of  the
         Appellant's bundle shows that the CBN is an evangelical network.

      (b)    whilst  Mr.  Saville  accepted  that,  under  Sharia  law,  the
         punishment for apostasy is death, this  does  not  mean  that  the
         penalty is applied. The Deputy Minister of Justice is  quoted   in
         the CBN article (on page 85 of the Appellant's bundle)  as  saying
         that no Muslim is allowed to convert. However, nothing is said  as
         to what would happen to a Muslim who does convert. The quote  from
         Judge Shinwari (that  those  found  guilty  in  his  courtroom  of
         sharing  the  gospel  could  face  the   death   penalty)   refers
         specifically to those who evangelise, as indicated  by  the  words
         "sharing the gospel". The next quote from  Judge  Shinwari  (which
         refers to the three ways of dealing with  non-Muslims)  could,  in
         theory, apply even to  those  born  into  Christianity.  In  other
         words, he could be taken to  be  saying  that  he  would  want  to
         execute all non-Muslims.  Yet,  there  is  no  suggestion  on  the
         Appellant's behalf  that  all  Christians  are  at  real  risk  of
         persecution. The example of the convert Simon on pages 86  and  87
         does not help the Appellant, because it is clear, from what  Simon
         is quoted as saying in the article, that  he  is  an  evangelising
         Christian. Although Simon says that he would be executed if caught
         - which, in Mr. Saville's submission, shows a subjective  fear  on
         Simon's part - the article does not show  that  any  fear  on  the
         Appellant's part, as someone who has not said he would evangelise,
         is well-founded.

      (c)   the ECRE report at page 107 of the Appellant's bundle refers  to
         sections of the community who "may" have protection  concerns.  In
         other words,  ECRE  are  not  saying  that  the  sections  of  the
         community  thereafter   specified   would   be   at   real   risk.
         Furthermore, the categories named  by  ECRE  are  "Hindus,  Sikhs,
         Shiites, Sunnis and Ismailis".  There  is  no  mention  of  Muslim
         converts to Christianity. It is therefore difficult to see how the
         ECRE document is a relevant source which  the  Adjudicator  should
         have considered.

9.2   An Adjudicator is only obliged to  refer  to  relevant  evidence.  Any
     relevance which the above documents may  have  was,  in  Mr.  Saville's
     submission, so small that they do not have a significant impact on  the
     outcome. Accordingly,  in  Mr.  Saville's  submission,   there  was  no
     material error of law in the Determination.

9.3   In the event that we were not with him, Mr.  Saville  referred  us  to
     paragraph 6.94 of the CIPU Report, which  quotes  an  extract  from  an
     interview by Reuters with Judge Shinwari on 24 January 2002. He  refers
     to punishment for those who get themselves involved  in  missionary  or
     anti-Islamic activities.  According  to  paragraph  6.93  of  the  CIPU
     Report, the UNHCR are quoted in the Danish Fact-Finding Mission  report
     of 2002 (relating to a mission to Afghanistan from 22 September 2002 to
     5 October 2002) (the 2002 Danish Fact-Finding Report)  as  saying  that
     there were no Christians in Afghanistan. This is  not  consistent  with
     paragraph 6.55 of the CIPU, which quotes the  Europa  World  Year  Book
     2003 as stating that there is a small, extremely low-profile  Christian
     community in Afghanistan.

9.4   Mr. Saville did not dispute that Sharia law is  the  basis  of  Afghan
     law. However, paragraph 5.2.2 of the 2004  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report
     (page 166 of the Appellant's bundle) states that,  according  to  UNAMA
     (United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan), Sharia law was used
     under the Taliban to apply strict punishments such as  amputations  and
     stonings but that these were not now used because many forms  of  proof
     must be applied before such a punishment can be given.  The  first  and
     second paragraphs on page 167 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  also  state
     that, after the fall of the Taliban, stoning  and  amputation  were  no
     longer used. This shows that  Sharia  law  is  not  applied  with  full
     rigour. The first paragraph of paragraph 5.4 of the 2004  Danish  Fact-
     Finding Report  (page  172  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  states  that
     conversion from Islam is  not  allowed  and  that  the  punishment  for
     apostasy is death. However, in the first paragraph on page 174, the CCA
     refers to people having converted from Islam but makes  no  mention  of
     their  having  received  any  judicial  punishments.  The   CCA   makes
     assumptions that persons who have converted would face difficulties but
     does not say what happens in practice.

9.5   Mr. Saville asked us not to place weight on Dr. Wardak's  report.  Dr.
     Wardak is a Chartered Psychologist. It may be that he qualified with  a
     law degree from Afghanistan and that he travels to and from Afghanistan
     regularly. However, his law degree was obtained in 1978 - that  is,  26
     years ago - when he was 18 years old. This does not make him a  lawyer.
     Since obtaining his law degree, he has practised in a different  field.
     He gained qualifications relating to mental health. That has  been  the
     principal focus of his career. His law degree in 1978 does not make him
     an expert on current Afghan law. Whilst on page 2 of  his  report,  Dr.
     Wardak states that the traditional punishment for apostasy is death, he
     does not mention any evidence of that punishment being carried out.  On
     pages 3 to 4 of his report, he refers to the risk which  converts  face
     principally from warlords and  extremist  groups  in  society.  In  Mr.
     Saville's submission, the risk from warlords is not  reflected  in  the
     objective evidence. He refers to two killings in Kabul but  these  were
     of people who were politically involved in Kabul. Even  if  the  report
     were to be accepted, the  fact  is  that  Dr.  Wardak  only  refers  to
     societal problems for converts.

10.1  In response, Mr. O'Callaghan submitted that the Adjudicator  was  duty
     bound to explain why the documents in the Appellant's bundle (pages  84
     and 106) were  not  relevant.  The  reasoning  which  Mr.  Saville  had
     provided at the hearing  before  us  should  have  been  given  by  the
     Adjudicator. The Adjudicator's error is material  because,  if  he  had
     given the documents at pages 84 and 106 some weight, he could have come
     to a different conclusion. The reference to  "sharing  the  gospel"  by
     Judge Shinwari on page 85 of the Appellant's bundle is not  limited  to
     evangelical activities. He could have been referring also to those  who
     attend church. The three ways Judge Shinwari describes of dealing  with
     non-Muslims  accords  with  the  approach  of  the  Hanafi  school   of
     jurisprudence to apostates. The Hanafi school  insists  that  apostates
     should be given a chance to repent  and  reconsider  his/her  position.
     Accordingly, in Mr. O'Callaghan's submission, Judge Shinwari must  have
     been referring to apostates.

10.2  Mr. O'Callaghan referred us to the fact that,  at  paragraph  6.93  of
     the CIPU Report, the CCA state that it would not  rule  out  that  NGOs
     might have converted Muslims  to  Christianity,  whereas  the  CCA  are
     quoted in  the  2004  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report  (page  173  of  the
     Appellant's bundle) as saying that it has become aware  of  people  who
     have converted from Islam to other religions in Afghanistan. The  UNHCR
     were also quoted in 2002 as saying that there  were  no  Christians  in
     Afghanistan. The evidence is that there is now  a  small  community  of
     Christians in Afghanistan.

11.   We reserved our determination.

      Determination

12.   We remind ourselves of the recent judgement of the Court of Appeal  in
     CA v. SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165. The Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited
     by Section 101 of the 2002 Act, which confers jurisdiction to entertain
     appeals on points of law only. The  Tribunal  cannot  allow  an  appeal
     unless it holds that the Adjudicator had perpetrated a  material  error
     or mistake of law.

13.1  It is not clear, from paragraph 40 of the Determination,  whether  the
     Adjudicator had considered the CBN article and the ECRE report at pages
     106 to 110 of the Appellant's bundle. It may be  that  the  Adjudicator
     had not considered these documents are all. On the other hand,  it  may
     be that the Adjudicator had considered the documents but did  not  find
     them relevant. Clearly, the CBN article and the  extract  of  the  ECRE
     report have some bearing on the issue of risk which the Adjudicator had
     to determine. At least that much can be said of  these  documents.  The
     Adjudicator's failure to give  any  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
     documents were not relevant (if he had considered them) is an error  of
     law. Accordingly, whether the Adjudicator  had  simply  overlooked  the
     documents or had considered them but found them not  relevant,  we  are
     satisfied that there is an error  of  law  in  the  Determination.  The
     question is whether that error is material.

13.2  Mr. O'Callaghan submits that the error would be a material one if,  on
     the basis of the CBN article and the ECRE report, the Adjudicator could
     have reached a different conclusion. We do not consider that  the  test
     is whether the Adjudicator "could have" reached a different  conclusion
     but whether the documents would properly have led him  to  a  different
     conclusion on the whole of the evidence which was before him.

13.3  We are satisfied that the CBN article and the ECRE  report  would  not
     properly have led the Adjudicator to reach a different  conclusion  for
     reasons which we now give:

            The ECRE report (pages 107 and 108 of the Appellant's bundle):

      (a)   Paragraph 15 (on page  107)  refers  to  certain  categories  of
         individuals who "may have ongoing  protection  needs  that  remain
         unchanged despite recent political developments  in  Afghanistan".
         Page 108 refers to "religious minorities at  risk  of  persecution
         including  Hindus,  Sikhs,  Shiites,  Sunnis  and  Ismailis".  Mr.
         Saville relies on the absence of  any  mention  of  converts.  The
         implication is that this means that they are not at real risk.  We
         consider that this is an overly simplistic approach. The list  was
         not  meant  to  be  exhaustive,  as  is  indicated  by  the   word
         "including". The Appellant is clearly  a  member  of  a  religious
         minority. Potentially, therefore, he was someone who might  be  at
         risk. Beyond this, the ECRE was of no relevance, since it provided
         no detailed information as to  the  difficulties,  if  any,  which
         apostates face in Kabul.

            The CBN article:

      (b)   We agree with Mr. Saville that CBN is a partisan source.  It  is
         a Christian  evangelical network, as can be seen from the  caption
         at the bottom of page  87.  This  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  in
         assessing the weight to be attached to the article as a whole.

      (c)   The article is four pages long, but there is a section  on  each
         page which can barely be read. The quality of the copy before  the
         Adjudicator was the same. We do not therefore know  whether  there
         is  relevant  information  (which  may  be  for  or  against   the
         Appellant) which we are unable to read.

      (d)   We can see from the top of page 85  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
         that the Afghan President, Mr. Hamid Karzai, is said to  be  in  a
         tug-of-war with powerful radical Muslim groups which (it is  said)
         are trying to stop his efforts to create a more  open  and  stable
         society. In a paragraph further down on the same  page,  President
         Karzai is said to have announced in June (this must be  June  2002
         or earlier, since the article is dated 11  May  2003)  with  Judge
         Shinwari by his side that Afghanistan  would  continue  to  follow
         Sharia law. The fact that this announcement was made by  President
         Karzai has some significance, because  it  is  generally  accepted
         that moves towards a  more  tolerant  society  are  being  led  by
         President Karzai.

      (e)    The  Adjudicator  had  before  him  evidence  that  Sharia  law
         providing for punishments by stoning and amputations had not  been
         applied, at least in Kabul, since the fall  of  the  Taliban.  The
         Deputy Minister of Justice is quoted in the CBN article  (page  85
         of the Appellant's bundle) as saying that no Muslim is allowed  to
         convert. However, the CBN article also referred to the example  of
         Simon who had converted and  who  had  not  reported  in  the  CBN
         article any actual problems he experienced living in  Kabul  as  a
         convert. Mr. O'Callaghan submitted  that  the  evidence  was  that
         Simon was living underground in Kabul. We do not agree.  There  is
         reference to the interview with CBN being a clandestine one. There
         is reference to Simon fearing that the authorities would find  out
         that he has converted from Islam to Christianity.  However,  there
         is nothing which suggests that he is living underground in  Kabul.
         The article indicates that Simon had a subjective  fear  of  being
         discovered by the authorities. Nevertheless, Simon also  expressed
         evangelical desires. Simon made no mention of any problems he  had
         experienced in Kabul, either from the authorities or from  society
         in general. We acknowledge that the article indicates  that  Simon
         had, as at the date of the article, only  recently  returned  from
         Pakistan to Kabul. However, 1 �  years  have  elapsed  since  that
         article was written. If Simon  had  experienced  problems  in  the
         interim on account of his conversion, one would expect some report
         of this, at least by the CBN. The absence of any such evidence  is
         itself evidence on which some weight can properly be placed.

      (f)   The quote from Judge Shinwari (that those found  guilty  in  his
         courtroom of sharing the gospel  could  face  the  death  penalty)
         should be seen within the context of the rest of the  article  (in
         particular, the fact that it goes on to give  the  example  of  an
         evangelical convert) and the fact that the CBN is  an  evangelical
         network. Accordingly, the Adjudicator could  not  reasonably  have
         come to the conclusion that Judge Shinwari's  reference  to  those
         "sharing the gospel" was meant to include even those  who  do  not
         evangelise but who simply attend church.

      (g)   Finally, we note that, whilst there  is  reference  in  the  CBN
         article to an interview with Judge Shinwari, the full text of  the
         interview has not been provided. We cannot therefore tell  whether
         Judge Shinwari was  describing  the  punishments  which  could  be
         applied under Sharia law or the punishment which would in fact  be
         applied in his courtroom. He is quoted as saying that those  found
         guilty in his courtroom of sharing the  gospel  "could"  face  the
         death penalty. It is true to say that, under Sharia law, the death
         penalty "could" be applied. This does  not  mean  that  the  death
         penalty would in practice be applied. The article goes on to quote
         Judge Shinwari as describing the three ways in  which  non-Muslims
         are dealt with. On the evidence which was before the  Adjudicator,
         it was not possible to say whether Judge Shinwari was referring to
         what could be done under Sharia law or what would in  fact  happen
         in practice.

      (h)   Even if Judge  Shinwari  was  referring  to  what  he  would  in
         practice do if someone is convicted of a relevant offence  in  his
         courtroom, this does not mean that there  is  a  real  risk  of  a
         convert being subjected to those consequences. It is  relevant  to
         bear in mind that there is tension  in  Kabul  between  those  who
         would wish to have the full rigours  of  Sharia  law  applied  and
         those who would wish a more  tolerant  society.  Page  85  of  the
         Appellant's bundle gives us evidence of  that  tension.  There  is
         clear reference to President Karzai's efforts  to  create  a  more
         open and stable society (see the  first  paragraph  on  page  85).
         There is clear evidence of radical  Islamic  views.  This  tension
         shows why it is relevant to consider whether there is any evidence
         as to what happens in practice. There  is  a  complete  dearth  of
         anecdotal evidence of difficulties experienced  by  the  Christian
         convert community in Kabul. We appreciate, and bear in mind,  that
         the community is small. Nevertheless,  the  absence  of  any  such
         evidence is relevant evidence on which some weight can be placed.

       (i)    The  Appellant  is  someone  who  has  not  said  that  he  is
         evangelical, or would be in Kabul.

      (j)   As the Adjudicator reminded  himself  in  paragraph  40  of  the
         Determination, the burden of  proof  remained  on  the  Appellant,
         albeit to the low standard for proof.

13.4  On the totality of the evidence which the Adjudicator had  before  him
     and for the reasons we have given above,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
     error of law in the Adjudicator's Determination is not material. He was
     entitled to reach the conclusion he did (that the Appellant was not  at
     real risk of persecution of Article 3 ill-treatment on account of being
     an apostate) on the  evidence  which  was  before  him.  He  could  not
     properly have reached a different conclusion. In case  this  is  raised
     subsequently, this is not an appropriate case for  the  application  of
     the benefit of the doubt in the Appellant's favour. That principle only
     applies where, after all of the evidence has been considered,  a  doubt
     remains as to whether the claimant is  at  real  risk  of  persecution.
     This is not a case where there is such a  doubt. This is a case of  the
     claimant failing to discharge the burden of proof to the low standard.

14.1  Accordingly, it is not strictly speaking necessary for us to  consider
     the fresh evidence which has been adduced  to  the  Tribunal.  However,
     even if it had  been  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the  fresh
     evidence, we would have reached the same conclusion for  reasons  which
     we now give.

            The CIPU report of April 2004:

      (a)   We do not consider that  there  is  any  inconsistency,  as  Mr.
         Saville appeared to suggest, between paragraph 6.93  of  the  CIPU
         report of April 2004 (which quotes UNHCDR as saying that there are
         no Christians in Afghanistan)  and  paragraph  6.55  of  the  same
         report (which refers to a small, extremely  low-profile  Christian
         community). The latter is attributed to a 2003 Report, whereas the
         former is attributed to a 2002 report. We  conclude  that,  whilst
         there were no Christians in Afghanistan in 2002, there  now  is  a
         small low-profile community.

      (b)   Paragraph 6.94 states that  the  UNHCR  Geneva  refers  to  "the
         risk" continuing to exist for  Afghans  suspected  or  accused  of
         having converted from Islam to Christianity. We are not told  what
         UNHCR regards is "the risk" faced and whether  "the  risk"  is  "a
         risk" or a "real risk".  There  is  a  further  quote  from  Judge
         Shinwari in paragraph 6.94. In this quote, he is clearly referring
         to those who proselytise. Furthermore, there is nothing to suggest
         the likelihood of someone who proselytises actually being  brought
         to court.

            The 2004 Danish Fact-Finding Report (pages  166,  167,  172  and
         173 of the Appellant's bundle):

      (c)   We agree with Mr. Saville that, when pages 166 and 167 are  read
         as a whole, the picture which emerges is that, whilst  Sharia  law
         in theory does provide for draconian penalties for  apostates  and
         those who proselytise the Christian  faith  in  Afghanistan,  this
         does not mean that such penalties are applied in practice, or that
         it is reasonably likely that  the  authorities  will  take  action
         against  an  apostate.  There  is  reference  to  the  fact   that
         amputations and stonings have not been carried out in the last two
         years. We have  already  referred  above  to  the  power  struggle
         between those who would lead Afghanistan to being a more  tolerant
         society and those who are more radical. Further evidence  of  this
         can be seen from the final sentence  of  the  fifth  paragraph  of
         paragraph 5.2.2 of the 2004 Danish Fact-Finding  Report  (see  the
         penultimate paragraph on page  166  of  the  Appellant's  bundle),
         which states that the informal legal system can play an  important
         role in pacifying the fundamentalists. We are therefore  fortified
         in our view that it is important to consider not only what  Sharia
         law states in principle, but what happens in practice.

      (d)   We once again acknowledge the difficulty posed by the fact  that
         the Christian community in Kabul is very small, and only  recently
         emerged. This is  evidence  we  take  into  account.  It  is  also
         relevant, as we have said above, to take into account the  absence
         of any evidence of any problems by apostates in Kabul.

      (e)   The CCA states (page 173 of the Appellant's bundle) that  it  is
         aware of people who have converted from Islam to other  religions.
         It then goes on to state that it assumes that a convert  would  in
         the first instance have problems with his own  family  and  social
         network, which would not accept the conversion, and later that  he
         would have problems with his surrounding  community.  Taking  this
         evidence at its highest, we make two comments.  Firstly,  it  does
         not  indicate  that  apostates   face   ill-treatment   which   is
         sufficiently severe as to amount to persecution or Article 3  ill-
         treatment. In the second place, it does not show that the risk  of
         any ill-treatment is such as  to  reach  the  low  standard  of  a
         reasonable likelihood.

            Dr. Wardak's report

      (f)   Mr. O'Callaghan relied on the fact that Dr.  Wardak  obtained  a
         law degree in 1978  from  a  university  in  Kabul.  We  make  the
         following points. His curriculum vitae indicates that  he  is  the
         holder of a B.A. degree in  "Law  /  Jurisprudence",  obtained  in
         1978. In other words, he studied law 26 years ago, when he was  18
         years or younger. Since then, he has  obtained  qualifications  in
         another discipline. He is now a Chartered Psychologist. We do  not
         accept that the  fact  that  he  obtained  a  BA  Degree  in  "Law
         /Jurisprudence" in 1978 from Kabul makes  him  an  expert  on  the
         question of whether an apostate faces a real risk  of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment in Kabul at the present time.

      (g)   In the third paragraph from the bottom of page 2 of the  report,
         Dr. Wardak states that, since the fall of the Taliban  regime  and
         the take-over of the transitional administration, "there has  been
         no significant progress, in  the  reconstruction  of  the  country
         ................" This sweeping statement is simply not borne  out
         by the objective evidence. It cannot be said  that,  in  Kabul  at
         least,  there  has  been  "no   significant   progress,   in   the
         reconstruction of the country". This is evidence  of  a  one-sided
         view of events. However, and in any event, there is nothing in Dr.
         Wardak's report which in fact shows that  apostates  are  at  real
         risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment, for reasons  given
         below.

       (h)    The  explanation  by  Dr.  Wardak  of  the  Hanafi  school  of
         jurisprudence is useful, as it does indicate that Judge  Shinwari,
         in the quote in the CBN article (on page 85, the reference to  the
         three ways of dealing with non-Muslims) was probably referring  to
         apostates. However, this still does not change our observation  in
         paragraph 13.3 (g)  above  that  we  do  not  know  whether  Judge
         Shinwari was referring to what could happen under  Sharia  law  or
         what would happen in practice.

      (i)   We now quote the following relevant  extracts  of  Dr.  Wardak's
         report (which begin from the last paragraph on the third  page  of
         his report) (we have supplied the paragraph-numbering for ease  of
         reference):

            (i)  Under the prevailing circumstances,  a  person  accused  of
                 apostasy will be  regarded  as  an  outcast  by  the  great
                 majority of the fanatical groups commanding a great deal of
                 influence in society. Although people  in  general  do  not
                 possess fanatical attitudes towards a wide range of  social
                 and religious issues, there is nothing  to  stop  extremist
                 elements from taking the  law  into  their  own  hands  and
                 committing an act of  violence.  This  can  happen  in  the
                 capital as well as in provincial towns and  provinces.  The
                 killing of the Minister of Aviation in  February  2002,  in
                 day light under  the  watchful  eyes  of  the  Ministry  of
                 Interior and secret police is a vivid example.

            (ii) Similarly, the assassination of the  vice  president,  Haji
                 Qadeer in July 2002, in daylight in front of his office  is
                 another example, of atrocities committed by the war  lords.
                 Furthermore, there have been few attempts on  the  life  of
                 the president, the last of which was a  few  weeks  ago  in
                 Paktia province this year......................

            (iii)      Once a person is accused  of  apostasy,  the  rumours
                 will gradually reach his/her community.  Once  the  rumours
                 reach the community then the issue will become a matter  of
                 public knowledge and will reach many places quickly,  which
                 will  make  the  person   concerned   vulnerable   to   the
                 consequences. They may also be repercussions to the  family
                 of the persons concerned.

            (iv) In conclusion, the life  of  someone  accused  of  apostasy
                 from   Islam   may   not    be    safe    in    Afghanistan
                 ........................ On a personal  level,  Mr.  Rastah
                 being  in  a  hostile  environment  with  no  sociofamilial
                 support, may find it difficult to live and  function  as  a
                 normal person. This  may  lead  to  the  development  of  a
                 multitude of psychological problems.............

      (j)   In the first place, we agree with Mr. Saville that the  examples
         of the killings quoted in paragraphs (i) and (ii) do not  help  us
         to any significant extent to assess the issue  which  we  have  to
         decide. Dr. Wardak quotes the killings by  war  lords  of  persons
         involved  in  politics.   The   political   power   struggles   in
         Afghanistan are well known. The fact that the Minister of Aviation
         and the Vice President were killed /  assassinated  by  war  lords
         does not help us decide whether a  convert  is  at  real  risk  of
         persecution in Kabul, whether or not at the hands of war lords.

      (k)   The report does not give  any  anecdotal  evidence  of  problems
         experienced by any converts.  The  absence  of  such  evidence  is
         (again) evidence on which we can place some weight.

      (l)   It is interesting to  note  what  Dr.  Wardak  himself  believes
         would happen to a convert. Paragraph (i) states that  an  apostate
         will be regarded as an  outcast  by  the  great  majority  of  the
         fanatical groups which he says command a  great  of  influence  in
         society.  This does not help us to determine the likelihood  of  a
         person being regarded as an outcast  and  the  practical  ways  in
         which the life of such a person would be affected.  Paragraph  (i)
         also states that there is nothing to stop extremist elements  from
         taking the law into their own hands. We note that the reference is
         to extremist groups. We  are  not  given  any  indication  of  the
         prevalence of extremist groups. The sentence goes on to  refer  to
         the commission of "an act of violence" by such extremist elements.
         The reference to "an act of violence" does not help us  to  decide
         whether a convert is at real risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment.
         Paragraph (iii) refers to rumours  spreading  about  an  apostate.
         However, even where a rumour  becomes  public  knowledge  and  has
         "reached many places very quickly" the apostates  is  said  to  be
         "vulnerable to the  consequences".  Paragraph  (iii)  states  that
         "there may also be repercussions to the  family".  Paragraph  (iv)
         states that the Appellant "may  find  it  difficult  to  live  and
         function as a normal person".   We draw two conclusions from these
         quotes, even if they are taken at  their  highest.  In  the  first
         place, nothing in these quotes indicates  ill-treatment  which  is
         sufficiently severe as to amount to persecution or Article 3  ill-
         treatment. In the second place, the risk of any such ill-treatment
         as described in these extracts is not such as  to  reach  the  low
         standard of a reasonable likelihood.

14.2  We have referred to the absence of anecdotal evidence of the  problems
     faced in practice by apostates. We have said that we make allowance for
     the fact that the community is very small. It is also relevant to  note
     that the Christian community, small  as  it  is,  has  only  relatively
     recently emerged. We recognise therefore that, to some extent, the  CCA
     and Dr. Wardak are having to hypothesise on  the  risk.  However,  even
     taking at their highest what they have to say about the risk,  they  do
     not say that Sharia law would be applied. What they do  say  about  the
     risk neither reaches the low standard of a  reasonable  likelihood  nor
     the severity threshold for persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

14.3  Nothing we have said in  his  Determination  should  be  taken  as  an
     acceptance  of  Dr.  Wardak's  expertise.   We   have   indicated   our
     reservations about his so-called expertise to opine on the issue before
     us.

15.   It follows that the Adjudicator's finding that the  Appellant  is  not
     at real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment is one which was
     fully open to him on the evidence which  was  before  him,  and  simply
     cannot be said to be wrong in law. On  the  totality  of  the  evidence
     which is before the Tribunal, we are satisfied that  the  Appellant  is
     not at real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

16.   It follows that we must dismiss this appeal.

17.   This Determination  is  being  reported  because  we  have  considered
     additional material to that which was considered by the Tribunal in  RR
     (Risk-Christian) Afghanistan CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00081.  The  additional
     material we have considered is described  in  paragraphs  6.1  and  6.2
     above. We have concluded that the objective evidence before us does not
     show  that  Christians  (including  Muslims  who  have   converted   to
     Christianity) are at  real  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
     treatment in Kabul.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.




Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 10 December 2004

Approved for electronic distribution
