

   MM (DRC - plausibility) Democratic Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT
                                                                   00019 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  18 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           27th January 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                            Professor D B Casson
                                Mr R A McKee



Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination  of  Adjudicator,  Miss  S
     Jhirad, promulgated on 7 October 2003.  She dismissed the  Appellant's
     appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State in May  2003  to
     refuse asylum to the Appellant, who had arrived in the United  Kingdom
     in February 2000 and had claimed asylum immediately.  He is a  citizen
     of the Democratic Republic of Congo, born in 1978.

  2. The Appellant has claimed that this  father  had  been  a  Colonel  in
     Mobutu's forces, who had defected to Laurent Kabila in 1997.  In 1998,
     he had been ordered to Kisangani to  confront  rebels,  but  had  been
     persuaded to switch sides.  In 1999, Kabila soldiers  had  raided  the
     family home and assaulted the family.  He had escaped from them,  fled
     to Brazzaville and ultimately to Paris where he was  advised  that  it
     was safe to apply for asylum in the United Kingdom.  After he came  to
     the United Kingdom, he had  married  another  Democratic  Republic  of
     Congo asylum seeker.

  3. The Adjudicator  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  never  claimed  any
     personal involvement with any political party  or  rebel  group.   She
     explained why she regarded his account of his escape from  the  twelve
     soldiers who had come to the house as implausible.   She  referred  to
     another significant inaccuracy, and to the absence of any support  for
     any part of his claim that his father had been a soldier, let alone  a
     Colonel, or had been sent to suppress rebels or had changed sides.

  4. The Adjudicator said that his entire account was a work of fiction and
     that he had not experienced persecution.  He could return, as  someone
     who  came  from  Kinshasa,  without  any  real  risk.   It   was   not
     unreasonable to expect his wife and her child to accompany him.

  5. Those grounds of appeal which were given permission related to various
     criticisms of the credibility findings and they were the only  matters
     pursued before us.  In particular, Mr Toal said that he  was  pursuing
     them in relation to plausibility.

  6. We shall take the points in turn.  They arise out of paragraph  10  of
     the determination:

           "Against this background I assess the appellant's  appeal.   The
           appellant has never personally  had  any  involvement  with  any
           Party or rebel group in the DRC.  At the interview the appellant
           claimed that 12-armed soldiers raided the family home yet at the
           hearing and in his current statement  this  is  reduced  to  six
           raiders whilst six remained  outside  at  the  gate.   That  the
           appellant could manage to evade six armed soldiers is less  than
           plausible.  Having apparently sexually violated his sister (even
           supposing  this  happened  which   I   do   not   accept)   thus
           demonstrating that they were prepared  to  stop  at  nothing  to
           achieve the arrest of the family) it is  not  likely  that  they
           would not also have attempted  to  stop  the  appellant  in  his
           tracks by aiming  fire  at  him.   There  is  no  evidence  this
           occurred.  It is possible that the six soldiers who were holding
           family members might not have been entirely free to  give  chase
           but there were  apparently  six  other  soldiers  in  attendance
           outside and it is implausible that these militarily trained  and
           armed men did not succeed in apprehending the  appellant.   That
           he managed to elude 12 soldiers who did not shoot at him and let
           him vault a 2 metre boundary wall when some, if not all of them,
           could readily  have frustrated the escape route is far  fetched.
           Furthermore, the appellant named the rebel leaded in the area as
           Benjamin Ngbemba, whereas  he  is  actually  called  Jean-Pierre
           Bemba and this inaccuracy undermines the veracity of the  claim.
           There is nothing to  support  the  claim  that  the  appellant's
           father was a Colonel or for that matter was a serving soldier or
           that he was sent to suppress rebels or that he defected  to  the
           rebels.  I find the appellant's entire account to be a  work  of
           fiction and  that  he  has  not  experienced  persecution.   The
           appellant is from Kinshasa  and  I  find  that  provided  he  is
           supplied with proper travel documentation, obtainable, no doubt,
           from the DRC Embassy in London, he will be  able  to  return  to
           Kinshasa and will not face  any  real  risk  to  his  safety  on
           arrival or thereafter."

  7. The first point was that the third sentence inaccurately recounted the
     interview and was the cause of an inconsistency  being  attributed  to
     the Appellant which did not in fact exist.  The interview, at question
     17, referred to twelve men, six of whom entered the house and  six  of
     whom stayed outside.  As one soldier had held  the  Appellant  by  his
     clothes, he had managed  to  get  away  leaving  his  clothes  in  the
     soldier's hand.

  8. It is right that there was no  inconsistency,  contrary  to  what  the
     Adjudicator implies;  but  she  draws  no  conclusion  from  what  she
     appears to  have  thought.   It  is  not  the  basis  of  her  adverse
     credibility  findings.   That  arises  from  her  disbelief   of   the
     Appellant's case based on its inherent improbability.   His  statement
     had said that it was when he was taken outside that  he  was  able  to
     escape from the soldiers.  It is evasion of the six  soldiers  outside
     which she finds implausible, and later that none  of  the  twelve  who
     were there shot at him.  Her assessment is based on the disposition of
     the soldiers contended for by the Appellant.  There is nothing in this
     first point.

  9. On another lesser point, Mr Toal said that the  Adjudicator  had  made
     too much of the differences in the name given of  the  leader  of  the
     rebels.  It had been spelt as "Benjamin Ngbemba" in the SEF  form;  in
     the interview what he had said was written  as  "Bemba",  but  in  his
     earlier appeal statement it was "Jean Pierre Gbemba".  The actual name
     according to the Adjudicator was Jean-Pierre Bemba.

 10. In our view,  there  is  a  real  danger  in  putting  any  weight  on
     differences in the written version of names which may have no official
     or conventional orthography or one known to a  scribe  transliterating
     non-European phonetics.  "Ngbemba",  "Gbemba"  and  "Bemba"  represent
     just such a problem.  "Jean Pierre" and "Be(n)jamin" present  no  such
     problem.  It is difficult to know precisely which aspects of the names
     caused the Adjudicator to comment as she did.  Nor is  it  clear  that
     she appreciated that the Appellant had effectively got it right on the
     earlier version.  It illustrates the danger of giving weight to  minor
     discrepancies.  Whether or not her comments can  be  characterised  as
     showing an error of law, we do  not  regard  it  as  material  to  the
     outcome of the appeal.  There was an inconsistency in the first  name,
     which cannot be attributed to anyone other than the Appellant.  It was
     used by the Adjudicator as an additional point, not as the main  basis
     for the credibility conclusions.

 11.  Mr  Toal  then  took  issue  with  the  subsequent  comments  of  the
     Adjudicator; she had ignored other possible explanations for what  had
     happened  and  so  had  come  to  her  conclusions  without  a  proper
     assessment  of  credibility.   The  soldiers  might  have  been  under
     instructions to take the family alive as the relatives  of  a  soldier
     who had changed sides; that would account for the  lack  of  shooting.
     The rape of the sister could not show that the soldiers were  prepared
     to stop at nothing; that was pure speculation.  There was no  evidence
     that the six soldiers outside could see the  Appellant  after  he  had
     scaled the wall to escape.  There was no evidence that  those  outside
     had shouted to those inside that the  Appellant  had  escaped.   There
     were seven adults and a child to be guarded by the six inside and  the
     family had not been handcuffed or restrained on leaving the house.  It
     was wrong to say that this story was beyond the realm of possibility.

 12. Mr Toal referred us to a  passage  from  the  Judgment  of  Lee  J  in
     'W148/00A' v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2001]
     FCA 679, in the Western Australia District  Registry  of  the  Federal
     Court of Australia.   He  urged  us  to  apply  what  was  said  about
     plausibility as a basis for findings on credibility:  "A  circumstance
     is  'implausible'  if  it  is  beyond  human  experience  of  possible
     occurrences, that is to say, inherently unlikely".  It was critical of
     findings on credibility, based on the lower  Tribunal's  views  as  to
     what it thought was implausible on the facts of that case.

 13. Mr Toal also submitted that the Adjudicator had  failed  to  test  her
     analysis of the Appellant's story  against  the  background  evidence,
     which showed that the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  soldiery  often
     raped women and would want to arrest traitors to Laurent Kabila.

 14. The Adjudicator had also failed to assess the Appellant as a  witness.
     It was as if she had assessed the case wholly on paper.  There was  no
     reference to oral evidence as such or to cross-examination.  There was
     nothing about the way in which he had  given  his  evidence,  such  as
     whether he had been  detailed  and  elaborate,  whether  he  had  been
     evasive or forthcoming when answering challenging questions,  hesitant
     when he should have been ready and confident.  This was all  necessary
     for the making of proper credibility findings.

 15. We turn to our conclusions.  First, Mr Toal is right to say  that  the
     assessment  of  credibility  may  involve   an   assessment   of   the
     plausibility, or apparent reasonableness or truthfulness, of what  has
     been said.   This  assessment  can  involve  a  judgement  as  to  the
     likelihood of something having  happened  based  on  evidence  and  or
     inferences.  The particular role of background evidence here  is  that
     it can assist either way with that process, revealing  the  likelihood
     of part or the whole of what was said to have happened actually having
     happened.  It  can  be  of  especial  help  in  showing  that  adverse
     inferences can be apparently reasonable when based on an understanding
     of life  in  this  country  and  yet  are  less  reasonable  when  the
     circumstances of life in the country of origin are exposed.  This is a
     problem of which Adjudicators are well aware, and it  can  exist  even
     where no background material is available to assist.   The  assessment
     of plausibility is not however a separate stage in the  assessment  of
     credibility but is an aspect which may vary in  its  importance,  from
     case to case.  A story may be implausible  and  yet  may  properly  be
     taken as credible;  it may be plausible and yet properly not believed.
      There is a danger in erecting  too  many  stages  of  reasoning  with
     different tests,  as  opposed  to  recognising  different  aspects  of
     reasoning.   This  is  especially  so  as  credibility,  while   often
     decisive, is however not the true or ultimate focus of decision in  an
     asylum or human rights case.

 16. But there is a danger of "plausibility" becoming a term  of  art,  yet
     with no clear definition or consistent usage.  It is simply  that  the
     inherent likelihood or apparent  reasonableness  of  a  claim,  is  an
     aspect of its credibility, and an aspect which may well be related  to
     background material, which assists in  judging  it.   This  danger  is
     reflected in the comment of Lee J which, with respect, we do not  find
     helpful  to  us.   We  do  not  regard  "implausible"  or  "inherently
     unlikely" as meaning "beyond human experience or possible occurrence",
     nor do we regard that latter phrase as the relevant benchmark  for  an
     adverse conclusion as to plausibility or credibility.

 17. Mr Toal is also right to say that an assessment of the  oral  evidence
     including cross-examination of a witness, however brief,  would  often
     be of value, even  necessary  at  times,  to  explain  why  particular
     findings were made.  For example, an absence of evasion or a  sequence
     of changing answers, and the converse, can be usefully and  explicitly
     referred to.  This is an element in the assessment of credibility.

 18. Where there are aspects of the way in which evidence was  given  which
     form part of an Adjudicator's reasoning, is for  that  Adjudicator  to
     say how and why it did, as part of the reasons for the decision.   But
     it is an area for real caution.  Mr Toal disavowed any suggestion that
     demeanour be used or referred to as a tool in this  context.   He  was
     right to do so.

 19. It is the total content of  the  evidence,  including  consistency  on
     essentials  or   major   inconsistencies,   omissions   and   details,
     improbabilities or reasonableness, which does  and  should  found  the
     decision.  The  way  in  which  the  evidence  is  given,  so  far  as
     significant at all in this type of case, would normally  be  reflected
     in the quality of the content of  the  evidence.   It  may  confirm  a
     conclusion well founded in the content of the evidence.  It would,  we
     think, be very rare that it would properly justify a conclusion  which
     was not sustained by the content of the evidence or its quality.  Even
     evasiveness or the ability to answer questions would be  reflected  in
     the quality or content of the evidence - issues would  be  dealt  with
     satisfactorily or not.

 20. We also need to say something about the  submission  that  there  were
     alternative possibilities which could explain away satisfactorily what
     the Adjudicator found to be wholly improbable.  This is a not uncommon
     approach on appeal, even where that appeal is only on a point of  law.
     First, it is for the Appellant to put forward all the  evidence  which
     he can  as  to  what  happened.   If  there  are  inconsistencies  and
     improbabilities, it is for the Appellant to recognise  them  and  deal
     with them so far as he can.  Usually, and as here, the Appellant  will
     know that his credibility is in issue, even though not all the  points
     relied on by the Adjudicator may feature in the refusal letter.   Such
     points may arise from an Appellant's evidence to the Adjudicator.   We
     have explained the Adjudicator's role in  JK  (Cote  d'Ivoire)  [2004]
     UKIAT 00061 and in WN (DRC) [2004] UKIAT 0213.

 21. Second, if it is  said  that  there  was  an  alternative  explanation
     unfairly overlooked by an Adjudicator because the relevant  point  was
     unfairly not raised, it is for the Appellant to provide evidence as to
     what it was.  There is a world of difference  between  an  Appellant's
     evidence and the speculations of an advocate.

 22. Third, it is a fallacy  to  suppose  that  where  an  Adjudicator  has
     concluded that a story is too improbable to satisfy the lower standard
     of proof, the conclusion can be  shown  to  be  legally  erroneous  by
     pointing to alternative inferences even if they may be possible,  even
     reasonable.  A conclusion is not legally erroneous because it may fail
     to  contemplate  or  traverse  possibilities  not   raised   for   the
     Adjudicator's consideration.  It would need to be a point  so  obvious
     that any Adjudicator would  reasonably  have  had  it  in  mind  as  a
     reasonable alternative which needed to be dealt with, even though  not
     proffered by the Appellant, in order for the  contention  even  to  be
     arguable.

 23. Turning now to the specifics of this case, there  is  nothing  in  the
     background evidence relating to the motives or  rapacious  actions  of
     Democratic Republic of Congo soldiery which advances  the  Appellant's
     case.  The Adjudicator was entitled to focus in particular on what the
     Appellant said about his arrest and escape.  The coincidence  of  part
     of what he says with background evidence adds nothing here.

 24. The absence of specific reference to the Appellant's oral evidence  is
     of no significance here.  The  Adjudicator  has  concentrated  on  the
     substance or content of what he had to say.

 25. Her conclusions as to its implausibility relate to inferences and  her
     judgment as to what was likely or possible, in  the  circumstances  of
     the alleged escape where no background material was of assistance  and
     where it was for the Appellant to provide evidence as to why  and  how
     matters happened in the way in which he said they did in the light  of
     the challenge to his credibility.

 26. It is not sufficient  to  try  to  unpick  individual  stages  in  the
     conclusions by proffering a sequence of  possibilities.   It  was  the
     sheer improbability of one individual wresting himself from  a  guard,
     leaving his clothes in the guard's hand, then evading another five  of
     them, vaulting a two-metre wall, with no one shooting at him, even  to
     wound  him,  or  shouting  for  others  to  come,  which  caused   the
     Adjudicator to reject the story.  She was fully entitled to do so, and
     to reach in consequence the overall credibility conclusion  which  she
     did.

 27. The explanations proffered by Mr Toal are not persuasive alternatives.
      There was no evidence that this or any family was to be  taken  alive
     so pressingly that no chance was to be taken  that  a  shot  fired  to
     prevent escape might kill rather than wound.  The story was  that  the
     government wanted to capture them. It takes time to wrest oneself away
     from a guard so vigorously that clothes are left in his  hand  and  to
     scale a two-metre  wall  -  yet  none  of  the  six  soldiers  outside
     intervened to prevent it or to shout for  assistance  even  just  from
     those already outside the house.  It was for  the  Appellant  to  give
     such evidence of the disposition of the soldiers, and of the layout of
     the house, exterior grounds, wall and entrance that might explain  how
     it all might have happened.  The more improbable  a  story,  the  more
     cogent the evidence  necessary  to  support  it,  even  to  the  lower
     standard of proof.  In that light, the Adjudicator's comment about the
     absence of support for the claim about the Appellant's father, is  not
     an impermissible requirement for corroboration, but  a  reflection  of
     the fact that taken at face value the story was untrue and  there  was
     nothing else to shift that conclusion.

 28. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.  The decision is  reported  for
     our comments on credibility, plausibility and oral testimony.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
