

|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 5 November 2004         |        |MM (Zaghawa - Risk on Return|
|                           |        |- internal Flight) Sudan    |
|                           |        |[2005] UKIAT 00069          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..09 March 2005                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Vice President)                                     |
|Ms D K Gill (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr H G Jones MBE, JP                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Weston, of Counsel, instructed by
                       David Gray & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Trent, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sudan, born on  1  October  1986,  appeals
      with leave of the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator
      (Mrs N A Baird) dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 10 October 2003 to refuse him asylum  and  to  give
      directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal
      entrant.


2.    The appellant's evidence is that he was from  the  Zaghawa  tribe.  He
      worked as a shepherd in Sudan. About a year and a half before he  came
      to the UK his uncle  and  paternal  grandmother  were  killed  by  the
      Sudanese government. In around December 2002, he  returned  home  from
      the market and found two people from the Arab tribes there. They  beat
      him up with a leather strap and with a metal tipped arrow.  They  tied
      his hands together and forced him on to the back of a  horse.  He  was
      taken to a place in the desert where he was told that he had  to  take
      care of their animals. He was not allowed to live in a tent but had to
      live with the animals. Sometimes he got food and he  drank  milk  from
      the sheep. He was called a slave. He was  kept  by  these  people  for
      seven or eight months. One day during a three  day  celebration  of  a
      wedding he managed to escape. He arrived at Karnoi where his home  was
      but he did not go there as he could see that the whole of his  village
      had been destroyed. He knew that his father had money on the land in a
      hole so he went and got this money and ran to Port Sudan. He  went  by
      lorry and the journey took about five days. In Port Sudan  he  met  an
      agent who said he would help him. He gave the money to  this  man  who
      assisted him to come to the United Kingdom. He  feared  to  return  to
      Sudan because of the Arab tribes.

3.    The Secretary of State disputed that the appellant was  sixteen  years
      old when he was interviewed. The Secretary of State did however accept
      that the appellant may be a  Sudanese  citizen  and  that  members  of
      minority clans in Sudan may receive treatment from  Arab  clans  which
      would bring them within the scope of the 1951 Convention. He  did  not
      accept that the appellant was forced into slavery or that  he  or  his
      family was persecuted.

4.    At the  hearing,  the  Adjudicator  had  a  medical  report  dated  18
      February 2004 by Dr Wohlrab, the appellant's General Practitioner.  At
      the time of Dr Wohlrab's report the appellant was admitted  to  Cherry
      Knowle Hospital on  16  February  2004  and  was  being  treated  with
      medication for depression. He was being seen by a child and adolescent
      psychiatrist. There was a further letter  from  Dr  Wohlrab  dated  22
      March 2004 saying that he saw the appellant on 22 March and found  him
      to  be  still  suffering  significantly  from  post-traumatic   stress
      disorder. The appellant had told Dr Wohlrab that he had stopped taking
      the medication prescribed by the psychiatrist. Dr Wohlrab  decided  to
      prescribe vitamins and food supplements. Dr Wohlrab said in a previous
      letter that he was inclined to believe that the  appellant  had  given
      his correct age.

5.    The Adjudicator also had a letter dated 11 March 2004  from  the  city
      of Sunderland Social Services Department confirming the  appellant  to
      be visiting Gill Horne, a  social  worker  on  a  regular  basis.  The
      Adjudicator also had a further report dated 9  December  2003  from  a
      consultant clinical psychologist  who  said  that  the  appellant  was
      having difficulty sleeping. He exhibited an elevated level of  anxiety
      but not depression. She said that there was evidence of post-traumatic
      stress disorder too. She had organised for  the  appellant  to  see  a
      consultant adolescent psychiatrist with a  view  to  considering  some
      anti-depressant medication.

6.    The Adjudicator also had before  her  an  expert  report  prepared  by
      Peter Verne  in  November  2003.  This  report  was  specific  to  the
      appellant. Peter Verney claimed to be  personally  familiar  with  the
      Darfur region of Sudan and its people, having worked in the region for
      Save the Children in 1985 and 1986. He has maintained his interest  in
      the area and done a lot of work in research.

7.    The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from  Gill
      Horne, the Social Worker.

8.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was only 17  and  accepted
      his date of birth as 1 October 1986. She accepted that he was abducted
      as he claimed. She also accepted that he was able to escape  and  that
      he went home but lost touch with his parents. She did think,  however,
      that there was an element of planning to leave rather  than  find  his
      family and make the best of things in Sudan. She also accepted that he
      is of the Zaghawa tribe and that this  tribe  have  had  problems  and
      suffer harassment and discrimination.  She  also  accepted  that  many
      people from the appellant's clan had fled their home areas and are now
      displaced and that the expert report by Peter Verney was  an  accurate
      reflection of the situation.

9.    The Adjudicator did not accept that the appellant  was  persecuted  in
      the past. She did not accept that he would be at any  more  risk  than
      the rest  of  his  clan.   Although  they  are  clearly  harassed  and
      discriminated against, she did not accept that  they  are  persecuted.
      She therefore did not accept that there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood
      that the appellant would be persecuted if he were returned  to  Sudan.
      If he did not feel safe in his home area he could relocate.

10.   With  reference  to  the  medical  evidence,  she  accepted  that  the
      appellant has had psychological problems but noted  that  he  was  not
      currently on medication  because  he  stopped  taking  it  because  of
      stomach problems. According to the CIPU report access to mental health
      care in the primary care system is not available in Sudan and very few
      therapeutic  drugs  are  obtainable.  However,   there   are   special
      programmes designed to meet the mental needs of refugees and children,
      supported  by  NGO's  and  UNICEF.  Although  she  accepted  that  the
      appellant was exhibiting some symptoms of PTSD, she thought that if it
      were really bad he would be getting medication  and  counselling.  The
      Adjudicator was not persuaded that his condition was so  bad  that  he
      would not be able to get proper treatment in Sudan. She did not  think
      that the appellant's circumstances were exceptional.  Having  accepted
      that the appellant was only seventeen years of  age,  the  Adjudicator
      hoped that he would be granted leave to remain  in  the  UK  until  he
      attained the age of eighteen.

11.   The grounds of appeal upon which leave was  granted  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  Zaghawa  Tribe  are  not
      persecuted and was also wrong to maintain that the appellant  was  not
      subjected to persecution in Sudan. It was also argued that given  that
      the Adjudicator found  the  appellant  credible,  the  weight  of  the
      objective  evidence  clearly  supports  the  proposition  that  he  is
      reasonably likely to be at risk of persecution  as  a  result  of  his
      ethnicity were he to be returned to Sudan.

12.   Counsel argued that the flaw in the  Adjudicator's  determination  was
      in her finding that the appellant was not persecuted in the past.  She
      argued that no reasonable Adjudicator could reasonably say  that  what
      the appellant suffered in the past was not persecution.  Counsel  said
      that the appellant was a minor, who was kidnapped by the  Arab  tribes
      and used as a slave. The Adjudicator accepted  that  he  is  from  the
      Zaghawa  Tribe  and  suffered  harassment  and   discrimination.   The
      treatment, which  the  Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant  suffered
      included enslavement by the Arab  group  and  beaten  regularly.  That
      treatment was because he was  a  member  of  the  Zaghawa  Tribe.  The
      Adjudicator accepted Peter Verney's report was accurate  and  accepted
      that it was consistent with what was going on in Darfur. In the  light
      of that evidence, counsel argued that the Adjudicator was not entitled
      to find that the appellant was not persecuted in the past.

13.   Mr Trent on the other hand argued that the Adjudicator looked  at  the
      situation and distinguished  between  discrimination,  harassment  and
      persecution. She accepted the cumulative effect of discrimination  and
      harassment, amounted to persecution. However,  her  finding  that  the
      appellant was not persecuted in the past was a finding that  was  open
      to her in the light of the evidence that was before her.

14.   After deliberating on  the  matter,  the  Tribunal  decided  that  the
      Adjudicator made an error in law. We  found  that  the  treatment  the
      appellant was subjected to  in  the  past  was  enough  to  amount  to
      persecution.

15.   Counsel then argued that two issues arose in this case,  firstly,  the
      prospective risk the appellant is likely to face in  the  future  and,
      secondly, whether it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to  relocate  to
      another part of Sudan outside of Darfur.

16.   Counsel relied on the report by Peter Verney and two letters from  the
      UNHCR dated 18 May 2004 and 4 November 2004, both  of  which  postdate
      the Adjudicator's determination.

17.   Referring to the UNHCR letter of 18 May 2004,  Counsel  said  that  on
      return to Sudan the appellant would be at  risk  of  being  questioned
      particularly about his clan membership and where he comes from because
      of the government's plan for people in those regions.  She  said  that
      there is hardship and lack of security in the camps. UNHCR in Khartoum
      is aware of some individuals who  have  been  subjected  to  detention
      without trial on their return to Sudan. The  length  of  detention  is
      uncertain and international agencies, including the ICRC, do not  have
      access to the detainees. Southern Sudanese are almost certain to  face
      extreme hardship upon their return. They may be placed  in  camps  for
      the internally displaced where  they  would  likely  be  compelled  to
      contend with harsh living conditions and physical  insecurity.  Recent
      reports according to the  UNHCR  indicate  that  settlements  for  the
      internally displaced are being  demolished  in  and  around  Khartoum.
      UNHCR also states  that  Sudanese  of  non-Arab  Darfurian  background
      returning to the country face a heightened risk  of  scrutiny  by  the
      security apparatus. Internally  displaced  persons  from  Darfur  also
      often face protection risks, including forced  relocation  and  forced
      return.  Counsel  argued  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree   of
      likelihood that this would happen to the appellant.


18.   Counsel also referred us to  a  report  by  Human  Rights  Watch.  The
      report stated that as of early August 2004,  aside  from  humanitarian
      access, there has been little  improvement  in  the  humanitarian  and
      human rights conditions for the more than 1 million displaced  persons
      in Darfur. The government plans to  relocate  many  of  the  displaced
      communities to resettlement camps, "safe areas" or to  force  them  to
      return to their  village  despite  continuing  insecurity  raised  new
      concerns of possible forced displacement. The report also states  that
      the majority of displaced people remain in small and large towns under
      government control, where they are sometimes concentrated and confined
      in appalling conditions, preyed upon by the  Janjaweed  militias,  who
      operate in near total impunity. The government's use of certain ethnic
      militias as a counter insurgency partner has highlighted a new  ethnic
      and racial element to the dynamic conflict  in  the  region  and  also
      polarised ethnic and racial identity in some communities in a way that
      is new  for  many  Darfurians.  Human  Rights  Watch  also  said  that
      government plans to address the displaced civilians  seem  to  involve
      two elements: the forced return of small  numbers  of  communities  to
      their original villages, and the forced resettlement of a much  larger
      population of displaced civilians to new locations. Human Rights Watch
      received several  communications  from  different  locations  in  West
      Darfur, for example, where  tribal  leaders  have  been  harassed  and
      intimidated to take their communities back to certain villages or  new
      locations.


19.   In light of that evidence, Counsel  argued  that  a  returnee  in  the
      appellant's position would be forced to return to the area from  where
      he fled because of the government's plans.

20.   Counsel then referred us to extracts from Peter Verney's report of  28
      November 2003.  Peter Verney states that in  Darfur  Zaghawa  villages
      and individual villages have increasingly become targets for attack by
      pro-government Arab groups, who were ethnically cleansing the  region.
      In Southern Sudan and now in Darfur the government of Sudan has  tried
      to  resolve  conflicts  whose  deep  causes   lie   in   problems   of
      discrimination and justice by condoning or ordering actions which have
      violated human rights.

21.   Counsel referred us to the first addendum to Peter Verney's report  of
      22 October 2004 which deals with the IAT decision UKIAT  00167  of  20
      May 2004 which was a decision on  risk  on  return  of  failed  asylum
      seekers to Sudan. Mr Verney said that while official controls  can  be
      by-passed on exit, on arrival back in Sudan, returnees face a risk  of
      questioning or more serious interrogation as they run the gauntlet  of
      Sudanese Immigration Controls at Khartoum  Airport.  The  outcome  and
      attendant risk  is  influenced  by  numerous  factors,  including  the
      person's  documents,  his  known  history,  if  any,  his  ethnic  and
      linguistic characteristics and his political position with  regard  to
      the regime (whether real or imputed to him by the authorities  because
      of racial or under prejudice). Counsel added that this is corroborated
      by Human Rights Watch in relation to ethnicity and ethnic polarisation
      within Darfur. In the light of  that  Addendum,  Counsel  argued  that
      there is a prospect of risk to the appellant at the  point  of  return
      and if he got into the country, he would be at risk in Darfur.

22.   At this stage Mr Trent informed the Court that he  was  not  going  to
      argue that the appellant would be safe in Darfur.

23.   Counsel said that in that case the appellant would not be safe  if  he
      relocated to Khartoum. This is because he will be forced to return  to
      the outskirts of Khartoum according to government plans highlighted by
      Human Rights Watch.

24.   Counsel then referred us to the  second  addendum  to  Peter  Verney's
      report, which is  dated  28  October  2004.  Peter  Verney  said  that
      extensive corroboration of the worsening situation and of the Sudanese
      government's command and control of the operation in Darfur  has  come
      from the highest levels of the UN and other  non-Partisan  bodies.  He
      referred to the latest accounts of attacks on displaced people and  to
      the accounts of arrests of Western Sudanese in Khartoum and  elsewhere
      outside Darfur. He said that even in the  best  of  times,  it  is  no
      simple  matter  to  relocate  inside  Sudan,  where  the  absence   of
      infrastructure means that most people in  any  given  place  are  from
      local tribes  and  the  arrival  of  an  outsider  would  attract  the
      attention of the authorities. The social structure of the  country  is
      such that members of the Zaghawa would probably find it impossible  to
      relocate to some other rural area without being noticed.

25.   Counsel concluded  that  bearing  in  mind  the  appellant's  age  and
      particularly his vulnerability, and the objective situation, it  would
      not be safe for the appellant to relocate within Sudan outside of  the
      Darfur area. Conditions for displaced persons such  as  the  appellant
      are very grave.

26.   Mr Trent accepted that the appellant cannot return to  his  home  area
      since he was persecuted there and  given  the  conditions  in  Western
      Sudan.

27.   He said that the appellant would be returned to  Khartoum.  The  UNHCR
      letter of 4 November does not rule  out  returns.  It  calls  for  the
      exercise of extreme caution with respect to any potential  returns  to
      Sudan.

28.   Referring to paragraph 8 of Peter Verney's second addendum,  Mr  Trent
      said that the report  refers  to  numerous  arrests  of  human  rights
      defenders and lawyers. There is no suggestion that the appellant falls
      into any of those categories. Therefore the appellant would not be  at
      risk on return to Sudan. Furthermore, he is from the West and not from
      Southern Sudan.

29.   In reply, Counsel said that the UNHCR's  letter  of  4  November  2004
      does not make any distinction between those who come from the West and
      those who come from the South. Southern Sudan is used to demarcate the
      Arabs and the dark-skinned non-Arabs. According to the UNHCR letter of
      4 November 2004 those in Khartoum face forcible displacement.  Because
      the appellant is a person of non-Arab appearance he would be at  risk.
      The idea that there is a safe place for him to go is wrong because the
      government is forcing these displaced people back to Darfur.

30.   With regard to the appellant's  psychiatric  condition,  Counsel  said
      that if the Court thought it relevant then she would ask the Court  to
      take it into account when assessing risk to the appellant on return to
      Sudan.

31.   Having found that the appellant was persecuted in the past in  Darfur,
      the question we need to address is whether the  appellant  can  safely
      relocate within Sudan and whether it would be unduly harsh for him  to
      do so. That consideration encompasses any  risk  the  appellant  might
      face in Khartoum, where he would be returned to.

32.   Our attention was drawn to two letters from the  UNHCR.   Their  first
      letter of 18 May 2004 is regarding "Return of Failed Asylum Seekers to
      Sudan". In principle UHNCR is not opposed  to  the  return  of  failed
      asylum seekers to Sudan but  urges  all  states  to  exercise  extreme
      caution given the volatile nature of the situation in Sudan.

33.   UNHCR said that the overall situation continues to  be  influenced  by
      the civil war in Southern Sudan that has been raging since 1983, as  a
      result of which some 4  million  Sudanese  are  displaced  within  the
      country. Of these over 2 million  live  in  precarious  conditions  in
      greater Khartoum, with some 80,000 in camps and the rest  in  squatter
      and settlement areas.  The situation has been further  exacerbated  by
      the fighting in the Darfur region of Western Sudan.  This conflict has
      been accompanied by severe human rights abuses against  civilians  and
      has led to an estimated one million Sudanese  being  forced  to  leave
      their homes.

34.   With regard to the safety of returnees where asylum claims  have  been
      unsuccessful, UNHCR said that there were several sources of  potential
      risk.  One risk was the  border  decree  of  28  February  1993.   The
      Tribunal in AA found that there  was  no  evidence  that  this  decree
      existed.  UNHCR Khartoum was aware of some individuals who  have  been
      subjected to  detention  without  trial  on  their  return  to  Sudan.
      However, the UNHCR does not  identify  the  background,  ethnicity  or
      circumstances of these individuals.  The lack of such information does
      not assist us in finding that there is a risk capable of amounting  to
      persecution or ill-treatment which reaches the threshold of Article 3.

35.   UNHCR said that Sudanese of "non-Arab" Darfurian background  returning
      to the country face a heightened risk  of  scrutiny  by  the  security
      apparatus.  Additional danger is faced by those who are also students.
      Internally displaced persons from Darfur also  often  face  protection
      risks, including forced relocation and forced return.  We do not  find
      that  heightened  risk  of  scrutiny  is  not  enough  to  amount   to
      persecution or breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. This appellant was not
      a student.  We note that the UNHCR  cited  only  one  example  of  the
      authorities moving into a camp to evict its residents  and  forcefully
      relocating them to the outskirts of Khartoum.  This one  example  does
      not show that evictions are being systematically carried  out  on  all
      the camps and does not make it a real risk.

36.   The second letter from the UNHCR is dated 4 November 2004.  It  states
      the UNHCR position on return of failed asylum seekers to Sudan.  Again
      the UNHCR urges extreme caution. The  information  contained  in  this
      letter is similar to the information contained in their letter  of  18
      May 2004. The only additional information is that at least  two  camps
      housing IDPs in the Nyala area of South Darfur area were surrounded by
      units of the Sudanese army and police on Tuesday 4 November  2004.   A
      proportion of this camp was forcibly relocated to another  site  north
      of Nyala town.  As the information only  relates  to  camps  in  South
      Darfur, the letter of 4 November 2004 is not of much help to us.

37.   As to the conditions in the camps, the only evidence we have  is  that
      contained in the UNHCR letter of 18  May.   The  UNHCR  describes  the
      conditions as precarious.  This limited information is insufficient to
      lead to a finding that the conditions in the camp amount to  a  breach
      of Article 3  or  that  the  displaced  persons  in  those  camps  are
      persecuted by reason of their ethnicity by  the  authorities  who  run
      camps.

38.   We were also referred to the  report  by  Human  Rights  Watch.   This
      report refers to government plans to relocate many  of  the  displaced
      communities to resettlement camps, 'safe areas' or to  force  them  to
      return to their village despite continuing insecurity.  There  was  no
      evidence before us to indicate that these plans are being implemented.
       Until they are, they are just plans and as  such  do  not  raise  any
      Article 3 concerns.

39.   We were also referred to the report by Peter  Verney  of  28  November
      2003.  In his conclusion Peter Verney said that his report dealt  only
      with human rights violations committed  by  the  Sudanese  authorities
      outside the armed conflict areas of the south, namely the Darfur area.
       We note that it was in the light of that report and  other  objective
      evidence that the Adjudicator accepted the appellant's claims.

40.   We then considered Peter Verney's first Addendum of 22  October  2004.
      In the first paragraph, he repeats that returnees run the gauntlet  of
      Sudanese immigration controls at Khartoum airport.  He said  that  the
      outcome  and  attendant  risk  is  influenced  by  numerous   factors,
      including the person's documents, his known history if any, his ethnic
      and linguistic characteristics and his political position with  regard
      to the regime.  He does not say  what  the  outcome  is  nor  does  he
      identify the attendant risk.

41.   In paragraphs 2 to 5 of the first Addendum Peter Verney  analyses  the
      Tribunal's decision in AA 00167.  The analysis is accompanied  by  his
      own opinions about the behaviour of the Sudanese authorities.   We  do
      not attach any weight to his opinions.  The  remainder  of  the  First
      Addendum deals with the questioning of returnees at the  airport.   He
      goes on to state that the Sudanese authorities continue to arrest  and
      maltreat the opposition.  That may be so  but  our  appellant  has  no
      connection to the opposition.

42.   In his Second Addendum Peter Verney  said  that  Darfur  citizens  are
      regarded as a security risk.  Extensive corroboration of the worsening
      situation and of the Sudan  government  command  and  control  of  the
      operation has come from the highest levels of the UN  and  other  non-
      partisan bodies.  In particular he referred to the latest accounts  of
      attacks on displaced people and to the accounts of arrest  of  western
      Sudanese in Khartoum and elsewhere  outside  Darfur.   He  said  these
      reports have come from the UNHCR and other independent  organisations.
      Western Sudanese in Khartoum  were  tear-gassed  and  shot  trying  to
      protest to the UN coordinator and to deliver  information  to  him  in
      early 2004.   We do not find that this evidence paints  a  picture  of
      systematic human rights abuses of displaced Darfurians in Khartoum.

43.   In his report of 28 November 2003 Peter Verney commented on  the  risk
      the appellant is likely to face on return to Sudan.  He said that  the
      appellant's fear of the consequences of return is directly  linked  to
      the political situation in the Darfur region and the behaviour of  the
      ruling regime  in  Sudan.   There  is  a  significant  risk  that  the
      appellant would be subjected to hostile and abusive  treatment,  which
      is politically motivated  (and  tolerated)  while  influenced  by  his
      Zaghawa  ethnicity.   In  all  probability  the  appellant  will  face
      questioning on arrival at Khartoum airport, in view of the  fact  that
      he will be easily distinguishable as a western Sudanese (by appearance
      and accent) and a failed asylum seeker.  Even if he was able to  avoid
      or be cleared after interrogation at the airport, it is  quite  likely
      that he would be identified later within the country by local internal
      security forces and likely to be treated with suspicion and prejudice.
       Under the present regime, given  the  growing  security  problems  in
      Darfur and the labelling  of  Zaghawa  as  troublemakers,  this  could
      easily lead to adverse treatment of the appellant.

44.   (i)   We accept that the appellant is likely to be questioned at the
           airport on his return to Sudan in view of his ethnic and
           linguistic characteristics.


      (ii)  The objective information does not lead us to find  that  he  is
           likely to be at  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  which
           reaches  the  threshold  of  Article  3  as  a  result  of   the
           questioning.


      (iii) The appellant has no history of political opposition.


      (iv)  The appellant was not a student and is therefore not  likely  to
           be at risk for this reason.


      (v)   In the light of our findings, the numbers of  displaced  persons
           in Khartoum and the diversity of their  ethnicity  there  is  no
           particular reason for  the  appellant  to  be  identified  later
           within the country by local internal security forces and treated
           with suspicion and prejudice.


      Accordingly we  find  that  there  is  no  real  likelihood  that  the
      appellant will be at risk of  persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 were he to be returned to Khartoum.

46.   We bear in mind that the appellant had just turned 18  when  we  heard
      the appeal.  He was 15 years old when he was abducted and enslaved  by
      Arab groups. The medical report from  Dr  Wohlrab  of  22  March  2004
      indicated that the appellant was suffering from PTSD.  We  acknowledge
      that we do not have an up-to-date  medical  report.   Nevertheless  we
      take into account that the appellant has lost his family.  He will  be
      returned to an IDP camp in Khartoum where  he  will  have  no  support
      network.   In my opinion these particular circumstances are such  that
      it would make it unduly harsh to return the appellant to Sudan at  the
      present time.  His appeal is allowed for this reason only.




                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President


