
      MK (Mental Illness - Articles 3 and 8) Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00075 | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  30 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               31 March 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                      Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge N Huskinson (Vice President)



Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                      [                               ]


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Webber, instructed by TRP



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal from the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  N
     Renton, promulgated on 14 November 2002.  He  allowed  the  Claimant's
     appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of February  2002  to
     refuse to revoke a deportation order and to  set  directions  for  his
     removal to Pakistan;  he did so on  the  grounds  that  removal  would
     breach the Claimant's human rights, and Article 3 in particular.   The
     Tribunal allowed an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  from  that
     determination on 1 August 2003.  An appeal against that  decision  was
     allowed by consent in September 2004, after permission to  appeal  had
     been granted by the Court of Appeal;  the matter was remitted  to  the
     Tribunal.

  2. The terms of the Statement of Reasons accompanying the Consent  Order,
     to which the Tribunal is not a party, say that the appeal was allowed,
     not because it was concluded after consideration that the Tribunal had
     erred in law but because it  was  "arguable"  that  the  Tribunal  had
     failed to make a specific finding as to the  availability  of  medical
     treatment which "arguably" was  an  error.   Arguable  errors  do  not
     suffice to allow an appeal.  The error of law should be shown.  It  is
     to be hoped that those conceding that a decision should be  overturned
     will identify the error of law, not just arguable errors of law.

  3. The Claimant, born in 1962, arrived in the United Kingdom in 1996 with
     leave to enter for twelve months  as  a  spouse.   Some  three  months
     later, he killed his wife.  He pleaded guilty to manslaughter  and  in
     July 1997 was ordered to be detained under section 37  of  the  Mental
     Health Act  1983,  with  a  section  41  Restriction  Order.   He  was
     recommended for deportation upon release and a Deportation  Order  was
     made on 1 March 2000.

  4. On 12 February 2001, a  Mental  Health  Review  Tribunal  ordered  his
     conditional discharge, but because the conditions could not be met, he
     remained in detention.  On 11 February 2001, he sought  revocation  of
     the Deportation Order and indefinite leave to remain  on  the  grounds
     that his removal would  breach  Articles  2  and  3  ECHR.   This  was
     rejected by the Secretary of  State  in  February  2002  when  he  set
     removal directions for Pakistan.  This led to the current appeal.  The
     Adjudicator rightly held that he only had a  human  rights  appeal  in
     front of him.  There was no in-country appeal against the  refusal  to
     revoke the Deportation Order.

  5. The Claimant's case was that he could not receive the full psychiatric
     treatment in Pakistan necessary to prevent  him  becoming  a  risk  to
     himself and to others.  Nor could he obtain there the treatment  which
     he required for his insulin-dependent diabetes, without which he would
     die.  He produced the evidence  of  Dr  Kenney-Herbert,  a  consultant
     forensic psychiatrist and  his  Responsible  Medical  Officer  at  the
     hospital where he  was  detained.   The  Adjudicator  summarised  this
     evidence and commented as follows:

           "6.   He  says  that  without  the  proper  package  of  medical
                 treatment, the Appellant will relapse and his  health  will
                 deteriorate to the point where he becomes a  risk  both  to
                 himself and to other people.  That risk is described  later
                 in the report  as  deterioration  to  the  point  where  he
                 himself would be harmed and/or he will cause  serious  harm
                 to other people.  I am not concerned with the risk of  harm
                 to other people, because I  am  not  concerned  with  their
                 human rights."

      The conditions risked  here  was  a  return  to  his  state  on  first
      admission.

  6. The Adjudicator considered the circumstances here against Bensaid v UK
     and D v UK [1997] 24 EHRR 423 and said that this case was equivalent.

           "7.   Without  proper  medical  treatment,  the  Appellant  will
                 suffer acute mental suffering to the point  of  taking  his
                 own life.  This amounts to inhuman  treatment  contrary  to
                 Article 3."

  7. Adequate treatment could not be obtained in Pakistan:


           "8.   It may be the case that although the Appellant comes  from
                 a  remote  part  of  Azad  Kashmir,  he  would  obtain  the
                 medication he needs as set out at paragraph 6 of Dr  Kenny-
                 Herbert's Statement, although its cost would be a  problem.
                 However, it  is  evident  that  the  Appellant's  necessary
                 treatment amounts to far more  than  medication.   He  also
                 requires psychiatric supervision and treatment, and  social
                 work supervision according to the conditions imposed by the
                 Mental Health Review Tribunal.  This requirement is ongoing
                 and indefinite."


  8. Mental healthcare in Pakistan was not good, although there  were  good
     psychiatrists in the major  cities,  but  even  if,  implausibly,  the
     Claimant  could  gain  access  to  them,  there  would  still   be   a
     "substantial deficit" in access to emergency support and support  from
     social work staff.

  9. He concluded:

           "To summarise, I find that if removed to Pakistan, the Appellant
           would not be able to obtain the full package  of  treatment  and
           support he requires.  Without such  treatment  and  support,  he
           will relapse into a condition where he will suffer acute  mental
           anxiety, and harm himself to the point of taking his  own  life.
           His removal therefore amounts to inhuman treatment  contrary  to
           his rights under Article 3  of  the  ECHRFF,  and  is  therefore
           unlawful.  All this being the case, I will not consider  if  his
           removal would be contrary to his rights under Article 8."

 10. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were that there could be no
     breach of Article 3 once the Adjudicator had found that treatment  was
     available in Pakistan,  and  it  was  not  the  Secretary  of  State's
     responsibility to ensure that he received it.  Bensaid had set a  high
     threshold where the harm was not  the  direct  responsibility  of  the
     state.  The grounds promised a Home Office Presenting Officer for  the
     appeal.  None had been there to assist the Adjudicator.

 11. It is useful to note the  observations  of  Sedley  LJ  when  granting
     permission to appeal, remembering that they are only  observations  at
     that stage.

           "1.   I do not think it can be contested  that  the  adjudicator
                 erred in asking whether the  'full  package'  of  treatment
                 would  be  available  to  A  in  Pakistan.   The  IAT   was
                 accordingly right to form its own view, and no Subesh issue
                 arises.


           2.    What I think is cogently arguable is that the IAT went too
                 far in the opposite direction by treating the  availability
                 of good-quality  private  medical  services  in  the  major
                 cities,  and  the  local  availability  of  A's  drugs,  as
                 answering the question whether a  meaningful  or  effective
                 level of treatment (if that is the test) would be available
                 to A.  The  evidence  of  the  family's  circumstances  and
                 location makes  it  possible  to  contend  that  the  IAT's
                 decision was unrealistic."

 12. The Adjudicator's determination is rather brief in  its  reference  to
     the evidence which underlay the outcome and as the appeal before us is
     on fact and law, it is necessary to  consider  it  in  a  little  more
     detail so as to follow the submissions, and because the application of
     Article 3 is fact sensitive.  The relevant evidence is concerned  with
     the nature and severity of the Claimant's medical conditions  and  the
     reality of the availability to him of treatment for  those  conditions
     in Pakistan.

 13. Ms Webber for the Claimant submitted that the material,  which  showed
     the Claimant's condition before the offence, was relevant  to  how  he
     would be, were he to suffer a relapse following return.   He  had  had
     some seemingly minor problems with anxiety in his village in  Pakistan
     Kashmir according to his parents but he described  worse  symptoms  of
     his "mind going bad"  and  his  "head  exploding",  which  traditional
     healers had been  able  to  soothe.   These  had  been  the  untreated
     symptoms of mental illness, it was later concluded.   When  he  killed
     his wife he was depressed, feeling suicidal and  was  hearing  voices.
     In hospital here, there had been incidents of  head-banging,  attempts
     at  self-harm  and  he  received  anti-depressant  and  anti-psychotic
     medication.  A 1997 case conference felt  that  at  the  time  of  the
     offence he had been suffering from a severe  depressive  episode  with
     psychosis, although schizophrenia should also be  investigated.   This
     mental illness was a major contributory factor to the offence, but  he
     had  had  little  access  to  support   and   experienced   difficulty
     verbalising his concerns.   (He  was  illiterate,  without  education,
     speaking no English and had seen comparatively  little  of  his  wife,
     whom he had married in 1990 when she was sixteen, in order to come  to
     the United Kingdom to advance himself economically, according  to  his
     family).

 14. Dr Kenney-Herbert's opinion in 2000 was that the risk of  re-offending
     was sufficiently minimised that he could  be  managed  safely  in  the
     community with appropriate follow up.  This would  include  supervised
     accommodation, with someone who  could  understand  his  language  and
     cultural needs, with regular  monitoring  and  active  supervision  by
     health professional.  Regular anti-depressant and anti-psychotic drugs
     would be prescribed.

 15. Mr Parker for the Secretary of State argued that the decision  of  the
     MHRT in February 2001 that the Claimant  was  not  suffering  from  an
     illness which made it appropriate that he be liable  to  be  detained,
     even though he had suffered a relapse, showed the lesser  severity  of
     the Claimant's mental illness.  He had had unescorted leave,  and  his
     release was conditional on residence in an identified hostel which had
     agreed to take him.

 16. In February 2001, Dr Kenney-Herbert wrote to the  Secretary  of  State
     saying that the Claimant would become anxious and  distressed,  rather
     than violent, upon receipt of a deportation order.  Impending  removal
     would have a  deleterious  effect  on  his  mental  health  and  could
     precipitate a relapse.  He would need ongoing psychiatric treatment in
     the form of support and medication.   A  main  concern  would  be  the
     possibility of self harm.

 17. Dr Kenney-Herbert provided a further statement for the Adjudicator  in
     September 2002.  It described the anti-depressants and  anti-psychotic
     drugs which the  Claimant  took  and  the  drugs  against  their  side
     effects.  He was also an insulin  controlled  diabetic.   He  appeared
     then to be on insulin tablets;  (he may now inject).  He had not  been
     discharged.  The Claimant was said to be aware of the  mental  illness
     which had caused the offence and that he  would  need  to  be  treated
     indefinitely for it.  He was a basically honest  and  pleasant  person
     who was not inherently anti-social.  There was a  risk  of  aggression
     when he was unwell as he had demonstrated in an incident with  another
     patient although his escorted and unescorted leaves had  been  without
     incident.  The fairly  intensive  care  in  the  community  which  the
     Claimant would require included residence at  the  MIND  hostel,  with
     staff available by day and on call at night, with  someone  who  spoke
     the Claimant's language.  There would be regular nursing, social  work
     and day centre support for him.

 18. Dr Kenney-Herbert said that, given the Claimant's needs,  even  if  he
     were to have access to medication in  one  of  the  larger  cities  in
     Pakistan, "there is  a  serious  possibility  that  his  health  would
     deteriorate to the point where he became a risk both to himself and to
     other people".  Dr Kenney-Herbert had been informed by the  Claimant's
     consultant physician that, without insulin for his diabetes  mellitus,
     he would undoubtedly lapse into a coma and die  within  a  very  short
     period.  He concluded, referring to the Claimant's mental state:

           "As I have stated above, [               ]'s  illness  is  long-
           term and he may  in  fact  require  treatment  indefinitely.   I
           cannot stress too much the  potential  dangers  arising  from  a
           relapse.  That is a danger for both  [                ]  himself
           and  for  third  parties.   It  is   quite   possible   that   [
            ] was suffering from some form of mental illness when he was in
           Pakistan  but  that   this   went   undiagnosed.    Although   [
             ] is now aware of  his  illness  and  the  treatment  that  he
           requires, it is difficult if not  impossible  to  see  how  that
           treatment would be given to him if he is  forcibly  returned  to
           Pakistan.  In addition, he  will  be  thrown  into  a  state  of
           frustration  and   turmoil   if   this   deportation   proceeds.
           Therefore,  even  with  the  benefit  of  a  medical  escort  to
           Pakistan, once he was in Pakistan and responsible for himself it
           appears highly lightly that his health will rapidly  deteriorate
           to the point where he himself would be  harmed  and/or  he  will
           cause serious harm to other people.   I  believe  therefore  the
           decision to  proceed  with  his  deportation  has  very  serious
           implications both for [               ]'s  health  and  for  his
           life expectancy."

 19. The Adjudicator also had a village visit report from 1998 prepared  by
     a legal executive.  The Claimant's father and mother lived there  with
     their four other sons, who were all adults in their twenties or  early
     thirties.  The parents were in their sixties, unwell from a variety of
     conditions including diabetes; medication was purchased at the expense
     of food.  They were poor farmers with only two or  three  acres  which
     did not provide them with what they needed.   When  the  Claimant  had
     needed an operation when he was young, they  had  had  to  sell  their
     livestock and borrow money to fund it.  They could not afford  to  pay
     anything for  their  son's  mental  health  treatment.   None  of  the
     brothers had a job, and a little money was made   by illegal  fishing.
     The daughter was married and lived in another village in the area, but
     had no money to spare.

 20. There was evidence in the report that the  villagers  and  the  family
     clan had taken  against  the  family  because  of  the  killing,  that
     relatives in the United  Kingdom  no  longer  sent  the  family  money
     because of it, and  that  there  was  specific  ill-will  towards  the
     Claimant from a cousin's family which had wanted the deceased wife  to
     marry into their family.

 21. The town to which the villagers looked for their shopping and  medical
     needs  had  a  hospital,  at  least  one  doctor   who   charged   for
     consultations and where the medication required by  the  Claimant  was
     available at what by United Kingdom standards was a very low cost.  It
     was a very long journey by road but there was public  transport.   The
     more usual mode was by boat but that appeared to involve a day, except
     for a special fare, because of the timetable.  It would  be  a  costly
     journey even at the ordinary fare for those who had very little money.
      There appeared to be no specific facilities available in Kashmir  for
     those with mental disabilities.

 22. The content of this report so far as it related to travel and  medical
     facilities was largely accepted in a response from the High Commission
     and is reflected in the Adjudicator's determination.   The  drugs  for
     his mental illness were available locally  and  could  be  ordered  if
     necessary without prescription.  There  was  no  financial  assistance
     available to those who could not afford the good  quality  psychiatric
     treatment available in the larger cities.   In-patient  treatment  was
     available in the cities but to a  much  lower  standard  than  in  the
     United Kingdom.  The Claimant would be  unlikely  to  have  access  to
     adequate care even in the local town.  The family  circumstances  were
     confirmed and it was unlikely that the family could finance  any  long
     term medical  care.   The  village  report  and  the  High  Commission
     response were considered by the Secretary of State in his decision  of
     February 2002.

 23. It is convenient to set out here the  report  from  Dr  Kenney-Herbert
     which was produced after the Adjudicator's determination;  it is dated
     7 April 2003.  There is no later material.  In short he maintained his
     previous view:  without the  treatment,  ie  medication  and  support,
     which he had already  identified  as  necessary,  the  Claimant  would
     "relapse quickly into a state demonstrating a mixture of psychotic and
     depressive symptoms".  That would lead to a  high  risk  of  self-harm
     including attempted suicide.  The Claimant could not care for  himself
     in such a state.  Severe self-neglect would follow, and as an insulin-
     dependant diabetic, his health would be severely compromised.  Indeed,
     his life would be at a severe  risk.   Mr  Parker  stressed  that  the
     diabetes was diet and insulin controlled.

 24. Mr Parker's submissions for the Secretary of State emphasised the high
     threshold which had to be satisfied before Article 3 ECHR would permit
     someone to stay in the United Kingdom who otherwise had no right to do
     so.  Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 10, p205 illustrated the point.   The
     Applicant  was  a  schizophrenic  who  would  cease  to  receive   the
     particular drugs which he had in the United Kingdom, and might have to
     become  an  in-patient  to  receive  alternative  medication  at  some
     distance from his home with  the  stresses  of  a  terrorist  affected
     environment.  There was a risk of serious relapse but there was a risk
     of that were he to stay in the United Kingdom.  It was  accepted  that
     removal would arguably increase the risk  of  a  relapse  but  medical
     treatment was available to him.  It was accepted that the return of  a
     patient could in principle fall within Article 3.  But  the  essential
     feature to our mind of the Court's conclusions was that the  range  of
     risks and their severity were essentially speculative and so the  case
     had not been made out.

 25. Mr Parker's submissions relied particularly on N v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
     Civ 1369.  There, the appellant's life expectancy upon return would be
     reduced to two years;  itself a distressing  prospect  and  the  death
     would be painful and  distressing.   Laws  LJ,  paragraphs  40  -  41,
     emphasised the extreme and exceptional  nature  of  the  circumstances
     which had to exist for Article 3 to be breached in such  a  case.   It
     was insufficient that the case pressed strongly upon  one's  sympathy.
     D v UK [1997] 24 EHRR 423 could not be extended into  the  case  where
     simply the harsh effect of a want of resources in the home country was
     made harsher by the contrast  with  the  treatment  available  in  the
     United Kingdom.

           "40.  But I am no less clear that  D  should  be  very  strictly
                 confined.  I do not say that its confinement is to deathbed
                 cases;  that would be a coarse  rule  and  an  unwise  one:
                 there may be other instances which press with equal  force.
                 That said, in light of the considerations I have  described
                 I would hold that the application of Article  3  where  the
                 complaint in  essence  is  of  want  of  resources  in  the
                 applicant's home country (in  contrast  to  what  has  been
                 available to him in the country from  which  he  is  to  be
                 removed) is only justified where the humanitarian appeal of
                 the case is so powerful that it  could  not  in  reason  be
                 resisted by the authorities of  a  civilised  State.   This
                 does not, I acknowledge, amount  to  a  sharp  legal  test;
                 there are no sharp legal tests in this area.  I intend only
                 to emphasise that an Article 3 case of this  kind  must  be
                 based on facts which are not only exceptional, but extreme;
                  extreme, that is, judged in the context of  cases  all  or
                 many of which (like  this  one)  demand  one'  sympathy  on
                 pressing grounds.  On its facts, D  was  such  a  case.   I
                 consider that any broader view distorts the balance between
                 the demands of the general interest of the community, whose
                 service is conspicuously the duty  of  elected  government,
                 and the requirements of the protection of the  individual's
                 fundamental rights.  It is a balance inherent in the  whole
                 of the Convention:  see, for example, Soering paragraph 89.


           41.   Carnwath LJ observed in the course of argument that  there
                 was no evidence before us as to the numbers  of  actual  or
                 would-be immigrants to the UK whose  aspirations  to  enter
                 and remain here might be favoured if this appeal  succeeds.
                 With great respect he was plainly right to do so.   However
                 if on facts such as those of this case we were to  fix  the
                 Secretary of State with a legal obligation  to  permit  the
                 appellant to remain in the UK,  we  would  in  my  judgment
                 effect an unacceptable -  constitutionally  unacceptable  -
                 curtailment of the elected government's  power  to  control
                 the conditions of lawful immigration.   I  do  not  believe
                 that our benign obligations arising under the Human  Rights
                 Act 1998 require us  to  do  any  such  thing.   Quite  the
                 contrary;  our duty is to strike the very  balance  between
                 public  interest  and  private  right  to  which   I   have
                 referred."


 26. On the facts, Mr Parker submitted that they showed that the   Claimant
     would have family which could offer support and  detect  deterioration
     in his condition;  there was evidence that the parents had  illnesses,
     which they could treat in some way  including  diabetes,  and  so  the
     Claimant's condition could be managed.   They  could  seek  to  access
     treatment on an ad hoc basis or try to earn more money.  D was a  much
     more severe case involving a very short life span, and  death  without
     any support or comfort.  If his family  were  turned  against  him  he
     could relocate.  He would have the support  of  those  who  spoke  his
     language in a culture to which he was attuned unlike his  position  in
     the United Kingdom in the absence  of  particular  steps  being  taken
     here.  He was unaware of any specific measures which would be taken by
     the Secretary of State to assist his return but he did not think  that
     the Claimant would just be returned without more.

 27. Ms Webber submitted that Sedley LJ had identified the relevant  issues
     in the permission decision:  what was  available  and  what  were  the
     consequences of the treatment which he  would  otherwise  receive  not
     being available?  The whole package  was  relevant  to  effective  and
     meaningful treatment according to the medical evidence.  By  this  was
     meant, in the language of the Adjudicator, effective to prevent  acute
     mental suffering to the point of suicide.  By contrast,  the  evidence
     showed that in Pakistan he would face ostracism, a polarised community
     and the loss of the support of the  extended  family  because  of  the
     disputed marriage in the first place.  It was necessary to look at the
     practical availability of treatment to the Claimant and  not  just  at
     the existence of treatment within Pakistan for some.

 28. If the Claimant could not access treatment in Pakistan he would become
     a risk to  others,  and  subjecting  someone  to  a  risk  of  such  a
     personality change would itself amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  3.
     Applying R (Soumahoro) v SSHD EWCA Civ  840,  [2003]  INLR  543,  once
     there was a real risk of suicide it was for the Secretary of State  to
     show that  there  were  adequate  means  to  prevent  such  a  serious
     exacerbation of the mental illness.  It would not be  enough  to  show
     that the Claimant might be arrested.   The  evidence  was  clear  that
     medication was required.  But there had been no clear finding  on  the
     cost of medication.  The costs from the village report showed that  it
     could be Rs 4000-5000, for a family on the very  edge  of  sustainable
     life.  The Adjudicator's conclusion was right  even  if  the  lack  of
     availability of parts of the "whole package"  could  not  itself  show
     that Article 3 would be breached.  N v SSHD  should  be  distinguished
     because the risk of suicide was unlike the consequence of a  naturally
     occurring illness;  it involved suffering  which  was  inherently  the
     more  acute.   This  case   involved   survival   and   not   relative
     disadvantage.  In the United Kingdom, relapse  was  unlikely  and  its
     consequences were the more readily controlled.  In Pakistan  he  faced
     relapse, self-harm to the point of suicide, a lack of insulin and  the
     risk of attack from his extended family.

 29. This case showed the  qualities  of  exceptional  circumstances  which
     would make it a breach of Article 3 to remove the Claimant because  of
     the  compelling  humanitarian  considerations.   Article  8  was  also
     engaged even though the Adjudicator did not deal with it in the  light
     of his conclusions on Article 3.

Conclusions

 30. We take the view that in any Article 3 or Article 8 case of this sort,
     it is essential that the facts, so  far  as  they  are  ascertainable,
     should be clearly found.  It is then that the  judgment  can  be  made
     about whether return would meet  the  high  threshold  required  under
     Article 3 or what is now to be seen as the near  equivalent  threshold
     under Article 8, once the legitimate interests of immigration  control
     are allowed for.  This reflects the conclusion of the House  of  Lords
     in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 3  WLR  58  paragraph  20.
     But these cases are fact sensitive, and the question of  whether  they
     cross that threshold or not requires care in the finding of the facts,
     particularly where a case at first sight could cross the threshold.

 31. We were surprised that there had been  no  apparent  consideration  in
     this case as to how the return was to be  effected.   We  assume  that
     there would be any necessary medical  care  available  on  the  flight
     back.  But it struck us as surprising that the Secretary of State  was
     unable to help as to whether any special arrangements would be made to
     alert the Pakistan authorities that someone with the Claimant's mental
     illness was  returning,  so  that  they  could  consider  whether  any
     measures of care or protection would apply  to  him.   It  simply  was
     assumed by both  parties  that  after  arrival  at  the  international
     airport, the Claimant would find his own way to his own village.

 32.  We  asked  for  submissions,  during  the  course  of   writing   the
     determination, about the effect of section 86 of the Mental Health Act
     1983,  which  seemed  relevant  to  this  point.   It   provides   for
     restrictions on the removal of aliens who are subject to a section  37
     order as here.  Those restrictions require prior arrangements with the
     recipient country for the care of the patient, and the approval of the
     MHRT.  Ms Webber helpfully referred us to X v SSHD [2001] INLR 205  in
     which the Court of Appeal had held that this section ran  in  parallel
     with the Immigration Act regime and did not impose the sole  route  by
     which an alien patient could be  removed.   Nonetheless,  the  factors
     which were relevant to the exercise of the 1983 Act powers  were  also
     relevant to the exercise of any immigration powers.

 33. The contrast between the available powers under the 1983 Act  to  seek
     provision for the care of a returned alien under those provisions  and
     the stance adopted on  the  material  laid  before  us  could  not  be
     starker.  Even were  the  Claimant  to  be  treated  as  conditionally
     discharged, it is striking that no attempt appears to have  been  made
     to make arrangements for his return  with  the  Pakistan  authorities.
     Such arrangements might have removed even an  arguable  case  about  a
     breach of Article 3.

 34. However, that is not the position before us nor was  it  the  position
     before the Adjudicator and we have to reach a decision in the light of
     the material before us.

 35. We note that Sedley LJ said that the Adjudicator had erred  in  asking
     whether the whole package of treatment would be available in Pakistan,
     which it would not be.  It is plainly right that a difference  between
     the treatment available in the United Kingdom and in  Pakistan  cannot
     of itself  engage  Article  3  or  8.   So,  if  the  Adjudicator  had
     determined that a breach of Article 3 arose simply because  the  whole
     package was unavailable, he would have erred.

 36. In reality, the Adjudicator did not  actually  make  that  error.   He
     accepted the medical evidence as he was entitled to.  That was to  the
     effect that the whole package  was  necessary  to  prevent  a  relapse
     leading to acute anxiety and a greater risk  of  suicide.   The  whole
     package was relevant to the medical consequences.  It was the risk  of
     those medical consequences which was then said to  be  the  breach  of
     Article 3.  That may or may not be a tenable conclusion as we  discuss
     later.  But it is not the arguable error seen by Sedley LJ.

 37. This is, however, an appeal on fact and law;  subject to Subesh v SSHD
     [2004] EWCA Civ 56, we are entitled to examine the facts.  We can also
     take into account the later evidence from Dr Kenney-Herbert.

 38. We agree with Sedley LJ's other and related  comment.  It  is  not  in
     principle enough that the treatment, whether it replicates that  which
     the claimant enjoyed in the United Kingdom or is something  of  lesser
     value, is available in the country to  which  the  Claimant  would  be
     returned.  That is of marginal relevance, if  it  would  not  actually
     benefit the Claimant because he could not pay for  it  or  receive  it
     through charitable sources or because he could  not  reach  the  place
     where it was available or live there for other reasons.  The  question
     of access in this context is one which requires the  factual  position
     to be ascertained.  Even if the treatment in question  is  beyond  the
     Claimant's access for whatever reason, it does  not  follow  that  his
     return would breach Articles 3 or  8.   The  question  is  not  solely
     whether he can access the full treatment which he needs;  that is part
     of the factual matrix but does not determine the outcome.

 39. A breach of Article 3 requires a case  to  pass  the  high  thresholds
     exemplified in the cases and which demand, through  their  exceptional
     and compelling humanitarian circumstances that a person should not  be
     returned to his own country, even though what he would face  there  is
     not  imposed  ill-treatment  but  circumstances  which   reflect   the
     conditions of life for the inhabitants and  which  do  not  themselves
     necessarily breach Article 3.

 40. We first focus on the mental illness.  The mental health evidence  was
     that the Claimant needed medication and supervision.  Without both  of
     those components, in this country, there would be a serious risk  that
     his mental health would deteriorate to such an extent  that  he  would
     become a risk to  himself.   If  he  were  in  Pakistan  without  such
     treatment and support he would rapidly deteriorate "to the point where
     he himself would be harmed and/or he will cause harm to other people",
     adopting the words of Dr Kenny-Herbert.  Later he said, but it was not
     before the Adjudicator, that there would be a high risk  of  self-harm
     including attempted suicide.

 41. The suggestion that the family would be able  to  offer  some  of  the
     support and  supervision,  which  would  otherwise  have  to  be  done
     professionally here, has some force.  First, part of  the  reason  why
     his mental health worsened in the United Kingdom seems  to  have  been
     that he was wholly out of his depth and culture, which would not be so
     back in his own country.  Second, family can offer  advice,  restraint
     and sympathy up to a point, and although it could not be described  as
     treatment, it would be capable of easing the burdens  of  anxiety  and
     stress for some.  In this case, however, the family are less likely to
     be able to help in that way.  He has killed his wife and that  created
     a problem which he would face in his life back  in  his  home  village
     when trying to live a life with other villagers.  Indeed,  they  could
     become a serious threat particularly if he is seen as  behaving  in  a
     strange way.  His family faces a degree of internal  conflict  because
     of the contentious circumstances of the marriage anyway.  The Claimant
     is not one who enjoys the support of a large extended family;  he is a
     serious problem for them because of his mental  illness,  the  killing
     and the previous but related family dispute over the marriage  in  the
     first place.  He cannot realistically expect to get employment in  his
     village and it is entirely speculative as to  whether  he  could  hold
     down any form of employment were it available, or find any other means
     of obtaining the wherewithal to live.  The description of  the  family
     does not suggest that they could help out for long or as a  matter  of
     routine.  The cost of travel to the town to obtain medication would be
     high for those on the margin as his family appears to be.  The cost of
     treatment is such that there is no real prospect that he would be able
     to access the medication available in the nearest town.  If he were to
     move away, such support as they could provide would inevitably cease.

 42. The Claimant would return to the village were he  lived  most  of  his
     life and where he has family  who  would  provide  some  material  and
     emotional support.  He would be unlikely to obtain medication for  his
     physical and mental illnesses, but there would be some support of  the
     sort which family can give.

 43. The upshot of those factors is that the  return  of  the  Claimant  is
     likely to mean that he would face an increasing mental  illness  which
     creates a serious risk that he would commit  suicide  within  what  is
     likely to be a fairly short time scale.  He  would  receive  treatment
     for his mental illness in the United Kingdom, however, which he  could
     never have received in Pakistan.  There would be a  very  considerable
     reduction in life expectancy because in the United Kingdom he would be
     treated indefinitely.  He would experience a rapid decline in his well-
     being.

 44. We have to add to this that the effects of  the  mental  and  physical
     illnesses are cumulative and not separate.  He would  be  coping  with
     the effects of diabetes and that would affect his mental stability.

 45. We consider that the Adjudicator overstated the position to  a  degree
     when he says that without proper medical treatment, the Claimant would
     suffer acute mental suffering to the point of taking his own life and,
     later in the determination, that he will take his own life.  It  is  a
     real risk, indeed there would be a high risk of attempted suicide  and
     a greater risk than were the Claimant to stay in the  United  Kingdom,
     but the Adjudicator expresses the point with a certainty and immediacy
     of suicide which the mental health evidence does not in our reading of
     it contain.  That comment reflects a difference of degree in appraisal
     of the material.

 46. This is not a case as demanding as the facts of D, but it is  not  the
     case that they have to be equivalent in order for a breach of  Article
     3 to be made out.  It illustrates  the  level  of  severity  necessary
     rather than defining it.  But we regard the Adjudicator's equiparation
     of this case with D's  to  be  an  unsustainable  overstatement.   Key
     features of D are set out in N, but we would wish  to  emphasise  what
     seem to us to be the aspects which really struck at  the  humanitarian
     basis for the case.  It was not that by enabling  D  to  stay  in  the
     United Kingdom that his  life  expectancy  would  be  prolonged.   The
     Strasbourg Court made no finding on the claim that Article 2 would  be
     breached because of  the  shortened,  halved,  life  expectancy  which
     removal to St Kitts would cause.  It was that his life expectancy  was
     very short anyway wherever  he  was.   By  the  time  he  reached  the
     Strasbourg Court, it had dropped from eight-twelve months to  four-six
     months so as to be giving rise to "concern", ie not that he was poorly
     but that death was imminent.  The inhumanity of removal arose from the
      fact that a man dying imminently and inevitably would die without the
     palliatives and surroundings which provided solace and with  which  he
     had prepared for death.  There as a sense in  which  the  removal  was
     pointless - no possible public good but only personal harm could  come
     from it.  It is not a case about conditions of life so much  as  about
     conditions of death, imminent either way.  It is certainly not a  case
     about prolonging  life  expectancy  nor  the  receipt  of  life-saving
     medication.

 47. We would regard this as a case, in mental illness terms, approximately
     comparable in its demands on humanity as that of N.   The  Adjudicator
     did not have the benefit of the decision in  N  when  he  reached  his
     determination.  We cannot say that life expectancy would be as long as
     or longer than N's two years, because the reports are not  couched  in
     years but through vaguer descriptors.  And it would be wrong to  treat
     the circumstances there as imposing some specific timescale test to be
     satisfied in other cases.  This is not a deathbed  case  and  the  law
     does not require it to be for Article 3 to be engaged but that sort of
     case exemplifies the extreme nature of the case which has to be shown.
      The Claimant has been in this country for eight years now but that is
     because he has been detained in hospital after killing his wife  which
     he did shortly after his arrival.  The mere time which he has spent in
     this country does not therefore engage any  particular  obligation  in
     the way in which other cases might where someone  has  been  a  fairly
     long time in the United Kingdom.

 48. What is striking about N is not so much the judgment  of  Carnwath  LJ
     that on those facts, an Adjudicator could decide either way on Article
     3, but that the majority held that the range of  reasonable  decisions
     was not so broad as to permit that case to be held to involve a breach
     of Article 3.  The  range  of  reasonable  factual  assessments  falls
     within a very narrow compass.  On  factual  appraisal,  strong  Subesh
     level disagreement can readily arise where the  range  of  permissible
     factual assessments is small.

 49. It follows to our mind that  the  circumstances  in  which  facts  can
     lawfully be held to involve a breach of Article 3, where removal would
     be to circumstances which do not themselves breach Article 3  (and  it
     was not suggested that they did), must be  not  just  exceptional  but
     extreme so as to engage very strong, indeed  compelling,  humanitarian
     considerations.  Those might be considered to arise where no civilised
     person of ordinary sensibilities would cause such avoidable suffering.
      This case does not come within that category,  or  even  particularly
     close to it.

 50. Although this case involves a mental illness and risk of suicide, that
     does not bring in any different test for the purposes  of  Article  3.
     The extremity of circumstances to engage Article 3 does not vary.  The
     nature of suicide from mental illness, with the associated despair  or
     anguish, may more readily excite humanitarian  considerations  than  a
     physical illness, but the answers are unlikely to be much  clearer  in
     an individual case by attributing any preconceived differential weight
     to the different forms of illness which may face judges.

 51. It is the case, however, that mental illness and an increased risk  of
     suicide through the effect of removal are  capable  also  of  engaging
     Article 8.  It seems to us that the effect of removal  is  capable  of
     interfering with the rights in Article  8(1).   But  the  interference
     then can be  justified  under  Article  8(2),  or  otherwise,  by  the
     legitimate interests of immigration control which here can include the
     public interest served by giving effect  to  the  deportation  of  the
     Claimant following a court recommendation.  In R v Special Adjudicator
     ex parte Ullah [2004] UKHL 26, [2004] Imm AR 419, the House  of  Lords
     agreed (paragraph 24) with what the Tribunal had  said  in  Devaseelan
     [2002] UKIAT 702, a flagrant denial  or  gross  violation  had  to  be
     shown;  only where the right would be completely denied  or  nullified
     that there would be a breach of ECHR by the removing state.

 52.  As  Lord  Steyn  put  it,  (paragraph  30),   only   in   exceptional
     circumstances as in D, could someone subject to  expulsion  claim  any
     entitlement to remain in order to benefit from medical  assistance  in
     the expelling state.  But, (paragraph 47), it was the real risk  of  a
     flagrant violation which engaged  Article  8.   This  point  does  not
     appear to have concluded the Article 8 issue, because a  breach  would
     then depend on the application of Article 8(2).  But the general theme
     of the  speeches  is  that  the  flagrancy  has  to  reach  the  level
     equivalent to that of a breach of Article 3;  it  is  irrelevant  then
     what justification Article 8(2) might proffer.

 53. The Article 8 issue was considered in more detail in R v SSHD ex parte
     Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] Imm AR 381.   It  makes  it  clear  that
     Article 8 can be engaged by the consequences  of  removal  for  mental
     health, ie Article 8(1) rights exist and would be interfered with, but
     that interference may be justified by legitimate  immigration  control
     and other public interests;  see paragraph 3 and 10.  In  the  latter,
     Lord Bingham, agreeing largely with the Tribunal in Kacaj  [2002]  Imm
     AR 213, that legitimate immigration  control  would  almost  certainly
     meant that interference under Article  8(2)  would  be  proportionate,
     said that the degree of overstatement in that comment was small:

           "Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of immigration
           control will be proportionate in all save a  small  minority  of
           exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis."

 54. The theme, that the cases failing under Article 3 but succeeding under
     Article 8 would be small in number, was repeated by others.   Although
     Baroness Hale dissented in the result, her  comment  in  paragraph  59
     that in striking the balance, only the  most  compelling  humanitarian
     considerations were likely to prevail  over  the  legitimate  aims  of
     immigration control or public safety were in harmony  with  the  other
     speeches.

 55. Lord Carswell in paragraph 72 put it this way:

           "For the reasons given by your Lordships in  the  appeals  of  R
           (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator and Do v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [2004] UKHL 26, it must now be accepted that
           in principle article 8 could exceptionally  be  engaged  by  the
           foreseeable consequences for health of removal from  the  United
           Kingdom pursuant to an immigration decision, even though they do
           not amount to a violation of  article  3.   In  order  to  bring
           himself within such an exceptional engagement of article  3  the
           applicant has to  establish  a  very  grave  state  of  affairs,
           amounting to a flagrant or fundamental breach  of  the  article,
           which in effect constitutes a complete denial of his rights.  It
           is necessary accordingly to consider the present case  in  order
           to determine whether an adjudicator could arguable find that the
           removal decision is a breach of article 8."

 56. The specific consideration of suicide in R (Soumahoro) v  SSHD  [2003]
     EWCA 840, a case heard with Razgar in the Court of Appeal, has been to
     a considerable extent overtaken.  It identifies that a real risk or  a
     significantly increased risk of suicide on removal can engage  Article
     3 so that the case could not be treated as manifestly  unfounded.   It
     was a certificated case and not a case on the final decision.  It  was
     arguable that those circumstances engaged Article 3, and  were  not  a
     definitive test for its breach.   It  preceded  N,  and  although  not
     specifically overturned,  the  analysis  in  N  of  the  extremity  of
     circumstances involving a breach of Article 3  must  apply  to  mental
     illness, and Soumahoro must be read with that  in  mind.   The  Razgar
     questions shows how Article 8 should be approached  and  paragraph  20
     indicates that the application of Articles 3 and 8 to the same factors
     are likely to produce overall similar results.

 57. We do not consider this case is one in which Article 3  and  8  should
     lead to different results.

 58. We have considered the material thus far on the basis that the concern
     was the impact of a lack of treatment for his  mental  illness,  which
     might compound problems created by his diabetes.  It was an adjunct to
     that claim.  That is how the  case  was  argued  before  us  (see  the
     skeleton) and it is essentially how  the  Adjudicator  considered  it.
     There were references to diabetes but as an adjunct rather than  as  a
     separate issue.  It does not affect our conclusions.  If he delays his
     insulin or omits it occasionally because  of  his  mental  health,  it
     would not be fatal and the difficulties it  created  would  be  fairly
     readily observable by others or noticeable to him.

 59. Paragraph 3 of the Adjudicator's determination refers in one  sentence
     to an argument that Article 2 would be  breached  because  "inadequate
     treatment" for his diabetes could not be obtained, which would lead to
     the loss of his life.  But the evidence before the Adjudicator on  the
     cost and availability of drugs, whether from the  High  Commission  or
     the village report, is clearly dealing with mental illness.  The  cost
     and availability of insulin is simply not referred to.   There  is  no
     specific evidence about  it.   Article  2  is  not  discussed  in  the
     determination.  The Adjudicator's conclusions about  the  availability
     of treatment cannot be read as considering insulin;  this  is  because
     he is dealing with the evidence  of  the  availability  of  treatmetn,
     which only related to treatment in the context of  mental  health  and
     Article 3.  Indeed, it might be thought that the very consideration of
     Article 3 involved an assumption that insulin for diabetes  would  not
     be a significant problem.  If it  were,  then  Article  3  and  mental
     health would have been irrelevant because of the  potential  speed  of
     death for an insulin-controlled diabetic who has no insulin.

 60. The Tribunal's first decision referred only generally to  the  general
     availability of medical services in Pakistan and  the  appeal  to  the
     Court of Appeal made no  reference  to  Article  2  and  diabetes,  or
     insulin.

 61. We consider that the Secretary of  State  has  made  good  his  appeal
     against the Adjudicator's determination.  There  was  no  cross-appeal
     seeking to support it on a different Article 2  basis.   There  is  no
     evidence from the Claimant to show the lack of availability of insulin
     in Pakistan.  The evidence and submissions do not deal with it.  There
     is from the CIPU Reports some general  material  which  precludes  any
     definitive negative answer on its availability or cost, but  does  not
     dictate a positive answer either.  It is for the Claimant to make  out
     his claim;  he has not done so.

 62. In these circumstances, we do not propose  to  remit  the  matter  for
     findings of fact to be made on that issue.  It  may  not  even  be  at
     issue in fact, in the light of the way the case  was  put.   We  would
     have expected it to feature somewhat larger were it in reality the key
     issue.  Diabetes is not an uncommon illness in Pakistan.   If  insulin
     were now said to not be available in  Pakistan  to  the  Claimant,  he
     could contemplate a fresh claim.

 63. If insulin were not to be available to the Claimant in  Pakistan,  the
     rapidity of death compared  to  a  much  longer  life  in  the  United
     Kingdom, ignoring any mental illness, could give rise to  a  difficult
     issue about the relationship between diminished  life  expectancy  and
     perpetual medical treatment, and staying in this  country  to  receive
     it.

 64. However, for the reasons which we have given, this appeal is  allowed.
     It is reported for what we say about the approach to the  availability
     of treatment and the assessment of Article 3 and 8 cases.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


