

RA and Others (Particular Social Group - Women) Bangladesh [2005] UKIAT
00070


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing: 7 January 2005
                                                  Date Signed:  1 March 2005
      Date Determination Notified 10 March 2005



                                   Before:




                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice-President)

                                 Mr D Allen


                               Mr A E Armitage


Between
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ghaffar of Counsel
      Instructed by Edward Ismail Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr R Holmes
                    Home Office Presenting Officer


The claimant (the principal appellant) appeals with permission  against  the
determination of an Adjudicator, Ms S B Kirvan,  who  dismissed  her  appeal
against the Secretary of State's refusal to recognise her as a  refugee  and
the setting of removal directions to Bangladesh.

Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Adjudicator  accepted
that the claimant had been a victim of domestic violence, though not  of  an
acid attack, as she alleged.  This appeal was listed as a potential  country
guidance  case  on  the  situation  for  victims  of  domestic  violence  in
Bangladesh.  The appeal had previously  been  remitted  afresh.   The  first
Adjudicator  allowed  the  appeal  and  the  Secretary  of  State   appealed
successfully  on  the  basis  that  the  Adjudicator  had   not   considered
sufficiency of protection or internal relocation (these matters are set  out
in the present Grounds of Appeal  and  the  Tribunal  understands  that  the
claimant  may  be  concerned  that  having  succeeded   before   the   first
Adjudicator, her appeal was dismissed on remittal).

Following CA [2004] EWCA All ER (D) 354, it is not enough for  an  appellant
to disagree with the Adjudicator's findings of  fact.    There  must  be  an
error of law (including an error of fact  at  the  level  of  perversity  or
Wednesbury unreasonableness.  The Tribunal asked Mr Ghaffar to set  out  the
error of law disclosed by his Grounds of Appeal.  He indicated  that  ground
1 of the Grounds of Appeal should be treated as a recital.   The  issue  for
the Tribunal was whether women in Bangladesh who were  subject  to  domestic
violence  constituted  a  particular  social  group.   He  relied  upon  the
cumulative effect of the threats received by the claimant  at  her  parents'
home.  She is still married to the abusive  husband.   He  argued  that  the
claimant would be unsafe at her parents' home, as they had  repeatedly  sent
their daughter back to the home of her in-laws, or to her marital home.

For  the  Respondent,  Mr  Holmes  argued  that  sufficient  protection  was
available.  It was not  necessary  under  Horvath  for  that  protection  to
amount to a guarantee.  There had been  no  incidents  of  violence  to  the
claimant at her  parents'  home,  and  there  would  be  legal  avenues  and
parental support available to her on return.  If she chose  to  exercise  an
internal relocation option, her parents  could  assist  her  and  she  could
simply move away from her husband.

The Adjudicator's reasoning was correct and  sound.   It  displayed  neither
perversity nor irrationality and was supported  by  the  objective  evidence
(CIPU Country Report October  2004,  paragraph  6.81).   On  the  particular
facts of this case, the Article 3 and asylum thresholds were not reached:  t
he claimant had shown her ability to engage State protection  (BHRC  letter)
and the Bangladeshi State was willing to assist her.  Paragraph 6.84 of  the
same  CIPU  Country  Report  indicated  that  shelters  were  available  and
paragraph 6.90 showed the actions being taken by the Bangladeshi  Government
to address this issue. Enforcement was weaker in rural areas but  better  in
Dhaka.  Free legal help was available from the BNWLA.

Further, some areas  of  Bangladesh  were  less  conservative  and  did  not
tolerate domestic violence.  The claimant's  husband  was  concerned  as  to
what people would say if he did harm her.  He asked the Tribunal to  dismiss
the appeal.

 In reply, Mr Ghaffar asked us to look at paragraphs 6.81 and  6.84  of  the
CIPU Country Report for October 2004.   The  police  were  manipulative  and
prepared to do 'deals' with the perpetrators.  The claimant's view was  that
her husband had been worried what society would perceive, but  still  wished
her harm.  The Adjudicator had not addressed the police not wishing to  help
her.

The Tribunal reserved its determination for postal delivery,  which  we  now
give.  We remind ourselves of the core facts which the Adjudicator  accepted
(he considered that there was some embellishment of the  claimant's  account
at the hearing). The marriage was an unhappy one, and during the  last  year
in Bangladesh (2002) the claimant was constantly coming  and  going  between
her parents' home and that of  her  husband.    She  received  quite  severe
injuries in August 2002 and a family friend advised her parents to send  her
out of the country.  They paid an agent to achieve this.

Before leaving, she reported her husband to  the  police,  saying  that  her
husband desired to go to Kuwait and was beating her  to  make  her  bring  a
handsome amount of money from her father's house.  Other  persons  had  told
her that her husband was planning to throw acid on her.   She  had  attended
the Bangladesh Human Rights Commission and complained of the  same  matters,
the preceding day.  The claimant also  approached  a  women's  organisation,
which referred her to the police.  She was staying  at  her  parents'  house
and the police took a full note of her complaint, but the claimant  did  not
stay in Bangladesh to see whether they would act to protect her.

The Adjudicator considered all the objective evidence to which we  have  now
been referred, including the Dowry Protection  Act,  the  Cruelty  to  Women
Law, and the Women and Children Repression Prevention  Act.   He  considered
that domestic protection was available at  the  appropriate  standard,  that
her parents would again assist, and that internal  relocation  was  also  an
option.  Bangladesh is a very large country; it has a population  in  excess
of 129 million and a land mass of 57000 square miles.  Freedom  of  movement
is respected in the main (paragraph 6.58).

We looked at the passages in the CIPU for October 2004 to which the  parties
referred us, paragraphs 6.81-6.94, of which the material parts are  set  out
below -
"6.81 The State party report to the United Nations Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), dated 3
January 2003, comments: "Bangladesh is a gradually changing society where
the position, status and roles of men and women have primarily been shaped
by the stereotype of male predominance and authority over women." The
report notes: "Traditional socio-cultural values and practices work against
raising the status of women. Women still have limited opportunities for
education, technical and vocational training, employment and activities."
..."According to the Constitution, women enjoy the same status and rights
as men in terms of education, health, political process, employment,
development processes and social welfare.
However, in practice, they do not enjoy the fundamental rights and freedom
to the extent as men do. The unequal status of women in society and in
public life is largely due to the fact of having unequal status in the
family life. Women's lower socio-economic status, lower literacy, lesser
mobility are some of the practical obstacles to the establishment of their
fundamental rights."
The same report details recent initiatives both by the government and by
NGOs to reduce discrimination and gender-based oppression. CEDAW, in its
'Concluding Comments' dated 26 July 2004, urged the Bangladesh Government
to implement comprehensive awareness-raising programmes to change
stereotypical attitudes and norms about the roles of women; CEDAW also
expressed concern over the unequal status of Bangladeshi women within the
family and the fact that personal laws, derived from religious precepts
which are discriminatory to women, continued to exist in the country.
6.82 USSD 2003 notes:

      "Laws specifically prohibit certain forms of discrimination against
      women, including the Dowry Prohibition Act, the Cruelty to Women Law,
      and the Women and Children Repression Prevention Act. However,
      enforcement of these laws was weak. The Women and Children Repression
      Prevention Act provides special procedures for persons accused of
      violence against women and children. The law calls for harsher
      penalties, provides compensation to victims, and requires action
      against investigating officers for negligence or wilful failure in
      duty. An amendment to this act was passed on July 20 [2003], weakening
      provisions for dowry crimes and attempting to address the issue of
      suicide committed by female victims of acts of "dishonor.""

6.83 USSD 2003 adds:

      "In recent years, female school enrolment has improved. Approximately
      50 percent of primary and secondary school students were female. Women
      often were ignorant of their rights because of continued high
      illiteracy rates and unequal educational opportunities. Strong social
      stigmas and lack of means to obtain legal assistance frequently kept
      women from seeking redress in the courts. Many NGOs operated programs
      to raise women's awareness of their rights, and to encourage and
      assist them in exercising those rights. The Government also expanded
      incentives for female education by making education free for girls up
      to grade 12 (approximately age 18) and using a stipend system from
      grades 6 to 12. By comparison, boys received free education up to
      grade five."

6.84 As noted in USSD 2003 "Domestic violence was widespread, although
violence against women was difficult to quantify because of unreliable
statistics and societal inhibitions about reporting such violence. Much of
the reported violence against women was related to disputes over dowries.
According to human rights organizations, there were 261 dowry-related
killings during the year [2003]...Incidents of vigilantism against women-
sometimes led by religious leaders (i.e. via fatwas) - at times occurred,
particularly in rural areas. These included punishments such as the
whipping of women accused of moral offences. "

The Bangladesh Daily Star of 14 August 2003 reported that the results of a
study conducted by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), titled
'Assessing male psycho-socio attitudes towards violence against women',
were presented at a workshop in Dhaka on 13 August; the former deputy
representative of UNFPA was quoted as saying: "Sixty-five per cent of
Bangladeshi males think it is justifiable to beat up their wives, 38 per
cent have no clear idea what constitutes physical violence and 40 per cent
support keeping women socially dormant".

According to a report of the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board dated
12 January 2004, a study reported by UNFPA's 'The State of the World
Population' for 2000 found that 47 per cent of the women surveyed in
Bangladeshi villages claimed physical abuse by their male partners. A State
Party report to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),
published 14 March 2003, notes that under the Suppression of Violence
against Women and Children Act 2000 violence against a wife by, or on
behalf of, a husband carries a penalty of 5-14 years imprisonment if injury
is caused, and a maximum penalty of life imprisonment for causing or
attempting to cause the wife's death. USSD 2003 states: "The Women Affairs
Department ran six shelters, one each in the six divisional headquarters,
for abused women and children."

6.87 ... According to the State Party report dated 14 March 2003 to the UN
CRC, the Suppression of Violence against Women and Children Act 2000
carries the death penalty or life imprisonment for rape if death or injury
results or is intended. Attempted rape is subject to a penalty of 5-10
years imprisonment. Amnesty International's 2004 Annual Report (covering
events of 2003) stated: "Women's rights groups blamed the low rate of
convictions for violence against women on a lack of government institutions
to support the victims and a lack of trained police officers to investigate
the cases."

6.89 .... In March 2002, the Government enacted legislation to control the
availability of acid and reduce acid violence directed towards women, but
lack of awareness of the law and poor application limited its impact. The
new Acid Crime Control Law provides for speedier prosecutions in special
tribunals and generally does not allow bail."

6.90 The State party report to CEDAW dated 3 January 2003 confirms that two
new laws were introduced in 2002 - the Acid Crime Prevention Act 2002 and
the Acid Control Act 2002 - to restrict the import and sale of acid in open
markets, allow for trials in acid throwing cases by a special tribunal
(with a right of appeal to a higher court) to make the maximum punishment
for acid throwing offences the death penalty and to provide for the
treatment and rehabilitation of victims. The Canadian Immigration and
Refugee Board, in a report of 12 January 2004, quoted NGO representatives
to a 2003 meeting on violence against women as alleging that police, in
return for money, had been charging perpetrators under the Women and
Children Repression Prevention Act instead of the more severe Acid Control
Act. In a statement by the Asian Legal Resource Centre to the UN Economic
and Social Council, dated 10 March 2003, it was stated that the Bangladesh
National Women Lawyers Association and the Bangladesh Acid Survivor's
Foundation estimated that only 10 per cent of attackers were ever brought
to trial. Further, that the total number of acid attacks against women was
difficult to document because many cases went unreported for fear of
reprisals."

It is clear from the CIPU that the Bangladeshi State takes the  question  of
spousal abuse seriously and has acted to  reduce  and  prevent  violence  to
women.  Although many women do not know their rights, this  woman  does  and
has not hesitated to contact the police.  She has social  support  from  her
family and she has sufficient strength to make a fresh life  away  from  her
home village.  If her husband were  minded  to  cause  her  difficulties  in
future, the evidence shows that she could relocate, take  shelter,  or  have
him prosecuted.  The standard of  protection  available  meets  the  Horvath
standard.

on the question of particular social group, we have  been  assisted  by  the
careful  analysis  of  the  present  jurisprudence  in  HM  (Somali   women,
particular social group)Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00040 which is encapsulated  in
paragraph 22 of that determination -

      "22.  It is clear from the above that for the PSG  requirement  to  be
      met in respect of women in a particular country, there must  not  only
      be a combination of measures of  legal  and  societal  discrimination;
      these must also reach a certain level and intensity: see paragraphs 65
      and  79:  'What  is  striking  about  evidence  in  Pakistan  was  the
      widespread and intense nature of the discrimination'."

The objective evidence in Bangladesh is not as extreme as in Pakistan.   The
authorities are addressing the question  vigorously,  and  whilst  there  is
discrimination, we do not consider that it is at the Shah and  Islam  level.
We do not find  that  the  objective  evidence  establishes  that  women  in
Bangladesh are a particular social group.

We have  considered  whether  the  Adjudicator's  determination  is  legally
erroneous in its application of the objective evidence to the  facts  found.
We find that it is not; the Adjudicator's determination is  fully  supported
by the objective evidence and there is no error of law in her approach.

For all the above reasons, the claimant's appeal is dismissed.





Date: 1 March 2005                           J A J C Gleeson
                                        Vice-President

|Status of Determination                                           |
|(please tick as many as appropriate)                              |
|Starred                                       |                  |
|Country Guideline                             |                  |
|Reported                                      |                  |
|Unreported                                    |                  |
|Keywords (where appropriate):                                     |



Signed      ..............................J A J C Gleeson

Date        16/03/2005


