
 KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On: 30 November 2004       |        |                            |
|Dictated: 2 December 2004  |        |YK and RL ( Kosovo - Risk to|
|                           |        |homosexuals) Serbia and     |
|                           |        |Montenegro CG [2005] UKIAT  |
|                           |        |00005                       |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|19/01/2005                                                       |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr P R Moulden, Vice President                                   |
|Mr Richard Chalkley, Vice President                              |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                   |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                       |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |RESPONDENTS                 |


Mr G Saunders, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared on  behalf
of the appellant and Mr J Hannah, Counsel instructed by Raja & Co, appeared
on behalf of the respondents.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

2.    The first named respondent, YK, is a citizen of the  Federal  Republic
      of Yugoslavia from Kosovo who was  born  on  18  April  1982  and  who
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 September 1998,  when  he  applied
      for asylum.

3.    He appeals against the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr R A Miller, who
      in a determination promulgated on 12 January 2004, following a hearing
      on 6 January 2004, (not 2003 as erroneously appears on the front  page
      of the determination) allowed an appeal by the first named  respondent
      against the decision of the appellant, taken on 25  October  2002,  to
      direct the respondent's removal after refusing asylum.

4.    The second named appellant, RL, was born on 7 May 1978 and arrived  in
      the United Kingdom on 26 April 2000, when he applied for asylum on the
      same day.

5.    He appeals against the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr R A Miller, who
      in a determination promulgated on 12 January 2004, following a hearing
      on 6 January 2004, (and again, not 2003 as erroneously stated  on  the
      front page of the determination) allowed an appeal by the second named
      respondent against the decision of the appellant, taken on 2 May 2001,
      to direct his removal after refusal of asylum.

6.    The first named appellant's claim is that he was born  in  Prizren  in
      Kosovo and at the beginning of 1998, his father who had been a  leader
      in the Kosovo Liberation Army, was killed by the Serbian  authorities.
      Following his father's death,  the  first  named  respondent  and  his
      mother were persecuted by the Serbian authorities  who  had  requested
      information from them concerning  the  KLA.   A  month  prior  to  his
      departure from Kosovo, his mother  discovered  that  the  first  named
      respondent was a homosexual.   He expressed fear if returned to Kosovo
      as a homosexual, claiming that he would be subjected to  ill-treatment
      and abuse which would  amount  to  persecution  and  additionally,  or
      alternatively, to a breach of his Article 3 rights.

7.    The second named respondent had claimed that his  father  had  been  a
      member of the KLA and that the respondent had  been  a  supporter  and
      attended a demonstration in October 1999.   He  was  arrested  by  the
      police, detained for a few hours and then released,  but  during  that
      time he had been beaten.  In October 1999 the second named  respondent
      was attacked by KLA members, beaten up and stabbed in  the  left  hand
      with a knife.   He claimed that his mother and father had been  killed
      by members of the KLA.   He left his home area of Peja  and  travelled
      to Prishtina, where he  remained  for  two  and  half  months,  before
      travelling to the United Kingdom.

8.    Mr Hannah had appeared on behalf of both  of  the  respondents  before
      the Adjudicator, as he did before the Tribunal.  At the hearing before
      the Adjudicator, Mr Hannah conceded on behalf of both  the  appellants
      that there was insufficient evidence for the appeal to succeed against
      the refusal of refugee status on asylum grounds.  By consent, both the
      respondent's appeals on asylum grounds were dismissed.  For the  first
      time, both respondents claimed that they  were  now  in  a  homosexual
      relationship with each other, seeing each other sometimes five times a
      week and asserted that if they were required to return to Kosovo their
      rights under Article 3 would be breached.

9.    The Adjudicator allowed both appeals on the basis that  their  removal
      would breach their rights under Article 3 of the  European  Convention
      for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

10.   The appellants' grounds of appeal  were  the  same  in  both  appeals.
      They asserted that the Adjudicator had erred in law  in  allowing  the
      appeals under Article 3, since the  Adjudicator  failed  to  give  any
      reason why he found that to return each of  the  respondents  and  his
      partner would involve a breach of Article 3  rights.    They  asserted
      that the Adjudicator had placed undue weight  on  the  expert  report.
      The  report  itself  conceded  that  there  was  little  "concrete  or
      statistical evidence" of attacks on homosexuals in Kosovo and  in  the
      absence of such evidence, there  was  no  reasonable  likelihood  that
      either of the respondents would suffer ill-treatment which would reach
      the high threshold required under Article 3.   The grounds also assert
      that the decision of the Adjudicator was unsustainable in the light of
      the evidence before him and that the Adjudicator had even accepted the
      absence of and difficulty in finding concrete examples of  attacks  on
      homosexuals in Kosovo.   The Adjudicator erred in failing to adopt the
      approach set out in the starred decision of Omar Slimani 01/TH/00092.

11.   Insofar as this determination  deals  with  the  general  position  of
      homosexuals in Kosovo, it is intended that this should  be  a  Country
      Guideline decision, to be followed unless there is a  material  change
      of circumstances in Kosovo.  In  reaching  our  conclusions,  we  have
      taken account of past Tribunals'  decisions  in  relation  to  Kosovo,
      Alfred Bima [2002] UKIAT 08216,  Bekim  Krasniqi  01/TH/02140  and  DM
      (Serbia and Montenegro) [2004] UKIAT 00288.  We have also considered a
      copy of the  Amnesty  International  Report  of  April  2003  entitled
      "Prisoners in Our Own Homes": Amnesty International's Concerns for the
      Human Rights of Minorities of Kosovo/Kosova, the Amnesty International
      Report  entitled  "Former  Yugoslavia  Republic  of  Macedonia  Police
      Allegedly  Ill-treat  Members  of  Ethnic  Minorities",  the   Amnesty
      International Report "Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Continuing
      Failure by the Macedonian Authorities to Confront Police Ill-treatment
      and Torture", the Amnesty International Press Release entitled "Former
      Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: Police Ill-treatment  and  Torture  of
      Detainees Continues", an Amnesty International Report  headed:  "World
      Wide Appeal for: July 2003 Serbia and Montenegro: Member of a Minority
      Community Abducted and Killed", a report from Institute  for  War  and
      Peace Reporting dated  30  May  2003  by  Tanja  Matic  entitled  "Gay
      Kosovars Flirt with Danger", a client answer template entitled "UK 74"
      dated 13 March 2001 issued by ICMPD-IOM  Kosovo  Information  Project,
      the Serbia and Montenegro  (including  Kosovo)  Country  Report  April
      2004,  a  UNHCR  Report  entitled   "UNHCR   Position   on   Continued
      International Protection Needs of Individuals in Kosovo", August 2004,
      a letter from UNHCR, London Office, dated 25th October,  2004  and  an
      expert report produced by Dr. Stephanie  Schwanvner-Sievers  (undated)
      and a covering letter from her, dated 16 November 2003.

12.   Counsel agreed that this appeal was governed by  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act, 1999, not by the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act,
      2002 and the approach suggested by the Court of Appeal in Subesh et al
      [2004] EWCA Civ 56, is the correct approach to adopt in this appeal.

13.   Mr Saunders told us that he relied on the grounds  of  appeal  and  he
      indicated that he was aware that it was intended that this should be a
      Country Guidance case.  Mr  Hanna  expressed  some  surprise,  but  it
      appeared that the parties had  been  written  to  by  letter  dated  7
      October 2004 and advised by the Tribunal.  Mr Hannah told us that  he
      had not discovered any other cases which might be of assistance to us,
      although he was aware of the Tribunal's decision in Bekim Krasniqi and
      the decision in BM (Kosovo - Lesbians - Sufficiency of Protection) and
      the Tribunal's decision in Alfred Bima.   He placed before us  a  copy
      of the Institute for War and Peace  Reporting  article  entitled  "Gay
      Kosovars Flirt with Danger".   Mr Saunders told us that  the  relevant
      parts of the October 2004 Country Information  and  Policy  Assessment
      were identical to the  April  2004  assessment  and  that  he  had  no
      additional evidence.

14.   Mr Saunders asserted that the Adjudicator fell into  error  in  giving
      no real weight to the complete absence of any reports  of  attacks  on
      homosexuals in Kosovo and setting this against the views expressed  in
      the  report  of  Dr  Schwanvner-Sievers.    The   expert   based   her
      conclusions on what would happen. As far as her report has any factual
      basis, it is based on  a  Netherlands  report,  "Kosovo  Fact  Finding
      Mission (on the situation of homosexuals in  Kosovo)"  Amsterdam:  COC
      Netherlands.  Mr Saunders drew our attention to the footnote on page 4
      of the expert report, where it was reported that COC is  described  as
      being  "the  umbrella  association  for  the  main  gay  and   lesbian
      associations in the Netherlands, known for its  work  carried  out  on
      homosexual rights in the Balkans."  Mr Saunders said that he relied on
      the  caveat  set  out  by  the  former  President  in   Omar   Slimani
      01/TH/00092,  in respect of the treatment of experts' reports.    This
      Adjudicator, submitted Mr Saunders, bases her conclusions on what  COC
      says in the Kosovo Fact Finding Mission Report, but it  appeared  that
      this organisation was a gay and lesbian campaigning organisation.   Mr
      Saunders suggested that even that organisation was not able  to  point
      to any instances of  what  had  actually  happened,  beyond  undoubted
      social pressures and disapproval by society generally of  homosexuals.
      Despite the background of disapproval and prejudice described at pages
      27 and 28 of the expert's  report,  against  that  background  it  is,
      suggested Mr Saunders, all  the  more  surprising  that  there  is  no
      evidence of actual harm suffered by homosexuals  in  Kosovo.   In  the
      second paragraph of Dr Schwanvner-Sievers report she says:

           "In the light of the information gathered  for  this  report  it
           will  emerge  that  these  socio-cultural  reasons  explain  why
           assaults and discriminations  against  homosexuals  are  neither
           reported nor known in Kosovo despite the  fact  that  homophobia
           and  attacks  against  homosexuals  exist  where   such   sexual
           orientation becomes know."


      Mr Saunders said it was certainly one thing  for  attacks  not  to  be
      reported, but to say they are  not  known  is  an  entirely  different
      matter; if attacks were not known, then they could hardly be reported.
        Homosexuality is not illegal in Kosovo.  The only  attacks  referred
      to in any of the objective material before us is the reference in  the
      expert's report at page 6, where she refers to:-


           "In  an  article  published  last  September  [2002]  the  daily
           newspaper Epoka e Re spoke of the'dangerous ways  and  behaviour
           brought by the foreigners', before naming a restaurant near  the
           university  in  Prishtina  as  a  popular  meeting   place   for
           homosexuals.  According to the OSCE's media adviser  in  Kosovo,
           Willem  Houeem,  three  members  of  Kosovo's  Gay  and  Lesbian
           Association were beaten up immediately  after  the  article  was
           published."


15.   There was no other reference in any of the objective material  to  any
      other attacks on  homosexuals.   Given  that  there  is  a  homosexual
      community within Kosovo and given what UNHCR have said in their letter
      of 25 October 2004:


           "Kosovan  society  is  characterised  by  its  patriarchal   and
           traditional nature: therefore homosexuality is widely considered
           to be a taboo subject.  Individuals  in  Kosovo  freely  express
           their homosexuality, with those who  do  being  concentrated  in
           urban Prishtina.  In rural areas, homosexuality is considered to
           be 'non-existent' and is apparently kept hidden  by  individuals
           and within family structures.   It  is  likely  that  homosexual
           individuals may be exposed to psychological and  physical  abuse
           and  harassment  by  individuals  and/or  groups,  should  their
           sexuality be discovered or openly practised in Kosovo."


      This was said by UNHCR to derive  from  the  information  provided  by
      UNHCR in Prishtina.  Given what the UNHCR say,  Mr Saunders  suggested
      that one might expect to see some evidence of  actual  anti-homosexual
      behaviour.


16.   Within the report, Dr Schwanvner-Sievers says:-

           "Taking  cultural  stigmatisation   in   general   and   culture
           equalisation of homosexuality and same sex relations with minors
           in particular into account (through naming any homosexual  as  a
           'pederast'), there is little hope  that  Albanian  judges  would
           interpret a homosexual relationship as anything but illegal."


      This  is  because,  the   given   Albanian   cultural   understanding,
      homosexuality  is  said  to  be  widely  associated  with   same   sex
      relationship with minors.  The common majority  name  for  homosexuals
      is, confusingly, Peder  (from  Pederast),  independent  of  whether  a
      relationship with a  minor  actually  exists.   However,  Mr  Saunders
      pointed out that homosexuality was not illegal in Kosovo.   There  was
      no question of anybody being  brought  before  a  judge  charged  with
      homosexual offences.    The  report  appeared  to  ignore  this  fact.
      There was no evidence before the Tribunal of the law being applied  in
      the way suggested by the expert in her report.   The report emphasises
      the discriminatory and prejudicial nature of societal  attitudes,  but
      offered no evidence of it manifesting itself.   Mr. Saunders  referred
      us to the Country Information and Policy  Unit  Assessment  (paragraph
      K6.100) and reminded us that UNMIK regulations prohibit discrimination
      the basis of sexual orientation.  According to a request made  by  the
      Kosovo Information Project to UNMIK, until September 2002, there  were
      no recorded incidents of violence directed against homosexuals  during
      the time since UNMIK had been the authority  in  the  province.    The
      only incidents of violence was the report published in  the  newspaper
      Epoka e Re referred to by the expert.  He submitted that  since  there
      was no evidence of any harm the Secretary of State's appeal should  be
      allowed.


17.   We then heard submissions from  Mr  Hannah.   He  suggested  that  the
      first ground was a "reasons" challenge. However, this Adjudicator  had
      given his reasons for his finding.   Insofar as the respondent RL  was
      concerned,  the  reasons  were  contained  in  paragraph  14  of   the
      determination.    Counsel  pointed  out  that  paragraph  14  of   the
      determination in RL was the same as paragraph 15 of the  determination
      in YK.   The Adjudicator had previously analysed the expert's  report.
       The appellant knew very well why he had lost the appeal.  The lack of
      any evidence of persecution as mistreatment of  homosexuals  had  been
      explained by the expert in her report. There  was  simply  a  lack  of
      reporting and homosexuality is an  underground  activity.    There  is
      some evidence of violence and this, coupled with the explanation of  a
      lack of reporting is sufficient, Counsel  submitted,  to  satisfy  the
      lower standard of proof.  That was sufficient reasoning.   As  to  the
      second ground, there need not be any concrete evidence or  statistical
      evidence and the expert has explained why there is  none,  namely  the
      manner in which such attacks  are  reported.    The  absence  of  such
      evidence  does  not,  however,  mean  that  there  is  no   reasonable
      likelihood that such reports occur.  The third ground seems to  repeat
      the second ground.  So far as ground four is concerned,  it  addresses
      the approach  to  expert  evidence  recommended  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Slimani.  This Adjudicator followed the guidance in Slimani the nature
      of the expert report explained why there  was  no  objective  material
      showing attacks on homosexuals.   It  was  the  essence  of  what  the
      expert was saying that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  deviate  from  the
      guidance given by Slimani.  The expert explains why there is a lack of
      supporting  material.   He  asked  the  Tribunal  to  find  that   the
      Adjudicator did not err.  The report from the Institute of  Peace  and
      War Reporting says that gay rights activists receive  regular  reports
      of men being beaten up or intimidated on suspicion of being gay, while
      homophobic views are routinely  published  in  Kosovo's  papers.   The
      second page of this report also spoke of the newspaper report of three
      Kosovan  Gay  and  Lesbian  Association  members   being   beaten   up
      immediately after the article was published, as reported by the expert
      in her report.

18.   Mr Hanna submitted that the evidence from UNHCR quoted above  was  the
      starting point  and  that  the  rest  of  the  evidence  needs  to  be
      considered in light of  what  UNHCR  said.   An  absence  of  specific
      evidence would not doom the appeal  to  failure.   The  expert  report
      points out quite clearly why there is a lack of evidence.

19.   Mr Hannah drew our  attention  to  the  conclusions  set  out  in  the
      expert's  report.   There  is  simply  a  lack  of  interest   amongst
      authorities. It is for this reason attacks on gays and lesbians  would
      simply not be reported.  Additionally, the  victims  of  such  attacks
      fear further attacks.

20.   UNHCR cannot produce a comprehensive list of all  at  risk  categories
      in  Kosovo  and  simply  because  homosexuals  are  not  listed  as  a
      vulnerable group, does not mean that they are not one.  Kosovo  is  no
      longer the centre of media attention and that, Mr.  Hannah  suggested,
      explains why the press generally have not reported the problems  faced
      by gays and lesbians.   He submitted that the Tribunal could  draw  an
      inference from the evidence. It could infer what is reasonably  likely
      to occur to these individuals which, he submitted, is likely to  cause
      a breach of their Article 3 rights.

21.   Responding briefly on behalf of the appellant, Mr  Saunders  suggested
      that there were a number of groups who were vulnerable in  Kosovo  and
      all had experienced problems and troubles which had been reported.  It
      was, he suggested, extraordinary that attacks  were  claimed  to  have
      taken place,  which  had  not  appeared  in  the  media.  It  was  not
      sufficient, he submitted, to say simply that because attacks were  not
      reported to the authorities, they are not reported in the  media.   He
      invited us to allow the appeal.

22.   We reserved our determination.

23.   We have decided that we must allow the appellant's appeal.

24.   In paragraph 14 of the determination of the appeal  of  RL  (paragraph
      15 in the determination of the appeal of  YK),  the  Adjudicator  said
      this:-

           "The starting-point must be from Dyli that UMIK and KFOR offer a
           sufficiency of protection to young returning  Kosovans  in  most
           general circumstances.  UMIK  seeks  to  outlaw  discriminating,
           including  discrimination  against  homosexuals.  Against   that
           background the findings and the report of the  expert  presented
           by the appellant has to be  assessed.  She  [finds]  finds  that
           homophobic attitudes are so ingrained  in  society  from  stand-
           points of religion, virility and likely to go  unreported.  Even
           if  reported,  they  would  be  met  by  a  hostile  police  and
           judiciary.  While accepting the absence of,  and  difficulty  in
           finding, concrete examples, the  report  is  well  reasoned  and
           persuasive. For there to be a sufficiency of protection,  it  is
           necessary not only that UMIK be willing  to  support  them,  but
           that there be a tolerance in the community and a willingness and
           sufficiency of protection amongst the police, the judiciary  and
           the  religious  communities.   Outside   of   UMIK   there   are
           substantial reasons for  considering  that  there  would  be  an
           insufficiency of protection in the community and the  danger  is
           of such a severity that Article 3 rights would  be  abused.   In
           the case of this appellant and his partner, I find  that  return
           would involve a breach of Article 3 rights."


25.   After having reported on the expert's report in  paragraph  7  of  the
      determination, the Adjudicator said in paragraph 8:-

           "The judicial  tradition  is  such  that  Albanian  judges  will
           interpret a homosexual relationship as illegal.  The  conclusion
           of  the  report  is  that  the  appellants'  fears   of   severe
           discrimination, injury or death if returned  to  Kosovo  and  if
           their sexuality became known and their lack of trust in  Kosovan
           institutions and the police are consistent with the  researchers
           understanding  of  the  current  situation  and   treatment   of
           homosexuals in Kosovo.  The appellant's would not be  likely  to
           be able to  live  openly  and  continue  their  relationship  if
           returned to Kosovo."


26.   The Adjudicator appears to have  accepted  submissions  made  to  him,
      that the lack of objective evidence is because open  homosexuality  in
      such a society as that prevailing in  Kosovo  was  likely  to  provoke
      violence and no protection would be offered.

27.   We noted, however, that one respondent lived in the United Kingdom  in
      London and the other in East Kent.   Whilst they may have been  seeing
      each other regularly, they were not  living  together  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

28.   We very carefully have  read  and  considered  Dr  Schwanvner-Sievers'
      report.  In paragraph 2, she explains that it  is  for  socio-cultural
      reasons that assaults and discriminations are  neither  reported,  nor
      known in Kosovo, despite the fact that homophobia and  attacks  exist.
      We hav e some difficulty is understanding quite how, if  such  attacks
      are not known, it can be said that they  take  place.    However,  the
      only reported attack was that drawn to our attention by  Mr Saunders,
      following the publication of an article in Epoka e Re.  We are  aware,
      of course, that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  has
      responsibility for  identifying  and  protecting  vulnerable  minority
      groups in society.   According to the  UN  position  paper  of  August
      2004, it was intended to be an update on the  continued  international
      protection needs of individuals from Kosovo and issued in the light of
      renewed inter ethnic confrontations.  Its primary  focus  was  on  the
      continued  need  of  international  protection  of   minority   groups
      emanating from Kosovo.   It said  that  despite  five  years  of  NATO
      intervention, the situation in Kosovo continues to be complex and  the
      security of the minority communities remains a serious concern.    The
      latter part of 2003  saw  an  increase  in  serious  crimes  committed
      against the Serb minority community compared to the  year  2002.    It
      also spoke of the eruption  in  March  2004  of  mass  demonstrations,
      leading to inter-ethnic violence and  civil  unrest  on  a  scale  not
      witnessed since  1999.   While  reporting  on  Serb,  Roma,  Ashkaelia
      Egyptian and Albanian minority community members  and  despite  having
      referred to Bosniak and Gorani communities and the difficulties caused
      by Kosovo Albanians in ethnically mixed marriages,  persons  of  mixed
      ethnicity and Kosovo Albanians perceived to  be  associated  with  the
      Serb regime after 1990,  it  made  no  mention  at  all  of  gays  and
      lesbians.   Neither did the UNHCR Position Paper of 30 March 2004.

29.   We do not believe that as a Tribunal  we  should  necessarily  accept,
      without challenge, the assertion  that  simply  because  there  is  no
      objective evidence, it is because of the lack  of  reporting  of  such
      incidents, rather than that they do not take place.

30.   According to COC, gay rights activists receive regular reports of  men
      being beaten up or intimidated on suspicion of being gay, but they say
      that the problem has failed to attract the attention of  human  rights
      groups in the area, because of fear of being "outed" stops  most  gays
      from reporting hate crime to the authorities.  Whilst one  might  very
      well  understand  a  natural  reluctance  to  report  crime   to   the
      authorities for fear of being "outed", that did not explain why  there
      appeared to be so very little objective evidence of such attacks being
      reported in the media.  In her very thorough and detailed  report,  Dr
      Schwanvner-Sievers  refers  to  the  setting  up  of  Kosovo's   first
      association for homosexual men which,  apparently,  launched  its  own
      website in February 2003.   That association  recently  joined  forces
      with  Kosovo's  Association  of  Lesbians  and  has   enabled   Kosovo
      homosexuals with access to computers to communicate.  No evidence  was
      adduced to us to suggest that there are reports of attacks reported on
      this website.  If attacks were a regular  occurrence  then  we  should
      have expected them to have been reported on Kosovo's gay  website  and
      for copies to have been provided to us.

31.   We believe that the Adjudicator had misunderstood  what  was  reported
      by Dr Schwanvner-Sievers in relation to the attitude of the judiciary.
       He did, in any event, overlook the fact  that  homosexuality  is  not
      illegal for males over the age  of  eighteen  and  that  there  would,
      therefore, be no risk of  someone  being  charged  with  homosexuality
      being taken before a judge.

32.    We  have  borne  very  much  in  mind  that  Albanian  Kosovars   are
      predominantly Muslim and that particularly conservative Islamic  views
      dominate that society in conjunction with cultural, customary, hetero-
      patriarchal values shared by all Albanians.   We have appreciated that
      these customary values emphasise notions of  masculinity  and  of  the
      family,   of   "honour"   and   "shame"   and   subsequently   include
      discriminatory attitudes towards homosexuality.  We have no doubt that
      such a society would breed intolerance of homosexuality and  encourage
      discrimination  against  gays  and  lesbians,  but  there  is   simply
      insufficient objective material to support  the  contention  that,  on
      return to Kosovo, either of these respondents  will  face  harm  which
      would breach their Article 3 rights.   We do not accept the contention
      that, simply because victims of homophobic violence are  reluctant  to
      report attacks, there is no objective evidence.  We  believe  that  an
      organisation such as UNHCR would  have  identified  homosexuals  as  a
      vulnerable group if there was widespread and indiscriminate attacks on
      homosexuals.  The advice given by UNHCR in London does  not  help  us,
      because that is not supported by any objective material.   We  believe
      that if attacks on lesbians and gays were such a  widespread  problem,
      such that there was a real risk of either of these respondents  facing
      persecutory harm on return, then there would have been some  objective
      evidence to support that contention, if  only  from  lesbian  and  gay
      campaigning groups.   As it was, the only evidence  we  have  is  that
      quoted in the expert's  report  taken  from  the  Dutch  Fact  Finding
      Mission, which referred to only one incident.

33.   We find that the Adjudicator did make  a  material  error  of  law  by
      failing to give adequate reasons why he found that to return  each  of
      the respondents would  involve a breach of their Article 3 rights  and
      on the evidence before us we find there to  be  no  risk  that  either
      respondent will suffer a breach of their Article 3 rights on return to
      Kosovo.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President
