
 RM (Special Vouchers - representation) India [2005] UKIAT 00067


                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  25 February 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               10 March 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)
                                Mr P S Aujla

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Satvinder of Jasvir Jutla & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms P Ramachandran, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This appeal concerns the ending of the Special Voucher scheme for East
     African Asians.  It is brought by five adult siblings who were refused
     entry clearance to join their mother and sponsor  who  has  indefinite
     leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  They made  their  applications
     after the Special Voucher scheme had  ended  and  after  the  relevant
     Immigration Rules had been withdrawn.   Their  application  for  entry
     clearance was considered and  rejected  under  paragraph  317  of  the
     Rules, which required them to show that they were living in  the  most
     exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.   The  Adjudicator,  Mr   A
     O'Malley, in a determination promulgated on 15 April  2004,  dismissed
     their appeals.  Following the grant of Statutory  Review,  the  appeal
     comes before the Tribunal.   It  was  adjourned  part  heard  and  the
     Tribunal notified the parties of  the  material  which  it  wished  to
     consider in the light of the submissions which were being  made.   The
     Appellants' chief point, in  essence,  was  that  there  were  various
     government  statements  which  had  given   rise   to   a   legitimate
     expectation, which the Tribunal should, as a matter of substance, give
     effect to, that the children of those who were  or  should  have  been
     Special Voucher holders, should have been permitted to enter as if the
     changes in the Rules and scheme had not been made.

  2. The sponsor was born in Uganda in 1955, and left there in  1960.   She
     went to India where in 1972 she got married  and  where  her  children
     were born in 1975, 1977, 1979,  1981  and  1983.   The  sponsor  is  a
     British Overseas citizen.  She was not eligible to come to the  United
     Kingdom under the Special Voucher scheme because she was  married  and
     could not therefore be a head of  household  within  the  scheme.   It
     appears that after an application for a British Passport was  rejected
     for that reason, she got divorced by consent.   It  appears  that  she
     then made a number of other applications which were also  rejected  on
     the grounds either that she was not divorced or that the divorce was a
     divorce of convenience.  (There was no suggestion of maltreatment, the
     couple  had  lived  together  happily  until  immediately  before  the
     divorce, and an Entry Clearance Officer field  trip  report  concluded
     that the children, contrary to what they said had happened  after  the
     divorce, were still living with the father.)  The  IND  Guidance  Note
     operative for the scheme in 2001 required the Entry Clearance  Officer
     to be clear that any divorce was not one of convenience.

  3. The sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom in 1999, the  precise  basis
     upon which she did so is unclear, and in April 2001 commenced Judicial
     Review proceedings, as did a number of other would-be Special  Voucher
     holders, who claimed that the scheme  Rules  discriminated  on  gender
     grounds against women.  It appears that the Secretary of  State  dealt
     with  these  proceedings  by  granting  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain;
     invariably so, said Mr Juss for  the  Appellants.   In  the  sponsor's
     case, she was granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  April  2002,
     following further consideration  of  her  "particular  circumstances",
     outside the Rules.

  4. At no stage did  she  take  Judicial  Review  proceedings  from  India
     challenging the refusal of a Voucher.  That would have been  her  only
     remedy because the scheme was outside the  Rules  and  no  appeal  lay
     against the refusal;  and the refusal of entry clearance, which  could
     lead to an appeal, would have been inevitable if  there  had  been  no
     voucher.

  5. We do not have the full terms of the  Concession  which  embodied  the
     Special Voucher scheme;  they were referred to in HG and RG  (India  -
     Special Voucher Rules) [2005] UKIAT 00002.  The Scheme was ended on  5
     March 2002;  and no new applications were accepted  after  that  date.
     The relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules, 249-254, remained in
     force to cover those who had been granted a voucher but  had  not  yet
     entered the United Kingdom and those whose applications were undecided
     at that date.  Those paragraphs  were  deleted  with  effect  from  18
     September 2002, in a Statement of Changes presented  in  August  2002.
     These changes were related to the new provision  which  was  made  for
     British  Overseas  Citizens  in  section  12   of   the   Nationality,
     Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   As  we  have  noted,  the  five
     applications with which we  are  concerned  were  not  made  until  26
     November 2002, after the 2002 Act had been passed.

  6. The Entry Clearance Officer rejected the five applications in February
     2003 because they did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  for  the  most
     exceptional compassionate circumstances  or  for  maintenance  without
     recourse to public funds, or the absence of close relatives  in  India
     to whom they could turn.  He took account of material which  had  been
     reported on during the field  trip  in  connection  with  two  earlier
     applications which they had made, details of  which  are  missing  but
     which appear to have been made not long after the mother's divorce.

  7. The Adjudicator heard submissions to the effect that the mother should
     have been treated as a Special Voucher holder and that the  Appellants
     should therefore be treated as the  children  of  such  a  holder  and
     somehow that meant that the removal of the provisions in the Rules was
     irrelevant.

  8. The Adjudicator inferred from the material he  heard,  which  included
     evidence from the sponsor, that  the  divorce  had  been  obtained  to
     facilitate the issue of a British  passport.   A  statement  from  the
     oldest of the five said that they supported themselves by  working  as
     labourers; they could  not  speak  English.   They  did  housework  in
     exchange for accommodation rent-free.  They had not been abandoned  by
     their  father.   He  was  not  satisfied  that  the  five   could   be
     accommodated in the property occupied by the  sponsor,  or  that  they
     were financially dependant on her.  He dismissed  the  appeal  on  the
     grounds that they did not satisfy paragraph 317,  and  there  were  no
     Article 8 grounds for allowing  them  entry  clearance.   It  was  not
     disputed but that the dismissal of the claim under paragraph 317 could
     not be faulted.  It was the failure to consider  the  implications  of
     the ending of the scheme which were at issue.

  9. Mr Juss contended that a series of Government Statements,  whether  in
     Press Releases or in Parliament, should  be  taken  to  mean  that  it
     recognised the historic wrong done to East African  Asians  when  they
     were threatened with expulsion from Africa, had promised that the then
     proposed legislative changes, which then  followed,  would  mean  that
     they were better off or at least no  worse  off  than  they  had  been
     before.  The changes had however meant that the  children  of  Special
     Voucher holders were worse off because the provisions for entry  under
     the former Rules were  much  more  readily  satisfied  than  the  very
     restrictive provisions of paragraph 317.  The sponsor should have been
     granted a Voucher and that was in effect acknowledged by the Secretary
     of State in its grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain.   It  had  always
     been understood that families of  Voucher  holders  were  to  be  kept
     together, hence the ease with which their children  could  be  granted
     entry clearance.  N0-one seemed to have thought about the children  in
     the legislative changes which eventuated in the 2002 Act.  They had  a
     substantive legitimate expectation as a  result  of  those  statements
     which the Tribunal should give effect to in the interests of  justice,
     which was the concept which underlay legitimate expectation.

           The provisions of the former paragraph 252 are as follows:


                 "252. The requirements for indefinite leave  to  enter  the
                       United Kingdom as the spouse or child  of  a  special
                       voucher holder are that the person covered:
                       (i)   is in possession  of  a  valid  United  Kingdom
                            entry clearance for settlement  in  the  United
                            Kingdom in this capacity; and
                       (ii)  can and will  be  maintained  and  accommodated
                            adequately  by  the  special   voucher   holder
                            without recourse to public funds."

 10. They can be contrasted with the very much more restrictive  provisions
     of paragraph 317, but it is not necessary to set them out.

 11. A written answer in the House of Commons of 5 March 2002 explained the
     thinking behind the abolition of the Scheme:

           "Angela Eagle:  The special voucher  scheme  was  introduced  in
           1968 in recognition of the specific hardship being  suffered  at
           that time by British Overseas Citizen (BOC) passport holders and
           their dependants, who were under  political  pressure  to  leave
           their countries of residence in East Africa,  but  who  held  no
           other citizenship and have nowhere else to go.  Several thousand
           BOCs and other United Kingdom passport holders took advantage of
           the scheme and settled in the United Kingdom in  the  1970s  and
           1980s.


           However, the world political situation has now changed and  BOCs
           are no longer under threat of expulsion.  They  have,  over  the
           intervening years, either settled with their families in the new
           independent East African countries or, alternatively, some  have
           moved with their families to India.   Their  families  have  now
           grown up and have families of their own.


           There are relatively few applications for special vouchers these
           days and those who do apply are not being pressured to leave the
           country in which they reside.  The scheme no longer  serves  the
           purpose for which it was set up.  The Government have  therefore
           decided that the time has  come  to  abolish  the  scheme,  with
           immediate effect.  No new applications for special vouchers will
           be considered."

 12. The problem which this left was what would happen to those who had not
     yet taken up the benefits of the scheme  yet  might  need  to  do  so.
     There was a campaign about that.  Mr Juss referred us to a paper in  a
     practitioner's Journal which suggested that a ray  of  hope  might  be
     found in making an amendment to the Bill which became  the  2002  Act.
     He  had  relied  on  another  comment  in  that  as  evidence  of  the
     expectation that those who were eligible to obtain vouchers had always
     expected that they would be able to move with their families.  But  it
     seemed to us that the references were at least as  readily  understood
     as showing the opposite, namely that people would move at a time  when
     they were no longer burdened by children.

 13. Mr Juss placed considerable reliance upon  the  following  statements.
     First, from the then Secretary of State in April 2002 in a  debate  on
     the 2002 Bill:

           "In recognition of the fact that the old  special  quota  scheme
           had ceased  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
           originally designed,  we  abolished  it.   I  will  examine  the
           possibility of an alternative arrangement for  British  overseas
           citizens who have  no  other  nationality  but  who,  under  the
           existing complex historical circumstances, are not able to enter
           the country.  It would be right for us to do that, as we have  a
           moral obligation to them going  back  a  long  way,  and  it  is
           unfinished business."

 14. Second, a press release from the then Minister at the Home  Office  in
     July 2002 which announced a change to the 2002 Bill to meet  what  was
     described as a long-standing obligation  to  British  citizens  living
     overseas who would otherwise have no right of abode in any country:

           "At present, some citizens of our former colonies in east Africa
           have a British passport but not the right to live  and  work  in
           the UK.  Now, if they do not have any other nationality and have
           never given up another nationality, they will be able to acquire
           these rights.


           We are righting a historical wrong which has left  a  number  of
           overseas citizens without any right of abode, either in  the  UK
           or elsewhere.


           BOC status is a legacy of  decolonisation,  when  some  overseas
           citizens were treated unfairly, which was then compounded by the
           1968 Immigration Act and the 1981 British Nationality Act.   The
           Government is acting to put that right.


           We have a moral obligation to these people  going  back  a  long
           way.  We are now meeting that obligation  and  doing  the  right
           thing by those citizens of former  British  colonies  who  would
           otherwise have no right of abode in any country.


           The number who would want to live in the  UK  is  likely  to  be
           small - less than 500 BOCs a year have applied to live in the UK
           in recent times.  They are likely to view  it  as  an  insurance
           policy in case their circumstances change in the future.   I  am
           pleased we are able to offer them that added security."

 15. Third, a  press  release  from  the  Home  Office  in  September  2002
     describing the change and repeating much of the earlier statements:

           "The Government has now decided that British  protected  persons
           from former British protectorates such as  Zambia,  and  British
           subjects, generally people born in India  or  what  is  now  the
           Republic of Ireland before 1949, will be eligible if  they  have
           no other nationality and have not given up another nationality."

 16. Fourth, in the debate on the Bill, in October 2002,  Lord  Filkin  for
     the Government, repeated much of the above and said:

           "The amendments  which  we  now  propose  will  provide  British
           overseas  citizens,  British  subjects  and  British   protected
           persons having no other  nationality,  with  an  entitlement  to
           acquire,  on  application,   and   subject   to   some   further
           requirements  -  which  I  shall  presently  explain  -  British
           citizenship.


           In doing so, they would also acquire automatically  a  right  of
           abode here.  In other words, they would no longer be subject  to
           United Kingdom immigration controls, but could come  and  go  at
           will subject to the usual requirements for  proof  of  right  of
           entry on arrival.  They would additionally, as EU citizens under
           the Treaty of Rome, acquire the right of free movement under the
           treaty.


           The requirements for acquisition of  British  citizenship  under
           the new clause are as follows.  First, the applicant must  be  a
           British  overseas  citizen,  a  British  subject  or  a  British
           protected person.  Secondly, the applicant must  have  no  other
           nationality or citizenship on the date of application.  Thirdly,
           the applicant should not previously have given up an alternative
           nationality or citizenship, whether through action  or  inaction
           on his part.


           The latter requirement would exclude those who had lost  another
           nationality through failure to take the steps prescribed by  the
           law of that country for its retention beyond a certain date,  as
           well as those who had lost another nationality as  a  result  of
           some positive act on their part  -  such  as  the  making  of  a
           declaration of renunciation.  Such  countries  are  tolerant  of
           dual nationality in minors but require that on attaining the age
           of majority, the person must not only renounce their citizenship
           but also make a declaration of intention as to future residence,
           and/or take an oath of allegiance.


           Therefore, we do  not  consider  it  appropriate  to  extend  an
           entitlement to  British  citizenship  to  those  who,  by  their
           actions or inaction, have given up another nationality  and  one
           assumes the right to reside permanently in the country  of  that
           nationality.


           The Secretary of State must be satisfied that the applicant  has
           no other nationality and has not given up another nationality or
           citizenship.


           The  amendment  proposes  that  those  registered   as   British
           citizens, under the new provision would be British citizens  "by
           descent" for the purposes of the British Nationality  Act  1981.
           As such, they would be subject to the  restrictions  imposed  by
           that Act on the ability of  British  citizens  "by  descent"  to
           transmit their citizenship to a further generation born  outside
           the United Kingdom.  That would be consistent with their present
           position whereby British overseas citizenship and the status  of
           British subject and the British protected person are usually non-
           transmissible."


 17. Mr Juss also relied on other comments, made by Lord Filkin in  another
     connection, to say that  it  was  intended  that  no  person  formerly
     eligible for a voucher or entry as a dependant of an  eligible  person
     would be worse off. If they were worse off, the historic  wrong  could
     not be righted.

 18. Section 12 of the 2002 Act does provide for British Overseas  Citizens
     and like groups, via an amendment to the British Nationality Act 1981:

           "4B   Acquisition by registration: certain persons without other
                 citizenship


           (1)   This section applies to a person who has the status of -
                 (a)   British Overseas citizen,
                 (b)   British subject under this Act, or
                 (c)   British protected person.


           (2)   A person to whom this section applies shall be entitled to
                 be registered as a British citizen if -
                 (a)   he applies for registration under this section,
                 (b)   the Secretary of State is satisfied that  the  person
                       does not have, apart from  the  status  mentioned  in
                       subsection (1), any citizenship or nationality, and
                 (c)   the Secretary of State is satisfied that  the  person
                       has not after 4th July  2002  renounced,  voluntarily
                       relinquished or lost through action or  inaction  any
                       citizenship or nationality."


 19. In support of his contention that the Appellants should be  given  the
     benefit of a substantive legitimate expectation,  Mr  Juss  recognised
     that the Tribunal was limited to deciding whether a decision  was  for
     these purposes in accordance with the law.  It had been recognised  in
     Abdi v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 148 Court of Appeal, that if  the  Secretary
     of State ignored a relevant policy or failed to give effect to it, the
     decision would not be in accordance with law.  But it would not be for
     the Tribunal itself to give effect to that policy or to its reading of
     policy because it could not take into account all those factors  which
     might influence a policy decision or an exception to it.

 20. However,  Mr  Juss  said  that  legitimate  expectations  were  now  a
     recognised part of the law and that the Tribunal should do  more  than
     simply require the Secretary of  State  to  consider  his  policy,  it
     should give effect to the substantive legitimate expectation which  it
     revealed.  It should plug the legislative gap created by  the  removal
     of the scheme in that way.  He prayed in aid  the  recognition  of  an
     historical wrong, the fact that the Appellants  would  have  succeeded
     under the scheme, and they had perversely been put in a worse position
     by legislation which was intended to improve their position, defeating
     the intention to honour a moral obligation.  He  suggested  that  R  v
     SSHD ex parte Khan [1984] 1 WLR 1337, and R  v  Liverpool  Taxi  Fleet
     Operators' Association [1972] QB 299  were  of  assistance.   He  also
     suggested that the facts here showed that to frustrate the expectation
     would be so unfair as to amount to an abuse of power.

 21. He encouraged us to follow that route  because  two  Adjudicators  had
     already done so on the basis of the  July  and  September  2002  press
     releases.

 22. Shala v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 233, [2003] INLR 349 provided an  example
     of parallel exceptional circumstances;  but for the delay  there,  the
     claimant would have had leave to remain and could  have  made  an  in-
     country application.  Here, if the applications for  the  Voucher  had
     been properly considered in the first  place,  the  Appellants'  could
     have received entry clearance under the old Rules.  The  Secretary  of
     State should therefore  either  apply  those  old  Rules  or  make  an
     exception and grant entry clearance.

 23. For a whole range of reasons these submissions are misconceived.

 24. The statements relied on simply do  not  give  rise  to  a  legitimate
     expectation of the sort  contended  for.   They  show  a  sequence  of
     thinking.  The first written answer states that the  scheme  had  been
     wound up and new applications were not accepted because the scheme was
     thought to have achieved its purpose.  So there was no  representation
     there to help the Appellants.  On the contrary, they were  being  told
     that the scheme had ended.  Mr Juss did not put his  case  forward  on
     the basis of any representation that the scheme would not  end  before
     it did nor that his clients had been expecting to be able to  make  an
     application shortly before its abolition.

 25. The second statement recognises an obligation owed to those  who  have
     no other nationality and promises something for them.  What  that  was
     to be was unresolved at that stage.  It  did  not  contain  at  all  a
     promise that anyone who might have been entitled to  come  in  as  the
     dependant of a Voucher Holder would in future be able to  do  so,  let
     alone that someone who was the dependant of  someone  who  was  not  a
     Voucher Holder, but who might  have  been,  could  do  so.   In  fact,
     although Mr Juss was unable to help us at the hearing  as  to  whether
     the  Appellants  had  any  nationality,  the  applications  for  entry
     clearance all state that they have Indian nationality, as  might  have
     been expected for those born in India to an Indian father.

 26. The third document is a press release which deals  with  the  historic
     wrong by proposing legislation for  a  category  of  British  Overseas
     citizens who have no right of abode elsewhere.  It is not and  clearly
     is not a general promise to right wrongs and to leave no  one  at  all
     worse of as a result of ending the scheme.  It would be absurd to read
     the document that way because it would mean that it was  pointless  to
     end the scheme.  The meaning of the document cannot be arrived  at  by
     picking out a bit and ignoring the  context.   There  is  a  statement
     about the effect of  proposed  legislation  which  is  confined  to  a
     particular group.

 27. The Hansard statements do not bear out any general promise of the sort
     Mr Juss contended for.  On the contrary,  they  set  out  clearly  the
     scope of the Bill.  Section 12 of the 2002  Act  as  enacted  reflects
     what was said about it from the second document onwards.

 28. So the alleged representation was simply not made.  The representation
     which was made was carried into  legislation.   The  Appellants  could
     take advantage of it  if  they  were  British  Overseas  citizens,  as
     appeared to be accepted,  and  satisfied  the  other  provision  about
     having no other nationality.  It appears, however, that they  are  not
     in that category.

 29. There was no expectation, let alone a legitimate one that  the  scheme
     would not be ended and the Rules left unchanged either indefinitely or
     for any particular time.  There was no expectation  justified  by  any
     statements and none legitimately entertained that adult children would
     always be entitled to settle in the United Kingdom, even if  they  had
     another nationality.   Mr Juss made passing reference to  the  use  of
     these statements as a tool of construction of the 2002 Act or  of  the
     changes in the Rules.  But there is no representation to assist and no
     ambiguity to permit any such approach.

 30. We point out that whilst there may be scope for debate about  how  far
     any representation  needs  to  be  acted  on  before  giving  rise  to
     substantive enforcement or procedural protection, there is no evidence
     that the "representations" were ever understood by the  Appellants  or
     those in a similar position to mean what Mr Juss contended.  There  is
     no evidence that it was acted on or was even expected to be  acted  on
     in any way other  than  by  seeking  the  application  of  section  12
     according to its plain terms. There is no factual material to  suggest
     any of the factors  relevant  to  the  enforcement  of  a  substantive
     legitimate expectation, for the avoidance of an  abuse  of  power  are
     present.  The case simply does not get off the ground.

 31. Nor is there any material, akin to that which in Khan and LTOA made it
     unfair for the authorities  to  change  position  without  giving  the
     individual the opportunity, to explain why it  would  be  unfair  were
     that to be done.

 32.  The  real  complaint  is  that  Parliament  should  have   legislated
     differently in the Act of 2002 or should have disapproved the  Changes
     to the Immigration Rules or that the Secretary of State  should  never
     have ended the scheme.  Leaving aside for the moment  the  problematic
     issue  of  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  accommodate   Mr   Juss'
     submissions were they sound in other respects, the Tribunal is  not  a
     body which can overturn or redraft Acts with supplementary provisions,
     let alone ones which there is no evidence to suggest  Parliament  ever
     intended.  The same applies to the Immigration Rules.

 33. It cannot be said either that the decision to end the Scheme  was  one
     to which the Secretary of State could not  come;   Parliament  enacted
     section 12 to remove the difficulty which certain prospective  holders
     might have faced.  There is no argument but that when the  Scheme  was
     ended, neither the sponsor nor the  Appellants  were  Special  Voucher
     holders or had an application undetermined.  The clear purpose of  the
     ending of the scheme was to stop further  applications  by  those  who
     might otherwise succeed.  The Secretary of State's  statement  in  the
     House of Commons rationalises it.  Those who had  another  nationality
     and so were not at risk of expulsion were now to  be  excluded,  after
     very many years of the scheme's operation.  Children, who would now be
     adults, could only come in under paragraph 317, unless they  qualified
     in their own right under section 12.

 34. The argument that the sponsor should have been treated  as  a  Special
     Voucher holder, and her children as dependants under the  former  Rule
     is hopeless, quite apart from the foregoing.  The grant of  Indefinite
     Leave to Remain does not state that she should  have  been  granted  a
     Voucher.  It is a possible inference that the Secretary of  State  was
     concerned either to avoid the risk of losing the gender discrimination
     argument about heads of households, but that  is  some  distance  from
     acceptance that the sponsor here and  the  others  granted  Indefinite
     Leave to Remain  were  entitled  to  a  Voucher.   It  is  a  possible
     inference that he thought it too harsh or not  worth  the  trouble  to
     remove them.  She was never recognised as a head of  household  -  her
     divorce continued to be seen as one of convenience and not effective.

 35. Even if she had been entitled to a Voucher, she never obtained one  or
     maintained  a  challenge  to  its  refusal.   She  was  content   with
     Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 36. Even if she had been a holder, entry clearance would still  have  been
     refused to the Appellants, under  Rule  252,  because  they  were  not
     dependent on the mother.  That  is  clear  from  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer and the Adjudicator's findings.  They could not  be  dependant
     on the sponsor as the Rules required, because  of  her  earnings,  and
     their age and number.  It was specifically found that the sponsor  had
     not shown that she could accommodate them without recourse  to  public
     funds.  The Rules may apply to children as relations  rather  than  as
     minors but that makes the dependency requirement  on  the  sponsor  or
     Voucher Holder the more difficult for adult children.

 37. The argument however proceeds from a false premise,  namely  that  the
     sponsor and Appellants should be treated as what they were not.  There
     is no justification for applying some equitable notion of treating  as
     done that which could have been done.  They were not  Voucher  Holders
     or applicants when the scheme ended.  They have not  shown  any  basis
     for being treated as if either it never had ended or, as a  matter  of
     public law, never should have ended.

 38. Shala is of no assistance.  It deals with delay in decision-making and
     in a very  different  context.   There  was  no  delay  in  the  Entry
     Clearance  Officer  decision-making.   The  sponsor  objected  to  the
     refusals of Vouchers but did not challenge that till  she  arrived  in
     the United Kingdom and did not pursue any ground after  the  grant  of
     the Indefinite Leave to Remain which effectively compromised her case.

 39. There is therefore no justification for the asserted exception to  the
     Rules, an assertion which would have to show that the decision was not
     in  accordance  with  law,  because,  absent  policy,  extra-statutory
     discretions are not for the IAA.

 40. The Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  say  that  a  decision  is  not  in
     accordance with the law where the Secretary of State  has  ignored  or
     misinterpreted his policy. Abdi shows as much.   But  it  is  for  the
     Secretary of State then to consider his decision again in the light of
     that policy.  The  Tribunal  does  not  enforce  policy  or  take  the
     decision under the policy.  There may well be and usually are  matters
     of interpretation, discretion, exception and application which  simply
     are not for the Tribunal.  Even in proportionality issues, policy is a
     guide to what is reasonable rather a matter for the Tribunal's  direct
     application.

 41. It obviously cannot hold that a decision is not in accordance with law
     simply because it is not in accordance with policy.  That would be  to
     equate Home Office policy with  law,  rather  than  to  recognise  the
     distinction.

 42. Mr Juss' arguments were tantamount to saying that we should decide not
     what policy was, but rather what it should have been and  then  should
     give effect  directly  to  that  preferred  policy,  and  that  to  do
     otherwise would be to uphold a decision which was  not  in  accordance
     with law.  We reject that suggestion.

 43. It might be that the facts of a particular case were so strong that  a
     failure to give effect to a substantive legitimate expectation was  an
     abuse of power and hence the decision would be not in accordance  with
     law.  That would not be enforcing policy but law.  But the facts  here
     are nowhere near that. Where the facts show that a  decision  breached
     the  requirement  for  the  procedural  protection  of  a   legitimate
     expectation, the decision would not be in  accordance  with  law,  but
     could be reconsidered.  The facts do not justify any  such  conclusion
     here.

 44. We considered Article 8.  But there is no basis, and  Mr  Juss'  Shala
     argument provides none, for saying that the  Immigration  Rules,  with
     the provisions of section 12, and the  scope  of  any  extra-statutory
     discretions, do not provide a proportionate answer to  the  desire  of
     the sponsor or her adult children to join her in the  United  Kingdom.
     They could not come in on the Rules as they  stood  when  she  arrived
     because she had no Voucher to assist, and she could not show, even  if
     she had had one, that they would then have been able to come.  And the
     Rules cannot be interpreted as if they  still  contained  Rules  which
     have been removed from them, simply because they at one time  provided
     a basis for someone to come who now cannot do  so.   The  Rules  would
     effectively  be  variously  frozen  as  at  the  time   preferred   by
     applicants.

 45. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say
     about the arguments on the Special Voucher scheme.  They seem to  have
     been misunderstood by  Adjudicators,  who  may  have  been  misled  by
     incomplete material, into failing to  appreciate  how  the  statements
     related to section 12 of the 2002 Act.  In any event, two Adjudicators
     also seem erroneously to have thought that it was their task  directly
     to enforce this misconceived expectation.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that
     these arguments now stop.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
