

   SG (Stateless Nepalese:  Refugee?  Removal Directions) Bhutan [2005]
                                                             UKIAT 00025 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 8 November 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  28/01/2005
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)
                                Mr K Kimnell

Between:

                                    [   ]
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr M O'Donnell, instructed by Derby Law Centre
For the Respondent:          Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

If an asylum claimant is in truth stateless, it is important to assess his
claim by reference to his country of former habitual residence, which will
not necessarily be the country of which he has previously said he was a
national.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1.  The  Appellant  who,  at  one  stage,  claimed  to  be  of  Bhutanese
     nationality, appeals, with permission, against the determination of an
     Adjudicator, Mr J W Miller, dismissing  on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds his appeal against the decision of the Respondent  on  22  May
     2003 refusing him asylum and consequently refusing him leave to enter.
      We should say that the notice of decision includes also an indication
     that the Respondent proposes to remove the Appellant to Bhutan.

  2. The Appellant's history is as follows.  He was born in  Bhutan  on  29
     August 1980 and is said to be of Nepalese ethnic origin.  It  is  said
     that his father and uncle became involved in the BPP in  Bhutan,  that
     that activity put him in some difficulties and that, as a result,  the
     Appellant left Bhutan with his uncle and went to Nepal.  That was on 3
     August 1989.  We have not been told a great deal about  what  happened
     in the successive eight years, but it is not said that  the  Appellant
     was ever in one of the refugee camps which have subsequently grown  up
     to deal with the problem of ethnic Nepalese leaving  Bhutan.   On  the
     contrary, the Appellant's uncle is said to have worked in  a  Nepalese
     Post Office and the Appellant, following his education in Nepal, began
     work as a teacher there.  That was in 1997.

  3. In the succeeding five years, we know of only two  or  possibly  three
     events.  In 1998,  on  an  unspecified  date,  it  is  said  that  the
     Appellant was arrested on suspicion as he had no  identification.   He
     has  claimed  to  have  been  badly  beaten  on  that   occasion   and
     subsequently lost his sight in his left eye.  Some four years later or
     so, on a date which has been variously specified as in January and  as
     in October 2002, the Appellant was again arrested because  he  had  no
     identification.  The suspicion is said to have  been  that  he  was  a
     Maoist.  He was detained for a period  of  about  two  days,  but  was
     released after a friend intervened.  He  left  Nepal  on  27  November
     2002, shortly after the last incident if it took place in October, but
     some ten or eleven months after the  incident  if  it  took  place  in
     January.

  4. Following his claim for asylum, the Secretary of State, having refused
     it, issued a letter of reasons for refusal,  dated  20  January  2003.
     The letter starts from the Appellant's claim, made  and  confirmed  by
     him that he had Bhutanese nationality and says that the  Secretary  of
     State doubts the Appellant's Bhutanese nationality but  that,  in  any
     event, he would not be at risk if returned to Bhutan.

  5. Before the Adjudicator, those areas were both explored in  detail  and
     the skeleton argument which Mr O'Donnell has very helpfully put before
     us today duly deals with those matters, that is to say,  firstly,  the
     Appellant's nationality, and, secondly, the risk to  him  if  he  were
     returned to Bhutan.

  6. It is right to say that the grounds upon which permission to appeal to
     the Tribunal was granted were  on  the  following  somewhat  different
     terms:

           "No authority beyond that of a well-known textbook is cited  for
           the proposition that discrimination in civil rights  may  go  so
           far as to amount to persecution.  It is not  easy  to  reconcile
           this with the decision of the Court of Appeal in AE & FE  [2003]
           EWCA Civ 1032 and the question needs to  be  considered  by  the
           Tribunal.  On this point only, permission to appeal is given."

  7. That, however, is in the context of a determination which  appears  to
     describe the Appellant as unambiguously Bhutanese which is not now his
     case and is not the case which Mr O'Donnell sought to emphasise  arose
     from the Adjudicator's  determination.   In  view  of  the  fact  that
     obvious  points  of  Convention  law  arise  from  the   Adjudicator's
     determination as a response to the material that was put  to  him,  we
     have allowed, and indeed encouraged, Mr O'Donnell  to  expand  on  his
     submissions and we are very grateful to the assistance  he  has  given
     us.

  8. The Appellant claims to be a refugee.  A refugee is a person who comes
     within the definition in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.   He
     is a person who is outside his country  of  nationality  or  who,  not
     having a nationality and being  outside  the  country  of  his  former
     habitual residence, is unable or, owing to  fear  of  persecution  for
     what is usually called a Convention reason, unable  to  return  there.
     It is beyond dispute that whether  or  not  a  person  is  a  refugee,
     protected by the Refugee Convention, is a matter of status, it is  not
     a matter of evaluating what a foreign government proposes to  do  with
     the individual.   The  status  in  question  is  to  be  evaluated  by
     reference either to the person in question's  country  of  nationality
     or, if and only if, he has no nationality, by reference to his country
     of former habitual residence.   We  pause  there  to  emphasise  that,
     although the Refugee Convention makes specific provision for a  person
     who has more than one nationality,  there  is  no  suggestion  that  a
     person can have more than one country of  former  habitual  residence.
     The primary question therefore in any refugee claim  is  to  determine
     the country of nationality or former habitual  residence.   It  is  an
     obvious point of Convention law that  the  country,  by  reference  to
     which the refugee claim is to be assessed, must be established.

  9. In the present case, the Adjudicator, as Mr O'Donnell points out, drew
     the conclusion that not only  is  the  Appellant  not  a  national  of
     Bhutan, but that he is not entitled to Bhutanese  nationality  either.
     Mr O'Donnell drew our attention to the Adjudicator's findings  insofar
     as the Appellant's own history is concerned and also to material  that
     was before the Adjudicator and is also before us, which relates to the
     attitude of the Bhutanese Government to those of Nepali ethnicity  who
     are seen as  an  undesirable,  albeit  large,  ethnic  minority.   The
     Adjudicator having concluded, as we think he must have done, that  the
     Appellant was in truth not to be regarded  as  a  Bhutanese  national,
     should then have (we repeat the word without intending any  criticism)
     obviously passed to consider  what  was  the  Appellant's  country  of
     former habitual residence.

 10. On the basis of the facts before him, we do not think  that  he  could
     properly have reached any conclusion other than that  the  Appellant's
     country of former habitual residence was Nepal.  That is  the  country
     to which the Appellant went when he was aged about nine.   It  is  the
     country in which he remained for the whole of the  time  when  he  was
     growing up and when he was training.  It is the country  in  which  he
     obtained employment and is the country from  which  he  left  for  the
     United Kingdom.  Further, in the course of his statement prepared  for
     the hearing before the Adjudicator, he wrote as follows, in  paragraph
     23, "My fear is of the police in Nepal".  After expanding on that,  he
     went clearly as a secondary matter to say, in paragraph 24, "I  cannot
     return to Bhutan either".

 11. In our view, there is no doubt at all that, insofar as the Appellant's
     status as a refugee comes to be considered, Nepal is the country which
     is in question:  because the Appellant is stateless and his country of
     former habitual residence is Nepal.  It follows that the Adjudicator's
     concentration on Bhutan for the purposes of assessing the  Appellant's
     claim was entirely erroneous, although we accept  that  he  was  drawn
     into looking at Bhutan, not only by the Appellant's original claim but
     also, no doubt, by the material that was put before him.   It  follows
     from that that the Appellant's refugee claim has yet  to  be  properly
     considered in detail and on the appropriate facts.

 12. Mr O'Donnell's second principal line  of  argument  is  that,  in  any
     event, the Respondent's decision to return the Appellant to Bhutan  is
     a decision which is not in accordance  with  the  law  and  so  cannot
     stand.  Again, this was not a  matter  dealt  with  in  the  grant  of
     permission but it is of sufficient importance for  us  to  attempt  to
     deal with it.  As we have indicated, the decision  against  which  the
     Appellant appeals was a decision refusing  him  leave  to  enter,  but
     which also indicated the proposed removal to Bhutan.  Because  of  the
     date of the decision, the right of  appeal  is  under  the  2002  Act.
     Under the 2002 Act, the rights of appeal are set out in ss 82  and  83
     and the grounds of appeal in s 84.  Section 82(1) reads as follows:

           "Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person,
           he may appeal to an Adjudicator."

 13. Section 82(2) indicates what is meant by an immigration  decision  for
     those purposes.  We do not need to set out the entire list.   We  draw
     attention only to the following.

           "82(2)(a)   Refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom.
                      (g)   A decision that a person is to be removed  from
                       the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions   under
                       s10(1)(a)(b) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act
                       1999 (removal of persons  unlawfully  in  the  United
                       Kingdom).
                       (h)  A decision that an illegal  entrant  is  to  be
                       removed from the United Kingdom by way of  directions
                       under  paragraphs  8-10  of   Schedule   2   to   the
                       Immigration Act, Control of Entry: Removal.
                       (i)  A decision that a person is to be removed  from
                       the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions  given  by
                       virtue of paragraph 10(a) of that Schedule."

 14. It does not appear to us that any of the other paragraphs of that sub-
     section could conceivably apply to this Appellant.  But, in  fact,  it
     is also clear that paragraphs (g), (h) and (i) do not  apply  to  this
     Appellant:  he is not an illegal entrant;  he is not unlawfully  here;
     he is proposed to be removed merely as a consequence of the refusal of
     leave to enter.  His right of appeal is in respect of the  immigration
     decision refusing him leave to enter.

 15. If we pass to s 84, which sets out the  possible  grounds  of  appeal,
     there is a ground that the decision (that is to say,  the  immigration
     decision in question) is unlawful under s 6 of the Human  Rights  Act.
     There is a ground that the decision (that is to say,  the  immigration
     decision) breaches the Refugee Convention.  There is also a ground (e)
     that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law.

 16. Mr O'Donnell  submitted  to  us  that  because  the  Appellant  cannot
     properly or perhaps at all be removed to Bhutan either because  he  is
     not a citizen of Bhutan or because he will be ill-treated in Bhutan or
     perhaps because he will, if returned to Bhutan,  need  to  attempt  to
     take refuge in a neighbouring country,  his  return  to  Bhutan  would
     breach his rights under the European Convention on Human  Rights  even
     if  it  does  not  breach  his  rights,  if  any,  under  the  Refugee
     Convention.

 17. In our view, there is no substance in that  submission  at  all.   The
     refusal of leave to enter to a person who is not a refugee  is  not  a
     decision which, in this case or perhaps at all, is  one  which  raises
     issues under the Human Rights Act.  It may be that  if  the  Appellant
     had a right of appeal which related to the destination  named  in  the
     removal directions in this case, he would be able to show that  Bhutan
     is not an appropriate destination for him.  But it is quite  clear  to
     us that nothing in ss 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act gives this Appellant a
     right to appeal against the  nomination  of  Bhutan  in  the  proposed
     removal directions.  He does not begin to show that  his  removal  qua
     removal would breach either Convention.  It does not appear to us that
     the destination is a matter which is capable of being the  subject  of
     an appeal under the 2002 Act.

 18. For those reasons, we reject the submissions made by Mr  O'Donnell  on
     that ground, but the difficulty  remains  that  the  Appellant's  real
     claim to be a refugee has not been properly assessed in the context of
     the appropriate country.  For that reason alone, we have decided  that
     the appropriate course is to remit this appeal for hearing  afresh  by
     another Adjudicator.  We have carefully considered  whether  doing  so
     would deprive the Appellant improperly of  the  present  Adjudicator's
     findings of fact.  It appears to us that the most appropriate  way  to
     deal with this is that which we  have  put  to  the  parties  in  this
     hearing and which they have agreed:  that is to say, that although the
     new Adjudicator is to make his own judgment of the credibility of  the
     Appellant's story on the basis of all the evidence before him, he will
     do so having read Mr Miller's determination and he will no doubt  wish
     to take that into account with all the other material  in  making  his
     decision.

 19. We therefore allow this appeal to the Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
     Appellant's appeal be considered afresh, albeit with reference to  the
     earlier determination, on  the  basis  that  he  is  a  person  of  no
     nationality, whose country of former habitual residence was Nepal,  by
     an Adjudicator other than Mr Miller.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
