

JS (Sri Lanka) (Suicide risks - Articles 3 and 8) [2005] UKIAT 00083
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  15 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            ...11 April 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)

Between:




                        [                          ]


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Constable, instructed by Higgotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This appeal is from the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr W D  Mark-
     Bell, promulgated on 25 March 2003.  He dismissed the  appeal  of  the
     Appellant against the decision of the Secretary of State on 6 December
     2000 to refuse to grant asylum and leave to enter;  shortly  after  he
     issued removal directions for Sri Lanka.  The Appellant is  a  married
     woman, a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in 1972, who arrived in the United
     Kingdom in October 2000 with  her  husband.   They  each  made  asylum
     claims in their own right.  These claims  were  processed  separately,
     perhaps  for  good  reason  in  this  case.   The  claimants  made  no
     application for them to be  heard  together,  but  there  has  been  a
     certain amount of leapfrogging and  mutual  reliance  on  the  various
     claims at their various stages.

  2. The asylum claim was abandoned at the  Adjudicator  hearing,  and  the
     claim proceeded as a claim that removal would breach Articles 3 and  8
     ECHR, not just examining the Appellant's claim by reference to her own
     experiences and needs, but also by reference to the impact on  her  of
     her husband's psychiatric difficulties which she would have to face if
     she were returned with him to Sri Lanka.  There  has  never  been  any
     question of one being returned without the other.  By the time of  the
     Adjudicator's hearing, the Appellant had given birth to a baby girl in
     October 2002.

  3. The Appellant is a Christian ethnic Tamil.  She alleged that  she  had
     been recruited in 1989 to undertake various propaganda  activities  by
     the LTTE;  her brother had been killed fighting for them in 1991.  Her
     father died shortly after;  they sold their estates and she moved with
     her mother to a town where  she  had  few  difficulties  pursuing  her
     education.  In 1998, she was raped by two Sri Lankan army soldiers and
     suffered physically and mentally as a result.  Although the army  took
     immediate steps to assist  her  to  pursue  a  complaint  against  the
     soldiers, she declined  to  make  a  complaint  for  various  reasons,
     including the humiliation and adverse social reaction which she  would
     experience.  A few weeks later she married her husband  whom  she  had
     known since 1990,  but  although  she  told  him  that  she  had  been
     attacked, she felt unable to tell him that she had  been  raped.   The
     two  lived  apart  because  of  difficulties  obtaining   a   marriage
     certificate.  During that time the army officer who had sought to help
     her pursue her complaint, came to her  mother's  house  frequently  to
     press his physical attentions upon her, seeking sex and marriage.   He
     threatened to tell her husband that she had been raped.  She felt that
     there was no one to whom she could complain.  In October 2000 she  and
     her husband left Sri Lanka to come to the United Kingdom.  His  asylum
     claim was based on the torture which he had suffered at the  hands  of
     the army and the psychological effect which that had had on him.

  4. The Adjudicator accepted that she had been  raped  because  there  was
     corroborating evidence from a local doctor;  he also accepted that she
     was suffering from PTSD as a result of the rape, because of the report
     of Dr Kamlana dated 16 August 2002.  He referred to  the  support  for
     those contentions because in other respects he did not accept what the
     Appellant had to say.  He did not accept her story that she  had  been
     threatened by the LTTE, and concluded that  her  fear  of  retribution
     from them was a lie, fabricated to gain access to the United  Kingdom.
     There is no challenge to those adverse findings.

  5.  The Adjudicator also rejected the fear of ill-treatment at the  hands
     of army officers or of one in particular.  He did not do so  in  terms
     which left the fear as a genuine one but one which had no  substantive
     foundation;  he did so in terms which said that she no longer had  any
     such fear.  (The first sentence of paragraph 38 of  the  determination
     might be ambiguous in that  respect  but  that  is  clarified  by  the
     penultimate sentence.)  He pointed out that there had been an  attempt
     to investigate and charge the rapists, and that although the Appellant
     had been advised to move away from the town and had done  so  for  two
     years, she had moved back to  be  with  her  mother  again.   He  also
     concluded that there was no evidence that she  was  under  any  actual
     threat of sexual harassment anywhere in Sri Lanka other  than  in  the
     town where the incident had happened.  This  latter  qualification  is
     not wholly consistent with his earlier point.

  6. Although Dr Kamlana had said that she would benefit from a combination
     of medication and counselling through weekly visits from  a  Community
     Psychiatric Nurse, the evidence from the Appellant was that  this  was
     not advancing her condition much, indeed it made her  dislike  herself
     more. He concluded that the background evidence showed a good range of
     medical facilities in Sri  Lanka  with  adequate  facilities  for  the
     treatment of severe PTSD.  Accordingly, the Adjudicator concluded that
     there would be no breach of Article 3 through removal because  he  had
     not been satisfied that removal would  worsen  her  condition  to  the
     level required by Article 3.

  7. He then turned to Article 8,  and  equiparating  the  requirements  of
     Article 3 with those of Article 8 taken as a whole, he concluded  that
     the risks faced by the Appellant would not reach  the  necessary  high
     threshold.   The  last  point  which  he  considered  related  to  the
     husband's position.  By this stage, an Adjudicator had  dismissed  his
     appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 3 but had allowed it  under
     Article 8.  She had done so, although Mr Mark-Bell makes no  reference
     to this, on the basis that he would be a suicide risk were he to  face
     return to Sri Lanka.  He knew that there was an  appeal  against  that
     decision by the Secretary of State.  The Adjudicator said that the two
     had decided to pursue their appeals separately  and  that  he  had  to
     consider the appeal in front of him on its own  merits,  just  as  the
     Adjudicator had done in the case of the husband.

           "45.  I am not persuaded that it  is  for  me  to  embark  on  a
                 determination on the Appellant's husband's appeal and  then
                 apply those conclusions either to the benefit or  detriment
                 of the Appellant's claim.  If the  Appellant's  husband  is
                 allowed to remain in the United Kingdom at the end  of  his
                 appeal process, then  the  Appellant  will  be  allowed  to
                 remain here with him."

  8. The grounds of appeal contended that the  Adjudicator  ought  to  have
     considered, for both Articles 3 and 8, the  evidence  submitted  about
     the husband's medical condition.  The adverse effect to the husband of
     his return and consequent traumatisation would impact in turn  on  the
     Appellant, stressed as she would be, and with a baby.  This impact had
     not been considered.

  9. The Tribunal's jurisdiction in this case covers both  errors  of  fact
     and law.

 10. By  the  time  the  appeal  came  to  be  dealt  with,  after  various
     adjournments, matters had moved on in certain respects.  The Secretary
     of State's appeal in the husband's  case  had  been  successful;   the
     determination  had  been  promulgated  on  8  September   2003.    The
     Adjudicator had accepted as accurate, and there was  no  challenge  to
     it, the claim that the husband  had  been  detained  on  a  number  of
     occasions by the Sri Lankan army and that on two  occasions,  in  1996
     and 2000 he had been severely tortured.  There had been a diagnosis of
     PTSD in the same general terms by the same doctor who had examined the
     Appellant.  The husband was  reluctant  to  take  medication  and  was
     reluctant to receive counselling  because  he  wanted  to  forget  the
     experiences.  He was in work and active but fearful of a return to Sri
     Lanka, threatening suicide rather than accept return.  The Adjudicator
     found that he would in fact take his own life rather than be  returned
     but the Tribunal took the view that that was not  sustainable  on  the
     evidence and involved a misreading of it.  There was no risk  that  he
     would be exposed to any repetition of  his  past  experiences;   there
     were adequate facilities for any medical needs which he might have; he
     had quite a substantial and active life here which showed  the  extent
     to which he would be able to cope with life there;  both  his  parents
     were in Colombo;  he would  be  reassured  by  what  he  saw  when  he
     returned and the Adjudicator had failed to recognise that this was not
     one of those rare cases in which return would disproportionate to  the
     interests of immigration control.

 11. We have been provided with two  further  reports  on  the  Appellant's
     condition, prepared after the Adjudicator's determination.  They  were
     not said to be excluded under Ladd v Marshall and we  have  considered
     them.  The first is a report of September 2003  from  Dr  Shrestha,  a
     consultant psychiatrist, who diagnosed PTSD and Post-Natal Depression.
      She had been treated for the latter with medication, and received the
     support of the Community Psychiatric Nurse.  Such support was expected
     to be needed for at least a  year.   But  progress  had  been  impeded
     because of a  suicide  attempt  by  her  husband  in  August  2003  or
     thereabouts, which had led to his becoming a  psychiatric  in-patient.
     He was expected  to  remain  there  for  some  time.   The  consultant
     concluded that the  Appellant  was  at  a  high  risk  of  suicide  or
     deliberate self harm;   there  had  been  a  number  of  incidents  of
     lacerations to the arm which seemed to provide some sort of relief but
     had  been  hitherto  unknown  behaviour.   She  needed  to  remain  on
     treatment until full recovery and therapy would  be  beneficial  after
     the acute phase was over.   The  consultant  was  not  aware  of  what
     treatment might be available in Sri Lanka, but reported what  she  had
     been told about the pressure under which the Appellant and her  mother
     had felt and what the consultant had  been  told  about  the  lack  of
     facilities  outside Colombo. She reiterated that suicide was  distinct
     possibility, "particularly, if the treatment should be discontinued".

 12. The second report is dated October 2003 and  is  from  Dr  Naismith  a
     consultant forensic  psychiatrist  from  a  different  hospital.   The
     report, like the first, was prepared in connection  with  the  appeal,
     but the Appellant saw Dr Shrestha as an out-patient every three to six
     months and the CPN once or twice a week.  Dr  Naismith  also  recorded
     the fears of the Appellant, and her thoughts of harming  herself,  and
     noted the extensive superficial lacerations to her forearm.  She  said
     that she had overdosed twice, once shortly after arrival and a  second
     time six months later.  He accepted the PTSD and PND diagnosis on  the
     basis of his  own  examination,  and  commented  that  her  continuing
     symptomatology was influenced by her experiences  in  Sri  Lanka,  her
     husband's mental state, the stress of  a  baby,  and  her  immigration
     status.  Both she and her husband were likely to  require  psychiatric
     treatment for the  future.   He  did  not  know  what  care  might  be
     available on return to Sri Lanka.  He could not say whether return  to
     another area of Sri Lanka other than the one from which she came would
     lead to harm.  But the fears, real or not, were genuine to  her.   The
     prospect of return would  be  likely  to  increase  her  distress  and
     further prejudice her mental health and there  was  very  real  danger
     that there would be an act of completed suicide.

 13. The Appellant produced a number of very recent documents.  Dr Shrestha
     said that she saw the Appellant regularly in the  out-patient  clinic,
     apparently every three months or so.  She took  anti-depressants,  saw
     the CPN and had  been  gradually  improving.   She  was  not  actively
     suicidal at present and had not made any attempts in the  last  twenty
     months but she might become suicidal if subjected to stress,  and  she
     continued to express suicidal ideas.  She should continue  in  therapy
     and the family  counselling  had  helped  her  relationship  with  her
     husband.  This was supported by a letter from the CPN.  Their GP wrote
     to say that return would  have  catastrophic  results  for  the  whole
     family. There were also letters of support, one from the local church,
     which attested to the couple's hard work and community contribution.

 14. We were told a little more about the  husband's  attempts  at  suicide
     after the success of the Secretary of State's appeal, which had led to
     his being sectioned, and it was this which had led to the more serious
     investigation of their mental health.  There was no up to date  report
     on him, but he was no longer in hospital.

 15.  Mr  Constable  for  the  Appellant  accepted  that   the   Tribunal's
     determination of the husband's appeal had  been  unchallengeable  when
     delivered but contended  that the subsequent events cast  a  different
     light on his case, in the light of which the Appellant's case also had
     to be considered.  The husband's discharge could be  prioritising  for
     bed spaces and not too much should be read into it.  We were told that
     only his mother was in Colombo.

 16. The correct legal approach was that set out in  Kurtolli  [2003]  EWHC
     2744 Admin, which held that the decision in Soumahoro [2003] EWCA  Civ
     840 remained good law after the decisions in N [2003] EWCA  Civ  1369,
     and Djali [2003] EWCA Civ 1371.

 17. This Appellant had a high subjective fear of removal from  the  United
     Kingdom;  it was not a resource issue but one of the  impact  on  her.
     The level of suicide risk was such that it engaged Articles 3  and  8.
     The Adjudicator had ignored the effect of  the  decision  in  Katrinak
     [2001] EWCA Civ 832, paragraph 23, in which Schiemann LJ had said that
     it was possible to persecute someone through the treatment  meted  out
     to his immediate family.  The question was what was reasonably  likely
     to happen to them and whether  that  would  be  reasonably  likely  to
     constitute persecution of him.  This aspect had been  ignored  by  the
     Adjudicator, and was reinforced by the later evidence.

 18. Miss Hart, with a careful  skeleton  argument  for  the  Secretary  of
     State, submitted that the Appellant could not reopen the  decision  in
     her husband's case by the backdoor.  If it was the combined effect  of
     the impacts which mattered, it had always been open to  them  to  have
     their cases joined.  Katrinak was of no help because of  the  findings
     of the Adjudicator and Tribunal in the  husband's  case  which  showed
     that he did not face persecution or a breach of his rights were he  to
     be returned.  The Appellant's case did not reach the high threshold of
     N and the cases showed that it  would  be  wrong  to  have  any  large
     difference it result as between Articles 3 and 8 in a  case  in  which
     the same factors underlay the alleged  breaches.   Reliance  was  also
     placed on the Tribunal decisions in P (Yugoslavia) [2003] UKIAT 00017,
     in which at paragraph 43, it  was  pointed  out  that  return  to  the
     country of origin did not mean return necessarily to any  place  where
     trauma had been experienced.

 19. It is also worth noting here  two  other  decisions  of  the  IAT:   N
     (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT 00053, in which the  tests  in  relation  to  the
     seriousness of harm required in respect of mental illness and  suicide
     risk where treated as essentially similar under both Articles 3 and 8,
     and KK (Serbia and Montenegro) [2004] UKIAT 00228,  in  which  it  was
     correctly  pointed  out  that  Kurtolli  was  a  case   concerning   a
     certificate of manifest unfoundedness, and which considered separately
     the effect of an adverse decision in the United Kingdom on risk in the
     United Kingdom and risk on return after removal.   It  recognised  the
     problems of acceding to any claim that an adverse decision could  lead
     to suicide  in  the  United  Kingdom,  with  the  protective  measures
     available, and considered the relevance of the Adjudicator's  role  in
     assessing circumstances in the country of return against the  relevant
     thresholds, as opposed to medical evidence which considered  the  best
     clinical outcome for the client.

 20. Miss Hart pointed to the CIPU October 2003 Report, paragraphs 5.32  to
     5.39, which identified  the  available  mental  health  facilities  in
     Colombo,  including  treatment  for  PTSD.   There  was   nothing   to
     contradict this and that is where the family  would  be  returned  and
     where they had relatives.  She invited scepticism of  the  Appellant's
     reported suicide attempts within six months of arrival in  the  United
     Kingdom, because  she  had  not  mentioned  them  in  earlier  medical
     reports.   The  strength  of  the  letters  concerning  the  community
     activities of the Appellant and her husband sat ill with  the  picture
     which was portrayed in the medical reports;  those  letters  showed  a
     couple who were vigorous and active and therefore had  a  far  greater
     ability to cope than those medical reports suggested.

Conclusions

 21. We accept that the husband's case has been resolved and that there  is
     no legal impediment to his return save for the outstanding  appeal  of
     his wife.  It might appear strange, at least,  if  she  could  not  be
     returned because of the condition of  her  husband,  which  in  itself
     would involve no breach of any international obligations.  But that is
     an unusual but not impossible position.

 22. We also accept  that,  except  for  any  impact  which  her  husband's
     condition may have on her, the return of the Appellant would breach no
     international obligations either.   The  conditions  which  she  would
     experience on return would not of themselves breach  Article  3.   She
     would not return either to the town where she experienced  the  trauma
     of rape.   There  is  no  reason  for  disapplying  the  Adjudicator's
     reasoning in respect of Article 3.  She  had  not  been  suicidal  for
     twenty months; there was some reason to doubt the truth of her suicide
     attempts alleged to have occurred shortly after  her  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom.  There is a genuine contradiction between the  picture
     which emerges from her medical reports and the picture painted by  her
     friends from the community as to her strength and ability to cope with
     life.  She has had the benefit of treatment and support  in  her  dual
     depressions.   There  would  be  protection  available   against   any
     significant risk that she might commit or attempt suicide here  before
     removal.  On return, she would find that treatment was  available  for
     her depression.  She would have some family support.

 23. We do not consider that this would give rise to an  interference  with
     her rights under Article 8.  She would have access to  treatment.   We
     accept that her return and the wait pending return would be a time  of
     real anxiety to her, but we do not accept that she  would  be  without
     genuine protection from any attempt to harm herself.  If it were to do
     so, it could not be an interference which was disproportionate.  There
     is no basis upon which the legitimate interests if immigration control
     could be outweighed by the concerns which she could have.  She has not
     told the truth about the background.  She has no basis  for  remaining
     here other than her mental state, for which she has received treatment
     for some years.  The main trauma was seven years ago.   She  would  be
     able to receive support, medical and  familial,  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
     reality of return would to some extent remove the unfounded  fears  as
     she would recognise that they were not in fact well-founded.

 24. In terms of Article 3, on the basis upon which we are  considering  it
     at  present,  we  consider  that  it   is   considerably   below   the
     circumstances in N.  What is striking about that case  is  the  narrow
     range of facts  which  could  lawfully  engage  Article  3  where  the
     circumstances in the  country  of  return  do  not  themselves  engage
     Article 3.  This case is not close to that category.

 25. Although this case involves a mental illness and risk of suicide, that
     does not bring in any different test for the purposes  of  Article  3.
     The extremity of circumstances to engage Article 3 does not vary.  The
     nature of suicide from mental illness, with the associated despair  or
     anguish, may more readily excite humanitarian  considerations  than  a
     physical illness, but the answers are unlikely to be much  clearer  in
     an individual case by attributing any preconceived differential weight
     to the different forms of illness which may face judges.

 26. It is the case, however, that mental illness and an increased risk  of
     suicide through the effect of removal are  capable  also  of  engaging
     Article 8.  It seems to us that the effect of removal  is  capable  of
     interfering with the rights in Article  8(1).   But  the  interference
     then can be  justified  under  Article  8(2),  or  otherwise,  by  the
     legitimate interests of immigration control which here can include the
     public interest served by giving effect  to  the  deportation  of  the
     Claimant following a court recommendation.  In R v Special Adjudicator
     ex parte Ullah [2004] UKHL 26, [2004] Imm AR 419, the House  of  Lords
     agreed (paragraph 24) with what the Tribunal had  said  in  Devaseelan
     [2002] UKIAT 702, a flagrant denial  or  gross  violation  had  to  be
     shown;  only where the right would be completely denied  or  nullified
     would there be a breach of ECHR by the removing state.

 27.  As  Lord  Steyn  put  it,  (paragraph  30),   only   in   exceptional
     circumstances as in D, could someone subject to  expulsion  claim  any
     entitlement to remain in order to benefit from medical  assistance  in
     the expelling state.  But, (paragraph 47), it was the real risk  of  a
     flagrant violation which engaged  Article  8.   This  point  does  not
     appear to have concluded the Article 8 issue, because a  breach  would
     then depend on the application of Article 8(2).  But the general theme
     of the  speeches  is  that  the  flagrancy  has  to  reach  the  level
     equivalent to that of a breach of Article 3;  it  is  irrelevant  then
     what justification Article 8(2) might proffer.

 28. The Article 8 issue was considered in more detail in R v SSHD ex parte
     Razgar in the House of Lords.  It makes it clear that Article 8 can be
     engaged by the consequences of removal for mental health,  ie  Article
     8(1) rights exist and would be interfered with, but that  interference
     may be justified by legitimate immigration control  and  other  public
     interests;  see paragraph 3 and 10.   In  the  latter,  Lord  Bingham,
     agreeing largely with the Tribunal in Kacaj [2002] Imm  AR  213,  that
     legitimate immigration  control  would  almost  certainly  meant  that
     interference under Article 8(2) would be proportionate, said that  the
     degree of overstatement in that comment was small:

           "Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of immigration
           control will be proportionate in all save a  small  minority  of
           exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis."

 29. The theme, that the cases failing under Article 3 but succeeding under
     Article 8 would be small in number, was repeated by others.   Although
     Baroness Hale dissented in the result, her  comment  in  paragraph  59
     that in striking the balance, only the  most  compelling  humanitarian
     considerations were likely to prevail  over  the  legitimate  aims  of
     immigration control or public safety were in harmony  with  the  other
     speeches.

 30. Lord Carswell in paragraph 72 put it this way:

           "For the reasons given by your Lordships in  the  appeals  of  R
           (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator and Do v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [2004] UKHL 26, it must now be accepted that
           in principle article 8 could exceptionally  be  engaged  by  the
           foreseeable consequences for health of removal from  the  United
           Kingdom pursuant to an immigration decision, even though they do
           not amount to a violation of  article  3.   In  order  to  bring
           himself within such an exceptional engagement of article  3  the
           applicant has to  establish  a  very  grave  state  of  affairs,
           amounting to a flagrant or fundamental breach  of  the  article,
           which in effect constitutes a complete denial of his rights.  It
           is necessary accordingly to consider the present case  in  order
           to determine whether an adjudicator could arguable find that the
           removal decision is a breach of article 8."

 31. The specific consideration of suicide in R (Soumahoro) v SSHD, a  case
     heard with Razgar in the Court of Appeal, has been to  a  considerable
     extent overtaken.  It identifies that a real risk or  a  significantly
     increased risk of suicide on removal can engage Article 3 so that  the
     case  could  not  be  treated  as  manifestly  unfounded.   It  was  a
     certificated case and not a  case  on  the  final  decision.   It  was
     arguable that those circumstances engaged Article 3, and  were  not  a
     definitive test for its breach.   It  preceded  N,  and  although  not
     specifically overturned,  the  analysis  in  N  of  the  extremity  of
     circumstances involving a breach of Article 3  must  apply  to  mental
     illness, and Soumahoro must be read with that  in  mind.   The  Razgar
     questions shows how Article 8 should be approached  and  paragraph  20
     indicates that the application of Articles 3 and 8 to the same factors
     are likely to produce overall similar results.

 32. We do not consider this case is one in which Article 3  and  8  should
     lead to different results.

 33. We make a few closing observations about Soumahoro in the light  of  N
     and of Razgar in the House of Lords.  It is important to remember that
     Soumahoro   and   Kurtolli   involved   certificates    of    manifest
     unfoundedness.  They do not purport  to  decide  more  than  what  are
     possible thresholds for a breach of Article  3  and  do  not  set  out
     definitive thresholds for a breach of Article 3.  The real risk  or  a
     significantly increased risk of suicide (Soumahoro paragraph 85)  does
     not purport to constitute a test for the  breach  of  Article  3.   It
     represented circumstances in which a breach of Article 3 could not  be
     regarded as unarguable.  Bensaid v UK [2001] INLR 325 ECtHR  does  not
     suggest that an increased risk of suicide of itself  is  a  breach  of
     Article 3;  in certain circumstances it is capable of being a  breach;
     nor would that necessarily engage or constitute an  interference  with
     Article 8 rights let alone constitute a  disproportionate  one  having
     regard to the legitimate interests of immigration control.

 34. Second, although Soumahoro was not expressly considered in  Razgar  in
     the House of Lords because that was an Article 8 case,  no  conclusion
     one way or the other can be drawn from that.  But  what  is  important
     though for Article 8 is that  the  questions  in  paragraph  17-20  of
     Razgar be asked.  No conclusion was expressed about the  final  answer
     in that case beyond that it was  a  possibility  that  the  return  of
     Razgar might breach Article 8.  But the answer under Article  8  as  a
     whole will rarely be different from what it would be under  Article  3
     if the same  factors  are  relied  on.   Bensaid  reflects  that  same
     approach while considering Articles 3 and 8 separately.

 35. Third, N illustrates the extremity of condition which still  does  not
     satisfy Article 3 and how high the test  has  to  be  for  a  case  to
     satisfy Article 3;  that in turn affects the way in which a breach  of
     Article 8 overall has to be approached;  the violation  has  to  be  a
     flagrant one amounting to an effective denial of the rights in Article
     8.  It is difficult to see that risks  of  self-harm  or  suicide  for
     mental illness or  personality  disorder  should  be  approached  very
     differently from other illnesses which may lead to a painful death  in
     an awareness that such a death is increasingly imminent.   This  point
     was made in Djali (paragraph 30), post Razgar and N in  the  Court  of
     Appeal.

 36. But all this leaves the question of the impact on the Appellant of the
     condition  of  her  husband.   We  accept  that  this  is  a  relevant
     consideration in the case of the Appellant.  We do not think that  the
     Adjudicator was right to deal with it on the basis that there had been
     a choice by the couple as to whether they had their  cases  determined
     separately in this case.  The husband's ignorance of the nature of the
     attack upon his wife could have been a justifiable reason for separate
     hearings of the appeals.  But, in any event, that does not provide  an
     answer to the point.  If the matter was material to the wife's appeal,
     it should have been taken into account even if there might have been a
     better way of doing so.  It could not be dismissed simply on the basis
     that the form of the appeal hearings determined what was material.

 37. We accept that the fact that the husband's case did not  itself  reach
     the thresholds necessary for his return  of  itself  to  constitute  a
     breach  of  the  ECHR  or  of  the  Refugee  Convention,   cannot   be
     determinative of the relevance of his condition to  his  wife's  case.
     It may not reach that high threshold, but the stress of coping with it
     may still have a real effect upon the wife.  Katrinak  was  of  course
     considering whether or not a spouse could suffer  persecution  through
     what was done to her partner.  But the point underlying Mr Constable's
     submissions is the simple one that the  husband's  condition  was  one
     which was capable of materially affecting the ability of the Appellant
     to function and cope with the stresses of return, it was  therefore  a
     material consideration in her case under the ECHR.  It required to  be
     considered but instead, it was ignored.  Cases under Articles 3 and 8,
     while they may fall within a narrow compass and have to  pass  over  a
     high threshold, are nonetheless sensitive to  fact  and  degree.   The
     full facts have to be considered in so far as  the  evidence  permits.
     This is not to re-open the case of the husband;  his position has been
     determined.  He is liable to be removed unless his wife succeeds.

 38. Although, as we have said, there are  weaknesses  in  the  Appellant's
     evidence and ignoring the husband's condition she would  not  succeed,
     that is to consider only part of what she as an individual would  face
     on return.  It may well  be  that  better  evidence  could  have  been
     provided at her appeal and also before us.  But  the  Adjudicator  did
     not consider the material which he  had  from  Dr  Kamlana  about  the
     husband in the context of the wife's case.  We  know  that  there  may
     well be areas which we know little about, as matters have evolved.  We
     have concluded that we have to remit  this  case  for  hearing  before
     another Adjudicator than Mr Mark-Bell or Mrs E B Grant.  It should  be
     heard by a panel of the AIT.  That panel will be  able  to  take  into
     account the up to date position of both the Appellant and her husband,
     though it must be understood that it will not re-open the decision  in
     his case.  It will not need to form any view as to how his case  would
     then fare taken in isolation;  it will  only  be  concerned  with  the
     effect of his condition, however the panel find it  to  be,  upon  the
     wife.  We make no comment about the prospects  of  success  which  the
     remitted appeal may have.  But the  Appellant  should  not  raise  her
     hopes high.

 39. This appeal is accordingly remitted.  It is reported for what  we  say
     about suicide risks and the relevance of the  position  of  those  who
     would be returned with the Appellant.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

