
NM and Others (Lone women - Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076

                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  14 February 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               31 March 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:

                   [                                 ] (1)
         [                                                     ](2)
           [                                                  ](3)

                                                                   CLAIMANTS


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances
For the Appellants:    Mr M O'Conner, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
(1)
                 Mr M Rana, instructed by Aden & Co Solicitors (2)
                 Mr Z Ahmed of Asghar & Co (Slough) (3)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. We deal in this determination with the appeals of three  nationals  of
     Somalia.  They were directed to be heard together under Rule 51 of the
     Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003  because  they
     raised the common issue of whether the Claimants  would  face  a  real
     risk of serious harm by virtue of being lone women, ie women returning
     on their own to Somalia.  Although only the appeal in respect  of  the
     third Claimant was brought by the Secretary of State, we  shall  refer
     to each of them as (first, second and third)  "Claimants".  This  case
     is reported as country guidance for what it  says  about  this  issue,
     Ashrafs, and the related issue of risk to returnees.



  2. Prior to our hearing of these three appeals, there  was  a  directions
     hearing.  That  gave  permission  for  those  representing  the  first
     Claimant to call Professor I M Lewis to speak to his expert report and
     identified five main issues - all relating to the  issue  of  risk  on
     return to lone women.  Steps were taken to  ensure  that  the  parties
     placed before the Tribunal the latest background country materials  as
     well as reports from experts.  In addition to a  written  report  from
     Professor Lewis, we also had a written report from Dr Virginia  Luling
     dated 25 January 2005 entitled "Opinion on the Return of Unaccompanied
     Women to Mogadishu".  We are grateful to those representing the  three
     Claimants for the efforts they made to combine  their  own  researches
     and deployment of experts.  By dint of their endeavours we  have  been
     able to approach our deliberations on these appeals in the light of  a
     good range of materials.



  3. We set out in Appendix A the cases which were cited to us.



  4. The principal background materials placed  before  us  are  listed  at
     Appendix B. They include the  joint  Danish,  Finnish,  Norwegian  and
     British Fact-Finding Mission to  Nairobi,  Kenya  7-12  January  2004,
     published 17 March 2004 entitled "Human Rights and Security in Central
     and Southern Somalia" which we refer to as the Joint  Mission  Report,
     2004.



  5. Although these three appeals have been heard together for the  purpose
     of enabling the Tribunal to give country guidance, our jurisdiction in
     respect  of  them  is  confined  to  that  of  error  of   law.    The
     determination in each was promulgated after 9 June 2003.   Accordingly
     we cannot have regard to post-promulgation  materials  in  determining
     the appeals, unless  satisfied  that  the  determinations  disclose  a
     material error of law:  CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.



  6.  The  first  Claimant  (NM),  who  is  now  29,  appeals  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs F M Kempton, notified on 23  June
     2003, dismissing her appeal on asylum and human rights grounds against
     a decision to give directions for  removal  and  to  refuse  to  grant
     asylum.  The second Claimant (SS), now  aged  19,  brings  her  appeal
     against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C J  Lloyd,  notified
     on 2 August 2004, dismissing her appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds against a decision to  give  directions  for  removal  and  to
     refuse to grant asylum.  The third  Claimant  (LA),  who  is  now  20,
     defends an appeal brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr J C Boyd, notified on 23 September
     2004, dismissing her asylum, but allowing her Article 3 human  rights,
     grounds of  appeal  against  a  decision  to  remove  her  by  way  of
     directions, and refusing to grant asylum.


NM



  7. The Adjudicator accepted  the  core  of  her  account  as  true.   She
     accepted she was a member of the Ashraf clan, that the  Ashraf  was  a
     minority clan, and that the whole area of Mogadishu  where  she  lived
     (Hamar Wayne) had been targeted by the USC and by Hawiye clan militias
     during the 1990s.  There had been four major attacks on the Claimant's
     family.  The last of those, in  1998,  left  her  husband  permanently
     disabled.  Despite a lack  of  specific  incidents  subsequently,  the
     family was often forced  to  hide  in  the  forest  to  avoid  further
     attacks.  Some time after 1998  she  was  divorced  when  her  husband
     married another woman.  Her troubles continued right up until she left
     the country with her two children on 2 January 2003.


  8. Notwithstanding these findings, the Adjudicator decided to dismiss the
     appeal.  Her first reason was that the CIPU Report of April 2002  made
     no mention of the Ashraf or Hassan in Mogadishu, but did confirm  that
     small clans were  safest  where  they  enjoyed  the  protection  of  a
     dominant clan.  At paragraph 27 she stated:

           "At paragraph 4.35 it is stated that  the  small  Asharaf  [sic]
           group in Gedo remained aloof from the clan fighting and enjoys a
           secure position ....    According  to  para  5.3,  most  Somalis
           ensure their personal safety by residing in the 'home areas'  of
           their clan and this may involve a form of internal  displacement
           for some people in Mogadishu who have had to move to traditional
           clan areas elsewhere.  The appellant  referred  to  living  with
           relatives for a while in Afgoye, and  so  presumably  there  are
           other  Ashraf  clan  members  in  that  rural  area,  where  the
           appellant could have gone if she was afraid, rather than seeking
           international protection."


  9. Her other main reason was set out at para 28 as follows:

           "I do not consider that the appellant has  a  Convention  reason
           and so she has not been persecuted for any such reasons.   As  a
           result, she does not come under the protecting umbrella  of  the
           Convention.  She is the victim, like so many of  her  countrymen
           and women of a civil war as discussed in the decision  in  Adan.
           As such she is just one of many people who have suffered but who
           has not been individually targeted due to her ethnic origin.  On
           return, she will be no different from  anyone  else.   There  is
           nothing to single out her circumstances.  Given that the  Ashraf
           have in particular been mentioned at 4.35 as enjoying  a  secure
           position, I cannot see what difficulty the appellant  will  have
           on return.  She will have the protection of  a  clan,  which  in
           itself appears to be protected."


 10. She also considered that the "catalyst" for the Claimant's decision to
     flee Somalia was her divorce.

 11. Mr O'Connor relied on two main submissions.  Firstly, the  Adjudicator
     was wrong to dismiss the appeal on the basis that the Claimant was not
     personally targeted.  Close family members had been murdered or maimed
     and the Adjudicator had accepted that the area where she  resided  was
     targeted.  Secondly, the Adjudicator had erred in failing to  consider
     that as a divorced woman from  a  minority  clan  returning  alone  to
     Somalia she would be particularly vulnerable to intimidation, physical
     and sexual violence against which she would receive no protection from
     any of the majority clans.  Having had  no  contact  with  her  family
     since arriving in the United Kingdom, she would in all likelihood have
     to go into a camp for internally displaced people where she would face
     a serious risk of rape and violence.  Even if she were able to contact
     her family, evidence showed that minority clans are forced to live  in
     desperate conditions of poverty and suffered discrimination because of
     their minority status.

 12. We find that her decision was legally flawed.  Firstly, she  erred  in
     her approach to the issue of past persecution.   She  considered  that
     the Claimant had not experienced persecution because she had not  been
     individually targeted.  However, on the basis of her own findings, the
     absence of individual targeting did not mean that  this  Claimant  had
     not suffered harm personal to her.  She  had  accepted  that  majority
     clan militia had targeted the whole of the Hamar Wayne area where  the
     Claimant lived.  She had also  accepted  that  as  a  result  of  this
     targeting, close members of the Claimant's family had been  killed  or
     injured.  The Claimant herself had only been able to avoid attacks  by
     hiding in the forest.  Thus the Claimant was directly  and  personally
     affected by targeted acts of violence.

 13. Of greater concern was her approach to current  risk.   She  concluded
     that because the Claimant had not been personally targeted, there  was
     no real risk of persecution on return.  Sometimes that may be a proper
     deduction.  But where the basis of the persecution is tribal or  clan,
     and it would be true for other  aspects  of  ethnicity,  the  risk  on
     return is much less easy to judge on the basis of an absence  of  past
     individual persecution.   The  risk  has  to  be  judged  against  the
     prospects of an individual of that ethnicity being persecuted, and the
     particular personal identity of that individual is likely to be rather
     less important.

 14. Secondly, the  Adjudicator  appears  to  have  misconstrued  the  CIPU
     materials that were before her.  She considered there would not  be  a
     prospective risk on return because the April 2002 CIPU Report at  para
     4.35 mentioned  the  Ashraf  as  enjoying  a  secure  position,  being
     protected by a majority clan.  That was  incorrect.   The  April  2002
     CIPU Report said nothing about the Ashraf.  The  report  she  actually
     made reference to was the October 2002 CIPU report.

 15. The October 2002 CIPU Report does not state that  the  Ashraf  were  a
     clan protected by a majority clan.   Paragraph 4.35 is confined  to  a
     newly included observation about the Ashraf in  one  locality  only  -
     Gedo - enjoying a secure position;  but the source on which it  relies
     for this observation dated from  1997.   Elsewhere  the  October  CIPU
     identified the Benadiri  (of whom the  Ashraf  form  a  sub-group)  as
     being a "particularly disadvantaged" minority group and one  "targeted
     by clan militia since the collapse of central authority in 1991":  see
     paragraphs 5.4 and 5.41.  In each of those respects,  the  Adjudicator
     ignored material considerations.

 16. Those errors had a consequential  impact  on  the  way  in  which  the
     Adjudicator  considered,  or  rather  did  not  then   consider,   the
     practicalities of the Claimant reaching those supposedly safe areas in
     safety.  It is not necessary to hold it to be a free-standing error of
     law, and we do not know precisely how, if at all, any such  point  was
     taken before her.  On her own analysis, members of  the  Ashraf  would
     have more than one area within which they  would  be  able  to  obtain
     protection (she seemed to have in mind Gedo and Afgoye).  But if  that
     were so, then it was necessary for the Claimant to gain access to such
     areas.  Had the Adjudicator appreciated the real difficulties faced by
     Ashraf, she might well have gone on to consider that issue.  We do not
     know what she would have concluded on the  material  before  her.   We
     deal later with the effect of the evidence which we  have  heard  upon
     the outcome of the appeal.

 17. There is a more general  point  which  merits  comment.   Mr  O'Connor
     contended that the Adjudicator also erred  in  failing  to  take  into
     account the April 2003 CIPU Report, from which that observation  about
     the Ashraf in Gedo had been removed and which was specific  about  the
     Benadiri being a minority clan that had been particularly targeted  by
     majority clan militia.  However, the Adjudicator made  no  mention  of
     the April 2003 report and we cannot see that she had  it  before  her.
     If it was not before her, she cannot be said to have erred in  failing
     to take account of it.  The fact that it had  been  published  by  the
     time of the determination does not impose a duty to  consider  it  nor
     make  it  a  material  consideration.   It  is  difficult  enough  for
     Adjudicators to consider the mass of material often placed in front of
     them, let alone to consider all that which is not.  The  CIPU  Reports
     have no special status in that respect.  An Adjudicator can of  course
     state that he will look at it or other material and  the  parties  can
     comment on it, but that is a matter for the Adjudicator.  If relevant,
     the parties should draw material to the Adjudicator's attention.

 18. In dismissing the appeal despite finding  that  the  Claimant  was  an
     Ashraf, the Adjudicator's approach in this appeal does not accord with
     that set out by the Tribunal in  two  recent  country  guidance  cases
     dealing with the position of minority clans generally -  KS  (Minority
     Clans-Bajuni-ability to speak Kibajuni) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT  00271
     - and the position of the Ashraf in particular:   AM  (Use  of  Sharif
     Name) (Somalia) CG [2004] UKIAT 000110, paragraph 14.   However,  both
     these cases post-date the Adjudicator's  decision  and  so  cannot  of
     themselves show she erred in law in her view of the facts.

 19. The Adjudicator's assessment of the Ashraf as  a  protected  clan  was
     also at odds with two reported cases, Ahmed Hussain [2002] UKIAT 02545
     and Omar Mohamoud Tubeec [2002]  01/TH/01347.   To  the  best  of  our
     knowledge there were no reported cases in existence taking a different
     view.  In both, the Tribunal based its conclusion that members of  the
     Ashraf were generally at  risk,  on  the  objective  materials  placed
     before them in those cases,  including  CIPU  materials.   Neither  of
     these cases were brought to the  Adjudicator's  attention.   Had  this
     been done, she could have had a very  different  starting  point  when
     coming to the assessment objective evidence before her.

 20. The fact that she did not consider these cases and quite possibly  was
     unaware of them cannot amount to an error of law.  Even though by June
     2003, when the Adjudicator promulgated her determination, the Tribunal
     had begun a new reporting system  (see  the  joint  Chief  Adjudicator
     Practice Direction CA3 and the Tribunal  Practice  Direction  No  10),
     there was still no publicly accessible electronic database of  pre  or
     post June  2003  reported  Tribunal  decisions.   An  Adjudicator  was
     dependant on the variable researches and random or partial selections,
     if any, of the parties.

SS

 21. The second Claimant had said she was a member of the Ashraf clan  from
     Jilib town near Kismayo, approximately 200 km south of Mogadishu.  Her
     family had faced attacks during the 1990s; her father  was  killed  in
     May 2003 when she was detained for three days before being returned to
     her mother.  In December 2003 she was caught again by the  Hawiye  and
     detained for three months.  She managed to escape and make her way out
     of Somalia to the United Kingdom.  The Adjudicator, however,  did  not
     find her asylum claim credible and in particular did not believe  that
     she was an Ashraf or from any minority clan.  The Adjudicator did  not
     accept that she  had  suffered  persecution  from  majority  clans  on
     account of her ethnicity and tribal affiliation.  We need not set  out
     the Adjudicator's reasons for rejecting credibility  since  permission
     to appeal was granted solely on the issue of risk on return as a young
     woman.  She acknowledged that the  Claimant's  family  may  have  been
     caught up in conflicts over the years, but considered  that  they  had
     apparently prospered and that they  remained  in  Somalia.   She  also
     acknowledged that the Claimant  "as  a  young  woman,  fits  within  a
     vulnerable category, were she to be returned". However,  by  reference
     to  the  Tribunal  cases  of  J  (Somalia)  [2004]  UKIAT  00071,  she
     considered that  "only in the most  exceptional  cases  would  general
     conditions amount to a breach of article 3.  The fact of  lawlessness,
     insecurity and instability did not reach the high threshold required".
      In the light of this guidance she concluded that the  Claimant  could
     not succeed in her asylum claim or in her human rights claim.

 22. In respect of the latter she wrote:



            "I have also examined article 3 on a different basis:   it  was
           submitted that the Appellant would be at real risk as  a  female
           if returned, particularly in the context of uncertain  security.
           She was affected by a differential impact.  I do not  find  that
           general security and humanitarian conditions of themselves  give
           rise to an  article  3  claim.   However,  there  must  be  real
           concerns about the return of a young single woman.  However,  it
           appears that she still has close family members in the  country,
           her mother and siblings, which is a factor which in my judgement
           militates against the Appellant herself being risk  [sic].   She
           would not be at real risk of treatment which  would  breach  the
           high threshold for article 2 and 3.



           43.  I  do  not  find  that  the  Appellant  would   suffer   an
           interference in  her  protected  human  rights  because  of  the
           general  security  or  humanitarian  situation  in  Somalia  nor
           because of her gender."


 23. The grounds of appeal, as elucidated by Mr Rana,  contended  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in law in not considering the question  of  how  the
     Claimant would be returned to Mogadishu in Somalia and then  make  her
     way south to Jilib.  He cited in  support  the  Tribunal  case  of  SH
     (Return-Gedo-Burden of Proof) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164, which  found
     that a woman who was a majority clan member from Gedo  region  was  at
     risk on return, because she would be unable to make her way in  safety
     from Mogadishu to the Gedo region.  The other main  point  raised  was
     that the Adjudicator had failed to give proper weight  to  the  latest
     objective evidence on Somali before her, which  included  three  major
     2004 reports.

 24. We point out  that,  thus  expressed,  that  latter  point  is  not  a
     contention of an error of law.  Old habits die  hard.   That  form  of
     drafting of grounds of appeal, appropriate for an error  of  fact  and
     law jurisdiction, is not correct  for  an  exclusively  error  of  law
     jurisdiction.  Grounds of appeal should raise errors of  law  and  not
     just continue old formulae with an "error of law" prefix.

 25. These grounds did not  persuade  us.   They  were  based  on  a  false
     premise.  They depended crucially on the Adjudicator  having  accepted
     that the Claimant's home area was as claimed by her,  ie  Jilib  town.
     However, the Adjudicator made no such finding.  To the  contrary,  she
     expressed her rejection of the Claimant's evidence in  general  terms:
     at paragraph 21 she stated  that  she  "did  not  find  the  appellant
     credible overall nor about the core of her claim";   at  paragraph  34
     she stated: "I did not find the Appellant credible  about  her  asylum
     claim";  and at paragraph 39 she  made  reference  to  the  Claimant's
     "poor credibility".  She did not find that the Claimant was  a  member
     of a minority clan.  The only matters she was prepared to accept  were
     that (i) "she and her family were caught up in the conflict  over  the
     years", (ii) they "apparently prospered" and (iii) "... the Appellant,
     as a young woman, fits within a vulnerable category, were  she  to  be
     returned".  None of these  matters  were  related  to  the  Claimant's
     geographical location.  In our view, if a Claimant fails to  establish
     core elements of her claim going to clan identity and to location, she
     is not entitled to have her claim considered as if she  had  satisfied
     those core elements.  In our view, this Adjudicator gave sound reasons
     for making the findings that  she  did.   And  on  her  findings,  the
     Claimant was simply a young female adult Somalia  national  with  some
     family left in Somalia who apparently had some degree of wealth.

 26. On Mr Rana's principal submission, it is incumbent on  an  Adjudicator
     in the context of  all  Somali  cases  to  make  a  finding  as  to  a
     claimant's home area.  We disagree.  The burden of  proof  lies  on  a
     claimant to make out his or her claim in material particulars.   If  a
     claimant's evidence does not sufficiently satisfy the Adjudicator, the
     Adjudicator cannot make a finding on a claimant's home area;  there is
     no duty to make a finding regardless of the quality of  the  evidence.
     The appeal has to be decided on  the  basis  that  it  is  not  known,
     because of deficiencies in the claimant's evidence and bearing in mind
     who bears the burden of proof.  Home area in the Somali context  means
     not so much place of birth as place of clan  origin  or  clan  current
     control or location.

 27. Where, however,  positive  findings  about  clan  and  home  area  can
     properly be made, then the prospects of safely reaching that area  may
     become an  issue,  because  such  prospects  impact  on  the  risk  of
     persecution or ill treatment contrary to Article 3.  But that is of no
     assistance to Mr Rana, since no positive findings  could  properly  be
     made in his Claimant's case.

 28. Nor do  we  see  any  real  inconsistency  between  the  Adjudicator's
     description of the Claimant as being in a  "vulnerable  category"  and
     her main conclusions.  Her description of the Claimant as being  in  a
     "vulnerable category" faithfully reflected what was indicated  in  the
     reports which were  before  her,  including  the  UNHCR  January  2004
     document in particular.  But she quite properly did not  equate  being
     in a "vulnerable category" with inevitable  proof  that  a  particular
     Claimant would face a real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return.   She
     considered that although "there must be real concerns about the return
     of a young single woman", the Claimant still had close family  members
     in the country (her mother and siblings).  This  factor  went  in  her
     case to reduce the level of risk she would face to one below that of a
     real risk.

 29. In our view it was properly open to  the  Adjudicator  to  assess  the
     evidence  before  her  this  way.   She  did  not  overlook  that  the
     background evidence  identified  the  Claimant  as  falling  within  a
     vulnerable category; nor did she ignore that  females  on  return  may
     encounter particular risks.  But she did not consider on that material
     that falling within these general categories alone  would  necessarily
     expose her to a real risk of ill treatment contrary to Article 3.   In
     respect of the latter, she was  entitled  to  place  reliance  on  the
     Tribunal view in J (Somalia) [2004] UKIAT 00071, paragraph 13 that "It
     would only be in the most exceptional cases  that  general  conditions
     would amount to a breach of article 3".   That  was  a  conclusion  to
     which she was entitled to come.  The evidence did not necessitate  the
     conclusion that any returnee or any female returnee  from  a  European
     country would be at risk.  There  may  be  sub-categories,  especially
     from minority clans, to whom that  would  apply.   But  it  is  for  a
     claimant to provide the evidence which shows him or her to be at  risk
     eg by being within  a  risk  category.   Where  the  evidence  is  not
     sufficiently sound, because it is not generally believed, the claimant
     fails to make out the case.

 30. Accordingly, we do not find that there was any material error  of  law
     in the decision of the Adjudicator to dismiss the appeal of the second
     Claimant.  Although we consider later the  evidence  about  the  risks
     faced by the general categories of returnees and lone women returnees,
     that assessment cannot affect the outcome of this appeal.

LA

 31. The third Claimant had  stated  that  she  was  an  Ashraf  living  in
     Alanley, Kismayo.  She and her family had been  subjected  to  attacks
     mainly by  Darod  militia.   The  final  incident  which  led  to  the
     Claimant, along with her parents  and  two  younger  sisters,  fleeing
     Somalia via Kenya  occurred  in  November  2003.   In  the  course  of
     fighting with rival Darod militia, members of the Marehan, a sub  clan
     of the Darod had attacked their house, beating her father, killing her
     brother, shooting her cousin and ransacking and looting  their  house.
     When she regained consciousness during an attack, she discovered  that
     her sister had been kidnapped.

 32. The Adjudicator made an adverse  credibility  finding.   He  concluded
     that she was not a member of the Ashraf clan  or  any  other  minority
     clan.  Having dismissed the asylum  appeal  however,  he  went  on  to
     consider whether the Claimant as a single girl would  be  at  risk  on
     return.  Given that the Claimant spoke standard Somali dialect, he did
     not think she would be out of place in her home region.   However,  at
     paragraph 41, he concluded:

           "I have considered the two most recent [2004] reports from UNHCR
           and from the Joint Report of 7th  January.   I  have  considered
           also the other background evidence here in the CIPU at 6.146  to
           6.150.  In considering those three recent Reports, the CIPU, the
           up to date Minority Report and the UNHCR Report, it seems to  me
           that to return the appellant to Somalia as a single young female
           returning from a European country would not render  her  subject
           to a well founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention  reason
           but would, in  my  opinion,  subject  her  to  a  real  risk  of
           treatment contrary to  the  terms  of  Art  3  of  the  European
           Convention of Human Rights.  ... I am satisfied that there is  a
           real risk of treatment contrary to Art 3".

 33. The Adjudicator made clear at paragraph 11 that he did not  think,  in
     the light of the matters relating to her credibility he  had  examined
     earlier, that she was a "genuine asylum  seeker".   However,  he  only
     expressly rejected her claim to be an Ashraf or a member of any  other
     minority clan.  At paragraph 36, he did at one point state: "[b]earing
     in mind the area [her family] lived in...", and at  paragraph  40,  it
     appears he was prepared to consider, at least in the  context  of  her
     situation as a rejected asylum seeker, what the position would  be  if
     she had no relatives left in Somalia.  On this basis he assessed that,
     since she spoke standard Somali dialect, she would, if returned to her
     home region, be seen as sufficiently Somali.  Implicitly, he concluded
     that she is a majority clan member.

 34. It is convenient to take  the  Claimant's  counter  submissions  first
     because they relate to what the Adjudicator actually held.   Mr  Ahmed
     sought to argue for the Claimant that the  Adjudicator's  comments  at
     paragraphs 36 and 40 amounted to an  acceptance  that  the  Claimant's
     home area was Kismayo and that, therefore, it was incumbent on him  to
     consider risk arising from the mode of return  to  her  home  area  of
     Kismayo within Somalia.  But the Adjudicator made no positive findings
     about the Claimant's home area, and found her claim to be  a  minority
     clan member not to be credible.  Part of his reasoning related to what
     he would have expected her to have known and to have  experienced  had
     she been a minority clan member from Kismayo.  On the other  hand,  it
     was partly because of her assertion that she was from Kismayo that  he
     rejected her credibility.  We consider that  that  was  no  more  than
     saying that if the Claimant said she was from Kismayo, her  story  was
     internally contradictory.  It involved no finding that  any  part  was
     correct.

 35. As in the  case  of  the  second  Claimant,  so  in  this  case  also:
     essentially all that was accepted by the Adjudicator was that she  was
     a young woman from a majority clan in Somalia, save  perhaps  for  the
     specific  acceptance  that  she  spoke  a  standard  Somali   dialect.
     Accordingly, the  Adjudicator's  conclusion  on  Article  3  proceeded
     simply on the basis  that  she  was  a  majority  clan  female,  being
     returned from a European country.  The lawfulness of  that  conclusion
     on Article 3 is raised by the Secretary of State's grounds.  It is for
     the  Claimant  to  show  what  risks,  if  any,  she  faces  in  those
     circumstances, knowing what the issues in the case are  and  that  her
     case that she was a minority clan member was  at  issue.   It  is  not
     incumbent on the  Adjudicator  to  make  findings  which  he  properly
     considers that the evidence does not permit him to.

 36. Even if we had accepted Mr Ahmed's  submission  that  the  Adjudicator
     effectively treated the Claimant's home  area  as  Kismayo,  it  would
     still be for the Claimant to show what risks she faced in Somalia, and
     in reaching her home or other safe area  from  the  frontier  post  or
     airport where she would arrive.  (We would  expect  the  Secretary  of
     State to be able to provide information as to the  various  places  of
     return,  if  other  than  Mogadishu.)   Here,  the  Claimant  on  this
     hypothesis provided nothing more  specific  than  that  she  was  from
     Kismayo and, on the Adjudicator's findings, was a majority clan member
     there, who had not been at risk.  No specific materials seem  to  have
     been drawn to his attention to cater for the possibility that the core
     claim might be rejected and yet that he might find that she had a home
     area in Kismayo, accessing which was then said to be dangerous for the
     Claimant even as a  member  of  a  majority  clan.   The  question  of
     internal relocation might also have arisen in respect of a member of a
     majority clan which was located in more than one area.  He was instead
     entitled to deal with the case on the basis upon which he did,  simply
     looking at returning lone women from a European country.

 37.  Accordingly,  we  consider  that  Mr  Ahmed's  submission  that   the
     Adjudicator should have allowed the appeal for  an  additional  reason
     relating to the lack of any safe route of  return  to  the  Claimant's
     home area must fail.

 38. The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in law by applying an unduly speculative  assessment
     of the risk to the Claimant on return.  Having rejected her  claim  to
     be from a minority clan and noting that  her  claim  did  not  involve
     gender-based persecution, there were no real  reasons  to  assume  she
     would not have the protection of a dominant clan upon return, or  that
     she would be readily  identifiable  as  someone  having  come  from  a
     European  country.   We  repeat  our  earlier   comments   about   the
     formulation of errors of law.  There may be an error of law struggling
     to make itself known here and the drafter should not smother  it  with
     the  language  of  a  wider  jurisdiction.    In   relation   to   the
     Adjudicator's  reference  to  the  internal  flight   alternative   at
     paragraph 28, it was submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  also  gave  no
     reasons for finding that the Claimant,  as  a  majority  clan  Somali,
     could not relocate to stable areas of the country where her  clan  may
     be dominant.

 39. The submissions for the Secretary of State  in  the  third  Claimant's
     appeal raise this issue:  did the Adjudicator err in law  in  allowing
     the Article 3 appeal simply on the  basis  that  the  Claimant  was  a
     rejected young female asylum seeker who would be returning on her  own
     from a European country whose claim for asylum had not arisen from any
     gender-based persecution, who was a member of  a  majority  clan,  and
     whose  case  had  no  other  distinctive  features?   He   based   his
     conclusions on the objective materials before him:  at paragraph 41 he
     referred to the  CIPU  Report  April  2004,  the  January  2004  UNHCR
     Position paper and the Joint Mission Report of 2004.

 40. There  is  no  analysis  of  the  background  material  to  which  the
     Adjudicator referred to  explain  how  that  conclusion  was  derived,
     general as it was.  In particular, it is far from  clear  whether  the
     conclusion related to the general circumstances of life once  returned
     to her majority clan area or whether it related to the difficulties at
     the place of return and en route to the clan area.   The  two  aspects
     give rise to different considerations.

 41. We set out later certain extracts from the background  material  which
     the Adjudicator had before  him.   It  is  difficult  to  see  that  a
     generalised conclusion about a real risk of a breach of Article  3  in
     an area where the majority clan lived could  properly  be  drawn.   It
     certainly would require  clearer  reasoning,  because  the  background
     material shows a pattern of area-based clan protection.  It  would  be
     for the Claimant to show that that was not available and she does  not
     do so simply as a young, single female majority clan member  returning
     from Europe.

 42. This is especially so in the light of the Tribunal's decision FG (Risk-
     Single Female-Clan Member-Art 3) Somalia CG [2003]  00175)  designated
     as a guideline case in June 2004.  As is clear from its  keywords,  FG
     was  particularly  pertinent  to  the  specific  country   issue   the
     Adjudicator was assessing, all the more so because  he  had  dismissed
     the asylum appeal and made adverse credibility findings.  Hence,  like
     the Tribunal in FG, he was concerned primarily with the residual issue
     of whether a relatively young woman returning on her own would  be  at
     real risk.  At paragraph 19 of FG, the Tribunal wrote:

           "We do not feel on the evidence that the return of the appellant
           would expose  her  to  a  real  risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading
           treatment. While there are cases of rape in Mogadishu, it is not
           established that the appellant, admittedly as  a  single  woman,
           would herself be at risk given that she is a  member  of  a  sub
           clan of a majority clan".


 43. The Adjudicator should have addressed this case, applying it or giving
     legally adequate reasons as to why not.   In  FG,  there  had  been  a
     positive finding that the Claimant was from a majority  sub-clan;   he
     made a negative finding that the Claimant was not from a minority clan
     with the implication she was from a majority  clan.   The  Adjudicator
     could perhaps have distinguished it by reference  to  the  significant
     later material from early 2004, but he did not even refer to it.

 44. However, in view of  the  explicit  rejection  of  the  asylum  claim,
     including noting that there was no claim of gender-based  persecution,
     and recognising the common jurisprudential  threads  between  the  two
     Conventions, it may be likelier that the Adjudicator had in  mind  the
     specific issue of safety at or between the point  of  return  and  the
     clan area, which is not an issue specifically  addressed  in  FG,  and
     which would also have provided a proper basis for distinguishing it.

 45. We set out later extracts  from  the  background  material  which  the
     Adjudicator had before him.  It does permit,  but  not  require,  that
     more limited conclusion.  That conclusion would not  be  out  of  line
     with the later case of SH (Return-Gedo-Burden of Proof)  [2004]  UKIAT
     00164, which did consider the problems of involvement in  Somalia,  in
     that case for a female majority clan member going from Mogadishu to an
     area of her  clan's  dominance  in  Gedo.   She  had  previously  been
     assaulted on that journey.

 46. It went on to conclude:

           "13.  During the course of the hearing, Mr Blundell  volunteered
                 to seek information from the country expert within the Home
                 Office as to the viability  of  travel  from  Mogadishu  to
                 Gedo. Having made such enquiries as he could,  he  informed
                 us that there have been returns to Mogadishu.  The  journey
                 from Mogadishu to Gedo is approximately 150 miles but there
                 is no public transport system and, as the CIPU  notes,  the
                 journey is likely to be interrupted by militia  checkpoints
                 at which extortion demands will be made. Realistically, the
                 appellant will have to be provided with money in  order  to
                 enable her to complete the journey  and  is  likely  to  be
                 subjected, at least, to extortion demands by militiamen. As
                 Mr Cox pointed out, the very fact that the  appellant  will
                 have money will render her liable to extortion.  Whilst  we
                 accept that this may not be in quite the same category as a
                 person being required to fell across battle-lines in  order
                 to seek the safety of his or her own community, it  appears
                 to us that the journey is likely to be perilous.  She  will
                 be accompanied by a young child. Mr Blundell accepted  that
                 it would not be particularly easy.
           14.   The conclusion that we have reached is  that,  whilst  the
                 background material establishes that the area  around  Gedo
                 will provide adequate safety for this appellant, even as  a
                 single woman,  there  is  at  present  no  practical  means
                 enabling her to complete  her  journey  there  in  adequate
                 safety.  In  our  judgment,  under  both  Conventions,  the
                 provision of adequate security is essentially  a  practical
                 affair.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  we  have   avoided
                 deciding the issue on the basis of who has  the  burden  of
                 establishing it. It is, of course,  for  the  appellant  to
                 establish her claim. If the  evidence  suggests  there  are
                 areas within the country where a  particular  appellant  is
                 able to find adequate protection, the  assumption  will  be
                 that there are means of travel to enable her to reach  that
                 destination. If, as  in  the  case  of  Somalia,  there  is
                 evidence  that  there  are  significant   difficulties   in
                 completing the journey, the information may  be  sufficient
                 to enable the appellant to discharge the burden placed upon
                 her. Nevertheless, it will sometimes be the case  that  the
                 Secretary of State has access to information  that  is  not
                 available to an appellant and, in such  cases,  it  may  be
                 reasonable for the Secretary of State to provide it. In  so
                 doing, we are not suggesting that the burden shifts to  the
                 Secretary of State although  the  issue  was  not  explored
                 before us.
             15. The consequences of this decision are  that  the  appellant
                 has  succeeded   in   establishing   that   there   is   an
                 insufficiency of protection for her were she to  return  to
                 Somalia and that her claim under the Refugee Convention  is
                 made out. Her upgrade appeal is allowed."

 47.  We  have  considerable  doubts  about  the  legal  adequacy  of   the
     Adjudicator's reasoning but we do not consider that the  Secretary  of
     State has made out his first ground of appeal.  The determination  can
     be sustained if the basis of his reasoning on the material before  him
     related to safety at the point of return or en route to a  safe  area.
     We decline to hold that a material error of law has been demonstrated,
     reading the determination in that way.

 48. On that basis, the appeal ground about internal flight  falls  by  the
     wayside.  Although  it  is  a  point  which  we  consider  later,  the
     availability of internal flight depends on risk in accessing any  such
     point.

 49. As we point out later, there is an issue which goes to both  of  those
     points which Adjudicators should consider, but that new issue was  not
     sufficiently flagged up in argument before the Adjudicator or  in  the
     background material for his conclusions to be  erroneous  in  law  for
     failing to deal with it.

Thus far

 50. Accordingly, the  appeals  in  the  cases  of  the  second  and  third
     Claimants are dismissed.  There is no  material  error  of  law.   The
     fresh evidence cannot affect the outcome.  The asylum and human rights
     appeals in the case of the first Claimant are allowed, but subject  to
     the effect of the fresh evidence which we consider.

 51. We acknowledge that our decisions mean that the outcomes of the second
     and  third  cases  are  different,  even  though  there  is  no  major
     distinction on the facts:  one had family members in Somalia, and both
     failed to show that they were minority clan members.  In  the  latter,
     the issue of risk at the point of return and in  accessing  clan  area
     was considered;  in the former it  had  not  been  raised  before  the
     Adjudicator as an issue distinct from whether she was a minority  clan
     member.  The second Adjudicator did not  have  to  consider  it.   The
     evidence on it before the second (or indeed  third)  Adjudicator  does
     not permit only one conclusion on it - far from it.

 52. This is not a satisfactory situation.  But, although it is an error of
     law  for  the  Tribunal  as  an  appellate  body  to  reach  different
     conclusions on the same issue in different cases, that may not  be  so
     for the first instance tier.  That position may change in  the  single
     tier.

 53. The Tribunal cannot deal directly with those  inconsistencies  because
     of the restrictions on admitting evidence  post  Adjudicator  decision
     which the changed jurisdiction to errors  of  law  has  been  held  to
     impose.

 54. However, we can deal with certain areas by way of guidance  to  reduce
     or eliminate true inconsistencies in later cases.  We turn to this  in
     the context of dealing with  the  first  Claimant's  appeal.   We  are
     entitled to take into account all the materials placed  before  us  in
     this appeal, including the oral testimony of Professor Lewis.   It  is
     possible that some was not before the Adjudicator when  it  could  and
     should have been.   We  make  no  findings  as  to  that;   we  simply
     recognise it as a possibility.  But we would  have  looked  at  it  in
     order to avoid misunderstanding any of the later evidence or to  avoid
     excluding material which might have a bearing on the general issue  we
     consider.

Risk to women returning alone from the United Kingdom

 55. In shorthand, the question we address is "Are such persons  a  current
     risk category?" for Refugee Convention  or  Article  3  purposes.   We
     remind ourselves that we are dealing here with  a  country  which  has
     been the subject of a great deal of examination in the form of country
     reports by external observers, notwithstanding that for many observers
     travel there is fraught with danger and  difficulties.   A  number  of
     governmental and non-governmental bodies  have  sought  over  time  to
     identify certain risk categories.   That  they  have  done  so  is  of
     assistance to the Tribunal in the tasks we have to undertake.

 56. The submissions we heard went beyond the contention  that  lone  women
     were  a  risk  category  and  embraced  the  broader  contention  that
     returnees generally were a risk category.  In what follows, therefore,
     we shall consider the evidence relating to  both  of  these  canvassed
     risk categories.  Many issues are common to both.

 57. We accept that there have been several reports in 2004 and  previously
     which have particularly highlighted  the  problems  facing  returnees,
     women and lone women.  Thus the  UNHCR  Position  Paper  January  2004
     (before  the  second  and  third  Adjudicators)  regarding  return  of
     rejected asylum seekers to Somalia (paragraph 5.1) states that:

           "Lives continue to be threatened by violence, crime, clan feuds,
           lack of justice as well as  poverty.  Furthermore,  humanitarian
           agencies have  real  problems  gaining  access  to  many  areas.
           Militia loyal to different strongmen succeed one  another  in  a
           perpetual move to establish a  sustainable  control  of  certain
           areas. There is a constant fear of abrupt change in clan balance
           shaking territorial power bases. This often leads  to  conflicts
           between clans and factions. Mines have been laid in  many  areas
           as part of current conflicts to either mark territorial  control
           or prevent the mistreatment of people. Moreover, the lack of any
           effective governing administration may render it impossible  for
           countries with rejected Somali asylum seekers to embark  on  any
           comprehensive and co-ordinated dialogue aiming at removing  such
           cases.  Consequently, UNHCR considers that  persons  originating
           from southern Somalia are in need  of  international  protection
           and objects to any involuntary return of rejected asylum seekers
           to the area south of the town of Galkayo."



58. This contrasts  with  the  area  north  of  that  town,  Somaliland  and
  Puntland.  In the north, returns are generally possible.  There are  also
  southern pockets of variable stability.   But  there  was  little  or  no
  authoritative government, high  levels  of  criminality,  sporadic  armed
  conflicts, lack of economic recovery, endemic humanitarian needs, minimal
  health care and education and population displacement.



59. As regards women, UNHCR states at paragraph 2.1:


           "Gender-based violence  is  prevalent,  including  rape,  female
           genital mutilation and domestic violence. The cultural attitudes
           of traditional elders and law  enforcement  officials  routinely
           result in restrictions on women's access to justice,  denial  of
           their right to due  process  and  their  inhumane  treatment  in
           detention ....


           Somali women who unsuccessfully but credibly based their  claims
           on issues relating to gender-based  persecution  should  not  be
           subject to involuntary return to any part of Somalia  (para  5.2
           )."

 60. Although we deal later with internal relocation, it is  relevant  here
     that the context for the UNHCR's view that internal relocation is  not
     possible, is that protection derives from living among those with whom
     ethnic, tribal, religious or cultural ties are shared;   it  is  clan-
     based.

 61. The Joint Fact-Finding Mission 2004  Report  (before  the  second  and
     third Adjudicators) is to similar general effect:   the  situation  in
     Mogadishu remains fluid.  Although  the  violence  that  results  from
     general clan conflict only flares up from time to time,  there  is  no
     effective protection for those targeted  for  violence.   Some  recent
     returnees to Mogadishu have been reported to  have  been  killed.   At
     5.1, it states:


           "Wolken [UNHCR Somalia representative] explained that  returnees
           are at risk of robbery, extortion at roadblocks, and attacks  by
           militias in the areas to which they return. She added  that  the
           UNHCR is unable to monitor the  progress  of  persons  following
           their return as UNHCR only has  a  field  office  in  Mogadishu.
           However, in areas where UNHCR has access some  monitoring  might
           be possible".

 62. No more than two to three returns per month had  been  facilitated  by
     UNHCR to  southern  or  central  Somalia.   The  January  UNHCR  Paper
     recognises limited circumstances in which individuals  can  repatriate
     voluntarily to the south.



 63. At paragraph 5.2, it cites Wolken as further stating that:



           "Any  Somali  who  returns  to  Somalia  from  abroad  would  be
           perceived as having some resources (cash or other). This will be
           the case both for persons returned by force and for Somalis with
           residence abroad who visit Somalia independently. As a result of
           this perception among Somalis within Somalia, the report states,
           a person in this category will be at a  greater  risk  of  being
           robbed, extorted or attacked by militia than persons permanently
           residing in Somalia".



 64. As regards women, the report notes at 4.7 under the heading  "Minority
     groups" that:




           "Regarding the situation of vulnerable groups in Somalia the CAP
           states 'In both the CAP Workshop for 2003 (August 2002) and 2004
           (August 2003), as well as in numerous other reports, aid  actors
           in Somalia have reaffirmed the three most vulnerable  groups  in
           Somalia to be IDPs, returnees and minorities. While  many  other
           categories of vulnerability have been identified, these  groups,
           which  include  women  and  children,  qualify  as   the   "most
           vulnerable of the vulnerable, 'primarily due to having  suffered
           from: 1) the loss of assets through  exposure  to  major  shock,
           whether it be economic, climactic or conflict-related; 2) having
           little or no access to protection from clan affiliations, and 3)
           being exposed to multiple vulnerabilities or risks'".



 65. At paragraph 4.9. the report observes that that:



           "According to CAP,  gender-based  violence  is  also  prevalent,
           including rape, female genital mutilation and domestic violence.
           ..."



 66. At 5.2.1, headed "Return of young persons, particularly females",  the
     report notes that:



           "Wolken indicated  that  young  Somalis  returning  from  abroad
           (particularly western countries, but also neighbouring countries
           such as Kenya) are vulnerable to physical abuse, and are  viewed
           with suspicion by their relatives  and  local  communities.  She
           referred specifically to young females who are at risk  of  rape
           and FGM. It was suggested that thousands of young girls  are  at
           risk of being outcast in this way."



 67. The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs report  of  November  2004
     relies at paragraph 4.3 for what it says about returnees on the  Joint
     Mission Report.  It summarises the latter thus:



           "Somalians returning to Somalia meet with no hindrance from  the
           local authorities on arrival. However, in the relatively  unsafe
           areas, passengers  are  sometimes  waylaid  en  route  from  the
           airport by militias or criminals who steal all their belongings,
           often resorting to  extreme  violence.  Somalian  emigrants  who
           travel to relatively unsafe areas also run  a  greater  risk  of
           being kidnapped, since criminals  expect  them  to  have  fairly
           wealthy relatives abroad."



 68. Its section on women at paragraph 3.4.3 highlights  that  in  southern
     Somalia in particular, "[m]istreatment and rape  of  women  ...  occur
     regularly in  this  region,  mainly  committed  by  militia  members".
     However, it also observed that:



           "Since the outbreak of the civil war Somalia  has  had  a  large
           number of single women. These are women  who  have  either  been
           divorced (or abandoned) or whose husband has  died  or  left  to
           seek work elsewhere. As a  consequence  of  the  civil  war  the
           number of female-headed families has risen sharply. For example,
           a recent survey by UNICEF shows  that  the  percentage  of  such
           families in Galkayo rose from 10% to 54% between 1990 and  2004.
           This percentage is substantially higher in southern Somalia.  As
           explained below, single women can generally rely on their family
           and clan for protection. However, in socio-economic terms female-
           headed households are very  vulnerable.  The  children  of  such
           families are often malnourished.




 69. Commenting on evidence concerning rape in Galkayo, it notes that:



           "Rape  occurs  fairly  regularly  in  Galkayo,  whereas  it  was
           virtually non-existent before the civil war broke out. Women  of
           minority groups or displaced  women  tend  to  be  the  victims,
           particularly since the perpetrators then has much less  to  fear
           from any claims for compensation from the victim's family and in
           southern Somalia, where an entire generation has grown up during
           a civil war, some of  the  young  men  have  never  learned  the
           traditional standards and values. Mistreatment and rape of women
           therefore occur regularly in this region,  mainly  committed  by
           militia members."



 70. It also suggests in paragraph 2.3.3 that the need for someone to  live
     within the area of clan protection may have decreased, particularly in
     the safe areas, but in principle within the clan  area,  a  person  is
     protected against violence from other clans.  But in relatively unsafe
     areas, there may be general safety fears arising out of conflicts with
     other clans.



 71. The latest October 2004 CIPU report cites the reference in the January
     2004 UNHCR paper to human  rights  violations  remaining  endemic  and
     kidnappings in Mogadishu having reached such alarming proportions that
     the public took to the streets in protest.  At  paragraph  6.124,  the
     report summarised the security situation 2003-2004 as follows:




           "As reflected in the [joint  mission  2004  report]  UN  sources
           suggested that the fluid security situation and general trend in
           extra-judicial killings in  the  southern  and  central  regions
           remained unchanged during 2003, a trend that has  been  constant
           since 1999. The source explained that this situation was  caused
           by the time that had elapsed and because the culture of violence
           and weapons, and disrespect for life have become more  prevalent
           in Somalia. It was added that the security situation in  Somalia
           is being continuously monitored and that the  overall  level  of
           violence in 2003 was high. Incidents of kidnappings and  looting
           have increased, as many people looked to increase their resource
           base. The weaker clans and the minority groups  were  now  worse
           off. This increase in violence and the deterioration of security
           in Somalia has affected not  only  Somali  civilians,  but  also
           local UN staff".



 72. It its sections on women,  it  highlighted  the  US  State  Department
     Report  assessment  that  violence  against  women  in   Somalia   was
     widespread:   robbery  and  rape  were  particularly  common  (see  in
     particular 6.96).



 73. Furthermore, insofar as this and the preceding April 2004 CIPU  report
     highlights lack of protection as a problem for women, (particularly in
     the context of rape and domestic violence), it is primarily in respect
     of three sub-categories expressed in the April report as follows:




           "Most vulnerable  have  been  women  who  have  been  internally
           displaced within Somalia, who  have  lacked  the  protection  of
           powerful clan structures, and  those  from  minority  clans  and
           ethnic minorities."




74. At the hearing, we heard evidence from Professor Lewis.  In his  written
  report dated 21 October 2004,  he  had  been  asked  to  comment  on  the
  situation of the first Claimant on the basis that she was an Ashraf  from
  Mogadishu.  We quote the last four paragraphs of this report:


           "... A new provisional president has been elected  for  Somalia,
           but the election has taken  place  in  Kenya  where  the  'peace
           conference' which appointed him has been meeting for  two  years
           since  Somalia  was  judged  to  be  too  hazardous  for   these
           negotiations. The person chosen belongs to the same  clan-family
           (Darod) as the previous dictator Mohamed Siyad  Barre,  who  was
           overthrown in 1990/91  and  his  appointment  has  already  been
           opposed by most of the warlords in Mogadishu who belong  to  the
           Hawiye clan-family. We are thus entering  on  a  new  period  of
           uncertainty and turmoil in Somalia generally, and  in  Mogadishu
           particularly, where anything could happen and there has  already
           been an upsurge  of  street  violence  with  assassinations  and
           kidnapping.


           The people most endangered in  these  circumstances  are  always
           members of the minority groups such as the Ashraf, and  refugees
           who return from this country are always particularly  attractive
           targets since they are assumed to be  (relatively)  wealthy.  In
           these circumstances a forcibly returned unprotected woman  with,
           or without, small children is always  especially  vulnerable  to
           robbery and sexual attack.  The  situation  of  homeless  people
           worsened  in  2003  when,  in  the  course  of  'anti-terrorist'
           measures, the US  State  Department  froze  the  Middle  Eastern
           accounts of the Saudi NGO Al-Haramayn which had  opened  centres
           for  homeless  people  and  orphans  in  Mogadishu.  Over  three
           thousands 'orphans' were thrown onto the streets.


           You also ask about the IDP camps round Mogadishu. These  have  a
           very bad reputation as offering only irregular support and being
           extremely insecure. The most recent intergovernmental report  on
           human  rights  (dated  2004)  on  the  camp  situation  is   not
           reassuring. This reports that 'there  is  no  control  in  these
           camps and militia members enter the camps to rape and kill  with
           impunity. The local community steal and loot any assistance that
           is given to the IDPs (Human Rights and security in  central  and
           southern Somalia: Joint Danish, Finnish, Norwegian  and  British
           fact-finding mission to Nairobi Kenya, March 2004, p 42)."

           In its position  paper  (Position  on  the  Return  of  Rejected
           Seekers-seekers to Somalia, Geneva, January 2004, p  9),  'UNHCR
           considers that persons originating from southern Somalia are  in
           need of international protection and objects to any  involuntary
           return of rejected asylum seekers to the area south of  Galkayo.
           Mogadishu represents the worse case  of  this  general  southern
           Somali  situation,  and  Amnesty  International   has   recently
           reported cases of returned asylum-seekers who have actually been
           murdered in the course of street robberies in Mogadishu'."

 75. In oral evidence, Professor Lewis explained that  despite  not  having
     visited the country since 1992 he was able to keep abreast  of  Somali
     affairs through reading academic and  non-academic  reports,  relevant
     websites, his discussions with FCO staff  and  a  number  of  personal
     contacts inside  and  outside  Somalia.   The  telephone  system  from
     Mogadishu was remarkably good.  He spoke to people who went in and out
     of Somalia.

 76. He said that events since he  wrote  his  report  suggested  that  the
     prospects for the new provisional government actually  being  able  to
     move from Nairobi to Somalia and govern were not good.   Although  the
     new provisional  government  contains  most  of  the  major  warlords,
     including those from Mogadishu, the latter are resisting proposals for
     foreign troops from the African Union to come and  maintain  security.
     He saw no prospect for any real  improvement  for  some  two  to  four
     years.

 77. As regards returns by air to Somalia, there were current  difficulties
     with UN-sponsored flights because the company it used called Echo  had
     gone bankrupt, and except in Somaliland and Puntland, most airports or
     airstrips - and certainly those in southern Somalia - were  under  the
     control of local militias who regard flights carrying passengers  from
     the West as potential targets  for  extortion  and/or  ill  treatment.
     There were documented cases of returnees who had been murdered because
     of  their  (perceived)  wealth.   Clan  militias  were  interested  in
     kidnappings,  sometimes  to  obtain  ransoms,  sometimes  for   sexual
     gratification and sometimes to conscript victims into forced labour on
     nearby farms under their control.

 78. In Somalia it was virtually impossible for a person to hide their real
     clan identity.  Sometimes, as in the case of many Ashraf, there  would
     be visible signs such as lighter  skin.   Also,  in  general,  militia
     interrogators would be able to establish easily whether a person was a
     member of their clan or of a different clan:  those at checkpoints  or
     roadblocks  could  be  expected  to  have  become  familiar  with  the
     genealogies of other clans.  In Somalia genealogy, traced  through  an
     extremely patriarchal line, is a statement of political identity,  the
     key which unlocks solidarity, something analogous to an identity card.
      It is not a family tree in a  western  sense;   after  two  or  three
     generations, the genealogy which each  individual  knows  becomes  the
     common tribal or clan ancestry, knowledge of which shows membership of
     the tribe or clan.

 79. Asked if a single woman would be at serious risk on  return,  he  said
     that it would depend on whether she was a member of a  clan  with  its
     own militia, in which case she could be  escorted.   Young  women  not
     under clan protection were regarded as fair game for  sexual  assault.
     Escort protection, however, would not eliminate risk;  Mogadishu,  for
     example, was a gangland criss-crossed by clan loyalties.   The  Hawiye
     clan  was  the  dominant  clan  there  with   two   main   sub   clans
     predominating, the Habergidi and the  Abgal.   Militia  roadblocks  of
     varying clan and sub-clan composition manned all routes in and  around
     the city.  The volatility of the situation was made worse by the  fact
     that young militiamen would sometimes be under the influence of qat, a
     drug with an effect similar to Benzedrine, and  increasingly  imported
     from Ethiopia and Kenya.

 80. Professor Lewis said, however, that it was reasonable to  assume  that
     members of majority clans would be able to obtain  militia  protection
     which would somewhat reduce the level of risk.  It was  not  essential
     for  the  effectiveness  of  militia  escort  protection  that   those
     encountered at checkpoints be from the same majority clan.   A  person
     being escorted might have to add to or change the  militia  escort  to
     accommodate different checkpoints.   The  bigger  majority  clans  had
     their own helicopters. Other clan militias manning  checkpoints  would
     generally consider it unwise to attack or rob a person under escort by
     another majority clan militia because they would know there  could  be
     gangland-style reprisals, but sometimes such caution  was  ignored  or
     mistakes happened.  In general, members of minority  clans,  including
     the Ashraf, did not have their own militias and so  would  face  great
     perils.  However, some minority clans  or  minority  clan  individuals
     might have protection from a patron majority clan or individual.   The
     absence of a militia was a significant characteristic  of  a  minority
     clan.

 81. The official international airport  in  Mogadishu  was  not  currently
     operational.  Whilst Mogadishu was the most dangerous area of southern
     Somalia currently, he accepted that someone who had to return, via  an
     airport or airfield near Mogadishu, to Jilib would encounter the  same
     type of problems:  it would not be feasible unless the person was,  or
     had a patron, from a majority group.

 82. Kismayo was another southern Somalia trouble-spot, with the upper hand
     in the power struggle shifting between two or three sub-clans  of  the
     Darod.  The  Marehan  were  currently  in  control,  but  things  were
     unstable.  Similar problems  as  regards  any  travel  in  and  around
     Kismayo applied as  in  Mogadishu.   There  were  planes  flying  into
     Kismayo, which has a huge airstrip.  But returns  into  Kismayo  would
     also be very risky unless one had arranged  a  majority  clan  militia
     escort.

 83. There was an Ashraf enclave in Gedo but they were not protected by any
     patron majority clan. There was nothing special about Gedo as a  place
     for Ashraf, as members of this clan  were  spread  all  over  Somalia.
     Professor Lewis considered the position for Ashraf in  Gedo  had  been
     the same in June 2003 as it was now.

 84. Asked about returns to Somalia direct into Somaliland,  he  said  that
     whilst  their  regional  administrations  would  accept  back   former
     Somaliland  residents  or  persons   from   clans   originating   from
     Somaliland, they  would  not  accept  back  outsiders.   The  Puntland
     administration would possibly  accept  outsiders,  particularly  young
     single males, in view of their current enthusiasm for migrant  labour.
     That acceptance would be irrespective of clan identity.   Once  again,
     however, having fellow clansmen would help.

 85. The Professor reiterated points he made in his  written  report  about
     Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps.  If a person were forced  to
     live in one of these camps,  they  would  face  an  utterly  insecure,
     destitute and menaced existence.

 86. Dr Luling , in a letter of 24 October 2004, referred to the unchanging
     security problems in Mogadishu and the  perpetual  problems  faced  by
     Ashraf and by those returned from the United Kingdom, who as such, are
     assumed to be wealthy.   They  are  at  risk  if  "unprotected",  from
     robbery and sexual attack.  The IDP Camps around Mogadishu  were  very
     insecure.

 87. In a letter dated 13 January 2005, written in connection with  another
     case, Dr Luling relied on the JMR to highlight the dangers to women in
     Mogadishu for that same reason.  "It is therefore essential  that  she
     has, arranged in advance, relatives near or distant who  will  protect
     her from the airport on.  A young woman without a husband or family to
     protect her would be vulnerable to sexual assault and robbery  in  any
     area of Somalia, and she would find it difficult to make a living."

 88. Professor Lewis stated that in general he regarded Dr Luling as having
     an excellent knowledge of Somalia and he considered  that  her  report
     was accurate.   Asked about her comments that women returnees would be
     at particular risk unless they arranged through family of fellow  clan
     members to be met by militia escorts,  he  said  that  family  members
     would regard themselves as under a strong obligation to assist.  Those
     who shared only a clan connection might  feel  a  general  albeit  not
     necessarily  strong  obligation  to  assist,  but  might  well  expect
     financial payment for escort services.

 89. Questioned about the reliance placed in the Joint Mission Report  2004
     on the views of Simone Wolken,  Professor  Lewis  said  he  considered
     those to be generally sensible and correct, but he sounded  a  general
     note of caution about many of the reports on  Somalia  in  the  public
     realm.  Their authors were sometimes  people  who  did  not  know  the
     country, did not speak Somali and had little or  no  training  in,  or
     understanding of, its social and political structure and no real means
     of testing their hypotheses.

 90. Like the Tribunal in AJH (Minority group-Swahili speakers) Somalia  CG
     [2003] UKIAT 00094, we found Professor Lewis an impressive witness who
     had great command of his subject of expertise.  He was  able  to  deal
     objectively with a considerable number of questions on a wide range of
     matters.  He was able to bring to bear his wealth of  knowledge  in  a
     helpful way to issues raised by all  parties  and  the  Tribunal.   We
     accept his evidence.

 91. Turning to internal relocation, we note the view expressed in some  of
     the background materials that the concept of internal  relocation  has
     no application whatsoever in the Somalia context.  Among those  taking
     this view is Simone Wolken, who is reported at paragraph  5.3  of  the
     joint mission  report  2004  as  stating  that  "the  Internal  Flight
     Alternative (IFA) was not a viable alternative in Somalia. In addition
     to the fluid security situation, she cited the adverse impact  such  a
     policy would have on the already difficult IDP situation".  The  UNHCR
     January 2004  Position  Paper,  which  represents  UNHCR's  considered
     position, states at the conclusion of paragraph 4.2 (headed  "Internal
     Flight Alternative") that "In light of the above, especially given the
     prevailing clan system, UNHCR is of the view that the internal  flight
     alternative is not applicable in the context of Somalia".

 92. However, in the body of the text to paragraph 4.2 it is stated:

           "The general pattern of  human  settlements  in  many  parts  of
           Africa, including Somalia,  is  often  characterised  by  common
           ethnic, tribal, religious and or/cultural factors, which  enable
           access to land, resources and protection  from  members  of  the
           community. Consequently, this  commonality  appears  to  be  the
           necessary condition to live in safety. In  such  situations,  it
           would not be reasonable to expect someone to take  up  residence
           in an area or community where persons with a  different  ethnic,
           tribal, religious and/or cultural  background  are  settled,  or
           where they would otherwise be considered as aliens.


           The only conceivable alternative could be to move to  the  slums
           of a big city, where internal migrants from the countryside lead
           a precarious existence, often in  appalling  living  conditions.
           Persons with a rural background may be rendered destitute  there
           and thus be subjected to undue hardship. Therefore, it would  be
           unreasonable to expect a person to move to an areas (sic) in his
           or her own country other than one where he or  she  has  ethnic,
           tribal, religious and /or cultural ties [emphasis added]."


 93. The further paragraphs on IFA emphasise that in  the  Somalia  context
     "place of origin" should not necessarily be  equated  with  "place  of
     birth" and that "the determining factor in  defining  where  a  person
     originates from is where the person  has  effective  clan  and  family
     ties, and where clan protection is thus available"  (emphasis  added).
     They also deal in  discrete  terms  with  the  specific  situation  in
     Somaliland and Puntland.

 94. We shall not summarise  the  submissions  of  the  parties,  since  we
     address all the important points each raised in the course of what  we
     say below.  However, we would like to thank all of them for  the  care
     they took in addressing the important issues raised by these appeals.


Discussion



95. Neither Professor Lewis  nor  Dr  Luling  sought  to  equate  their  own
  vocabulary of risk and danger with the words contained in the legal tests
  that have to be applied by the courts and  the  Tribunal  in  asylum  and
  asylum related appeals.  That in our view is entirely proper.  It is  not
  the function of country experts to seek to assess what does or  does  not
  breach the Refugee or the Human Rights Convention.  Irrespective  of  the
  vocabulary in which country experts express their opinion, it remains for
  judicial decision whether their opinion evidences the existence of a real
  risk of persecution or of ill treatment within the meaning of the Refugee
  Convention and Article 3.



96. Partly because of the  different  nuances  to  be  found  in  the  major
  sources of objective evidence, we regard it as important to consider  the
  two issues of risks to returnees and risk to lone women returnees in  the
  context set out by Professor Lewis and Dr Luling in their reports written
  for this hearing.  Both experts, each of whom  has  a  close  familiarity
  with the most recent background materials relating to Somalia, seemed  to
  us to agree that, whilst there are significant dangers for returnees  and
  lone women returnees in particular, these can be significantly reduced in
  certain cases:  those who, as majority clan members, can avail themselves
  of the protection of a majority clan, or as a minority, the protection of
  a clan patron, and also those who will be accepted back  into  Somaliland
  and Puntland.  The former two groups may be able to  arrange  in  advance
  for militia protection from the airport onwards, through close  relatives
  or fellow clan members.  The latter group  may  not  need  to  do  so  if
  returned directly to Somaliland or Puntland.



97. We do not seek to suggest that  all  of  Professor  Lewis'  formulations
  when giving evidence showed that majority clan protection  of  this  type
  was always available or adequate.  He made very plain throughout that  he
  thought Somali society generally was in a  parlous  state.   But  he  was
  asked  numerous  direct  questions  on  the  issue  of  overall  risk  to
  returnees, lone women returnees in particular and was  quite  adamant  in
  reply that majority clan protection of this type made a  significant  and
  material difference to the level of risk.  Dr  Luling's  report  likewise
  indicated that the existence of majority clan militia protection made  an
  important difference.



98. Professor Lewis emphasised that for persons with  close  family  members
  in Somalia the latter would feel under a strong duty  to  take  steps  to
  ensure a safe reception and onward travel.  For those here who would have
  less close links with fellow clan members, payment may be  required,  but
  we do not understand from anything we have read that the amounts involved
  would be prohibitive.   Allied  to  this,  we  note  that  although  both
  Professor Lewis and Dr Luling mention examples  of  returnees,  male  and
  female, who have fallen foul of banditry  by  clan  militias  on  return,
  neither they nor any of the other reports before us sufficiently evidence
  that such incidents are occurring routinely where militia  protection  is
  provided.


 99. We considered whether we should attach any  defining  significance  to
     whether female returnees were young or  not  young.   The  grounds  of
     appeal in the cases before us  highlighted  risks  facing  "young"  or
     "younger" women.  From the evidence as given by Professor Lewis and as
     contained in the background materials, we accept  that  younger  women
     would be particularly prey to militia violence and rape  attacks.   We
     accept that for some purposes it may be valid to demarcate young women
     as distinct from women generally.  However, we do not think  that,  in
     the asylum related context, it  necessarily  helps  to  draw  a  sharp
     distinction between categories of women based  on  age.   Whilst,  for
     example, older Somali women may not  be  so  immediately  at  risk  of
     sexual attack, their age or relative  frailty  might  make  them  more
     physically unable to avoid other  (equally  serious)  types  of  harm.
     Differences of age, like differences concerning health,  knowledge  of
     Somali dialects etc, are best left for consideration and  weighing  up
     in the context of any particular case.

100. We reach a similar conclusion in relation to divorced women (the first
     Claimant was accepted as such) and widows.  At first sight,  it  might
     seem that women in both these  categories  would  lack  protection  by
     definition.  However, we note that  the  multi-sourced  November  2004
     report of the  Netherlands  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  states  at
     paragraph 3.43 that "A divorced Somali woman cannot generally rely  on
     the protection of her former  husband's  clan.  However,  she  can  in
     principle rely on her own clan and clan family."  In the same  section
     the report states that "A Somali  widow  can  generally  rely  on  the
     protection of both the family of her deceased husband and of  her  own
     family".  Thus having the status of  a  divorcee  or  widow  does  not
     necessarily prevent a woman from being able to secure protection.

101. Professor Lewis also states, and what he  says  is  confirmed  by  the
     reports before us, that persons (male or female) returning directly to
     Somaliland and Puntland, albeit they might  still  face  difficulties,
     would not face anything like the same level  of  hostility  and  risk.
     Protection would be generally available.  However, the administrations
     of these two regions would in general only  accept  back  persons  who
     were former residents of those regions or who were members of  locally
     based clans or sub clans.  The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs
     report  of  November  2004  notes  at  paragraph  4.6  that  UNHCR  is
     encouraging the return of  Somalis  originating  from  Somaliland  and
     Puntland "'Originating from'  is  interpreted  here  to  mean  'having
     previously lived there for some time (more than a year)'".  We  stress
     here, as does the January 2004 UNHR paper, that  even  in  respect  of
     persons originating from Somaliland or Puntland, it may still be  that
     in the particular circumstances of their case a claim to  be  at  real
     risk of persecution or ill treatment can be made out.

102. These appeals do not raise specifically the discrete question  of  the
     safety for persons in IDP camps.  However, we would observe in passing
     that, on the strength of the background evidence and the oral evidence
     of Professor Lewis, we would consider  any  person  at  real  risk  on
     return of being compelled to live in one  of  these  camps  as  having
     little difficulty in making out a claim under Article 3, if not  under
     the Refugee Convention also.

103. The UNHCR consideration of internal flight is relevant to the question
     of the availability of protection.  Notwithstanding the seeming  width
     of its conclusion about the unavailability of internal flight,  it  is
     clear that it accepts  that  where  a  clan  is  majority  located  or
     dominant, it can afford protection.  That follows from the  contention
     that elsewhere a majority clan member is not likely to be protected.

104. We note the view taken by the Tribunal in SH [2004]  00164,  that  the
     January 2004 UNHCR analysis (as opposed  to  its  stated  conclusions)
     does not bear out the general unavailability of an internal relocation
     alternative.  Their own analysis is in fact very similar to  that  set
     out in the Home Office Operational Guidance Note Somalia V6  May  2004
     at paragraph 3.6.3, "Most majority clan  members  should  be  able  to
     reside in an area in which their clan dominates".   This  may  not  be
     where the individual originated.  We note that it is also the logic of
     Professor Lewis' position, as outlined to us  in  his  oral  evidence,
     that internal relocation is in  principle  available  for  members  of
     clans which have militia protection and some degree  of  control  over
     areas in which they reside.

105. We would accept that as regards internal relocation to Somaliland  and
     Puntland, the most recent objective evidence continues to confirm  the
     view taken by the Tribunal in AJH  (Minority  group-Swahili  speakers)
     Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094 paras 41 and 58, namely that it is  only
     a viable option for those formerly resident or having clan connections
     in these areas.  Once again, that also seems to be the position  taken
     in the January 2004 UNHCR report  in  the  paragraphs  which  look  in
     substance at the internal relocation situation as regards returnees to
     northern Somalia.

106. But we would not rule out, in view of Professor Lewis' oral  evidence,
     that young adult Somali males from southern Somalia may  currently  be
     able to relocate to Puntland, but we would need to have more  evidence
     than was before us as to whether, in the context of any direct  return
     of young adult male rejected asylum seekers to Puntland,  the  current
     Puntland administration would consider  them  as  prospective  migrant
     labour.  That is the type of issue on which it would be reasonable  to
     expect a Home Office input.

107. Internal flight is excluded where  majority  clan  protection  is  not
     available or cannot be accessed.

108. The extensive reliance upon UNHCR material makes  a  few  observations
     germane.  The value of the UNHCR material is first that where  it  has
     observers on the ground, it is in a good  position  to  provide  first
     hand information as to what in fact is happening.   The  process  then
     whereby its observations of what is happening become  position  papers
     or recommendations is likely to increase the objectivity and soundness
     of its observations in  that  respect.   It  has  a  special  role  in
     relation to the Geneva Convention.  It may also well be able to  offer
     Governments advice on the practical implications of the forced or mass
     return of people who are not refugees;  these implications may include
     infrastructure,  economic  conditions,  resettlement  facilities   and
     absorption capacity;  a slower rate  of  return  may  make  the  local
     government's task or the UNHCR task as  a  reception  body  that  much
     easier to perform well.

109. But their comments have their limitations and these need equally to be
     understood.  The UNHCR often speaks  of  inhibitions  on  the  return,
     usually forced, of failed asylum seekers, who have been rejected after
     a proper consideration of their claims.  It follows that the UNHCR  is
     not then  commenting  on  the  return  of  refugees  at  all;   it  is
     acknowledging that they would not face persecution  for  a  Convention
     reason and it is going beyond  its  special  remit  under  the  Geneva
     Convention.  This is not a question of picking up on  loose  language.
     The UNHCR is perfectly capable of using language which shows  that  it
     is or is not dealing with the risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
     reason, and sometimes does so.  These are considered papers after all.

110. This is illustrated by UNHCR position papers, such as the January 2004
     one dealing with Somalia, where UNHCR has responsibility for voluntary
     repatriation programmes, currently confined to northern  Somalia,  and
     has evident consequential concerns referred to in paragraph 3 of  this
     report  about  "over-stretched  absorption  capacity"  even   in   the
     relatively stable northern part of Somalia.  Reasons of this kind lead
     UNHCR to discourage signatory states from going  ahead  with  enforced
     returns of rejected asylum seekers.  However, the only  issue  arising
     on statutory  appeals  on  asylum  or  asylum-related  grounds  before
     Adjudicators and the Tribunal is whether the claimant is a refugee and
     if so, whether to return a person to Somalia would breach  the  Geneva
     Convention or constitute treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  or  any
     other Article, where engaged.  The  question  of  absorption  problems
     that might flow from any United Kingdom government decision to enforce
     returns in numbers is not of itself the basis for showing that  return
     would breach either Convention.

111. The UNHCR, in such circumstances and they arise  very  frequently,  is
     pursuing what it sees as its wider remit in  respect  of  humanitarian
     and  related  practical  considerations  for  the  return  of  people,
     particularly on a large scale.  This is a  common  problem  where  the
     country of refuge borders the country of past   persecution or strife.
      What it has to say about the practical problems on the ground will be
     important where it has staff  on  the  ground  or  familiar  with  the
     conditions which a returnee would face.

112. But the assessment  of  whether  someone  can  be  returned  in  those
     circumstances is one which has to be treated with real care, if it  is
     sought  to  apply  it  to   non   Refugee   Convention   international
     obligations, especially ECHR.  The measure which  the  UNHCR  uses  is
     unclear;   indeed,  realistically,  it  may  be  using  no  particular
     measure.  Instead, it is using its own  language  to  convey  its  own
     sense of the severity of the problem, the degree of risk faced and the
     quality of the evidence which it has to underpin its  assessment.   It
     is often guarded and cautious rather than  assertive  because  of  the
     frailties of its knowledge and the variability of the circumstances.

113. This is not to advocate an unduly nuanced reading of its material, let
     alone an unduly  legalistic  reading.   It  is  to  require  that  the
     material be read for what it actually conveys about the level of risk,
     of what treatment and of what severity and with what certainty  as  to
     the available evidence.  But  there  may  be  times  when  a  lack  of
     information or evidence permits or requires inferences to be drawn  as
     to its significance, which is for the decision-maker to  draw.   There
     is often other relevant material as well.

114. UNHCR's language is not framed by reference to the  ECHR  and  to  the
     high threshold of Article 3 as elaborated in the jurisprudence of  the
     Strasbourg Court and of the United Kingdom.  That is not a criticism -
     it is not an expert legal adviser to the  United  Kingdom  courts  and
     couches  its  papers  in  its  own  language.   So  its  more  general
     humanitarian assessments of international protection needs  should  to
     be read with care, so as to avoid giving them an authority in relation
     to the United Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR which they  do  not
     claim.  They may give part  of  the  picture,  but  the  language  and
     threshold of their assessments show that the UNHCR quite often  adopts
     a standard which is not that of the United Kingdom's ECHR obligations.

115. UNHCR papers are often not the only ones  which  Adjudicators  or  the
     Tribunal has to consider.  Other  organisations  may  have  first-hand
     sources  and  differ  from  UNHCR;   experts  may  bring   a   further
     perspective.  A considered UNHCR paper is therefore entitled to weight
     but may well not be decisive.

Principal Conclusions

116. We have given particular weight to the evidence of Professor Lewis and
     Dr Luling.  What they said is consistent  with  the  picture  emerging
     from the 2004 materials both UNHCR and the  JMR,  which  was  strongly
     influenced  by  UNHCR.   Their  evidence  is   significant   for   its
     development of a particular point, practicality of safe  movement  and
     the potential availability of majority clan militia escort,  which  is
     foreshadowed in certain parts of the background but not brought out as
     clearly as they brought it out.

117. The starting point is that male and female members of  minority  clans
     from the south will, in general, be  at  risk  of  breaches  of  their
     Article 3 rights, and will be refugees, in  the  absence  of  evidence
     that they have a clan or personal patron and the means to access  that
     area of safety without a real risk.   Were  such  evidence  to  exist,
     which at present would be  unusual,  their  return  would  involve  no
     breach of either Convention.  We recognise that there may be  minority
     clans who are, at least locally, integrated with majority  clans,  and
     other groups who may not be a minority clan at all, being closer to  a
     caste.  Those will require specific consideration.  We also  recognise
     that a division between minority and majority  does  not  represent  a
     bright line on one or other  side  of  which  every  clan  must  fall,
     because there are some which could be considered to  be  intermediate.
     But those issues do not arise here.

118. Those issues should be addressed where the evidence permits.  There is
     obviously a greater risk for lone females both in the place of  safety
     and in access, both in terms of  degree  of  risk  of  occurrence  and
     degree of severity of ill-treatment.  Their position  would  call  for
     particular care.

119. However, where the claimant, male or female, from southern Somalia, is
     not found to be a minority clan member or equivalent equally at  risk,
     different considerations apply.   First,  there  is  likely  to  be  a
     location in southern Somalia in which the majority  clan  is  able  to
     afford protection sufficiently for neither Convention to apply.  It is
     important not to over-generalise;  individual  factors  and  locations
     will be relevant, as will the past history and  individual  or  family
     connections.  Likewise, lone females will be at a  greater  risk  than
     males but they will not be able to show that, simply  as  lone  female
     returnees from the United Kingdom, they have no place of clan majority
     safety.

120. Second, the question of risk in accessing any  such  safe  place  will
     arise, the more strongly for females than males.     We  accept  that,
     where positive findings have been made as to what is the home area  of
     a Claimant, the prospects  of  being  able  to  travel  safely  within
     Somalia to that area (or if that is unsafe, to an alternative area) is
     a crucial issue, certainly in cases involving  southern  Somalia.   It
     will be relevant to the issue of return to a person's  home  area  or,
     where appropriate, relocation to another area.  That is because of the
     fact that many of the main road routes in this portion of the  country
     have military checkpoints or roadblocks.  In this context,  the  issue
     as to how claimants will get from the point of arrival to  their  home
     area or to an area where they have clan connections, is a real one.

121. Adjudicators in the context of Somali appeals therefore need  to  make
     careful findings concerning internal safety of travel  to  the  extent
     the evidence permits.  That is because the evidence shows that, except
     in the north, normal assumptions about travel  being  relatively  safe
     and secure cannot be made.  If the point of return is the airport near
     Mogadishu or somewhere else in southern Somalia, then there will  also
     be an issue of whether the claimant will be able to  negotiate  safely
     the clan militia in control of that airport.

122. A majority clan can be characterised as one which has its own militia.
      The strongly clan and family based nature of Somali society makes  it
     reasonably likely, though not certain, that  a  militia  escort  could
     sufficiently protect a returnee from Mogadishu through the  roadblocks
     and en route banditry, to the clan home area.  This would have  to  be
     pre-arranged.  Any unwillingness on the part of  a  claimant  to  make
     such  arrangements  is  irrelevant.   The  telephone  connections   to
     Mogadishu are good.  We do not know anything of their availability  to
     other towns.  The mere unannounced deposit, even of  a  majority  clan
     member, and especially a female, at Mogadishu airport would be  likely
     to put them at a real risk, in the absence of special factors.

123. There are problems with those whose case has been so disbelieved  that
     it is not known what  their  clan  or  place  of  origin  is.   It  is
     difficult to see that such a person could succeed;  he or she would be
     a majority clan member who was in  effect  declining  to  demonstrate,
     even to the low standard of proof that they were  at  risk  on  return
     because unable to arrange for clan militia escorts from  Mogadishu  or
     wherever else they might be returned to.

124. This evolution of thinking and guidance from FG and SH, through to the
     latest evidence and these conclusions, illustrates the inevitable  and
     proper way in which guidance evolves, responds to  and  helps  unearth
     the issues relevant to many cases.

125. We do not accept that the general conditions of life or  circumstances
     in Somalia engage the obligations of the Refugee  Convention  for  all
     returnees or all female returnees, in the light of  Adan  [1997]  IWLR
     1107, [1998] Imm AR 338.  A "differential impact" has to be shown.  We
     have recognised the scope for differential  impacts  in  our  analysis
     above.  Being a single woman returnee is not of  itself  a  sufficient
     differentiator, although the risks they face are greater and call  for
     careful  individualised  consideration  on  the  material   which   is
     accepted.  Nor  do  we  consider  that  those  general  conditions  or
     circumstances engage  Article  3,  without  more,  again  as  we  have
     discussed.

126. Returnees or  lone  women  returnees  claiming  protection  under  the
     Refugee Convention or under the Human Rights Convention who are  found
     to be former residents of Somaliland or Puntland or persons  having  a
     connection with a clan or sub clan based in either of  these  regions,
     would not in general face a real risk of serious harm, whether or  not
     they could arrange in advance for clan militia protection to meet them
     at the airport and escort them thereafter,  provided  that  they  were
     returned directly to those areas and not via Mogadishu.  If they  were
     to be returned via Mogadishu, we do not know whether a  majority  clan
     militia escort could be arranged for them.

127. The same may well apply  in  the  case  of  returnees  or  lone  women
     returnees returned directly to the Bay and Bakool region.  We did  not
     hear submissions on this issue, but in the light of references in  the
     reports before us to the dominance in that region of various sub clans
     of the Rahanweyne, it may be that access by air into that  region  for
     persons formerly resident or  having  local  clan  connections  there,
     might give rise to a similar outcome, with the same reservations about
     return via Mogadishu.

128. Internal relocation is not in general a viable option for  members  of
     minority clans except where they may be able to obtain  majority  clan
     protection in a secure area.  In respect  of  majority  clan  members,
     this may be a viable option for those  whose  majority  clans  have  a
     secure location elsewhere  within  southern  Somalia  than  where  the
     claimant came from, if the home area were not or had ceased to be  one
     where the majority clan was sufficiently strong to provide protection.
      Here, however, there would need to be an assessment of  whether  clan
     militia escort protection could be obtained.  As regards the  question
     of whether returnees could relocate to Somaliland or Puntland (or  the
     Bay and Bakool regions), we have affirmed that the  findings  made  in
     AJH remain valid, subject to a possible addition in relation to  young
     men returning to Puntland.

129. For reasons given above, this decision is to be taken as  superseding,
     in respect of the issues of risk to returnees generally  and  risk  to
     lone women, the following reported or Country Guideline  cases:  Ahmed
     Hussain [2002] UKIAT 02545, Omar Mohamoud Tubeec  [2002]  01/TH/01347,
     FB (Risk-Class-Midgan) Somalia CG  [2002]  UKIAT  06753,  AH  (Midgan-
     Disabled-Relocation-Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT 07343, NG (Risk-
     Female-Eyle-Internal Displacement) [2003] UKIAT 00011 and SH  (Return-
     Gedo-Burden of Proof) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164.   It  also  modifies
     what is said in  AJH  (Minority  group-Swahili  speakers)  Somalia  CG
     [2003] UKIAT 00094.

130. For the above reasons we have arrived at the following decisions.

First Claimant

131. We considered that the determination of the Adjudicator who dealt with
     the first Claimant was legally flawed.  We have taken account  of  the
     recent materials placed before us and in particular the oral  evidence
     we heard.   Professor Lewis' evidence made clear that the Ashraf  were
     a minority clan  which  was  especially  vulnerable  to  targeting  by
     majority clan militias and that for members of this clan  there  would
     be three particular problems afflicting  any  travel  within  Somalia.
     Firstly, most Ashraf could be picked out by  their  appearance,  being
     relatively light-skinned.  Secondly, the Ashraf had  no  clan  militia
     and so would be particularly at risk from militias manning checkpoints
     both at any airport in southern Somalia they might land at  and  along
     any route they might take by land to the Hamar Wayne area of Mogadishu
     or to any other part of southern  Somalia  such  as  Gedo  or  Afgoye.
     Thirdly, lack of clan militia meant that there was no area of southern
     Somalia which would be a safe destination for Ashraf, including  Gedo.
     The latter region had been unsafe for  Ashraf  for  at  least  several
     years.  This is in line with what the Tribunal has routinely held.

132. For those reasons, this Claimant's appeal is allowed outright.   There
     is no evidence that she had any majority clan patronage.

Second Claimant

133. We did not find the determination of the Adjudicator in  the  case  of
     the second Claimant to contain a material error of law.  We  therefore
     dismissed her appeal.  The new  material  would  not  have  led  to  a
     different outcome, if no finding as to  the  clan  location  could  be
     made.

Third Claimant

134. There were no material errors of  law  in  the  determination  of  the
     Adjudicator in respect of the third Claimant.  We concluded  that  the
     appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  dismissed.   The  new
     material could have led to a less favourable outcome to the Claimant.

Country Guidance

135. This is the last Country Guidance case upon which the final  President
     of the  IAT  will  sit.   It  is  appropriate  for  some  observations
     therefore to be made about these cases for the future, particularly in
     the light of  the  conflicting  decisions  in  the  second  and  third
     appeals.

136. It is evident that many  asylum  and  human  rights  cases  give  rise
     repeatedly to similar issues, in  particular  those  which  relate  to
     conditions in the country of origin.  It is self-evident  that  it  is
     unjust for a judicial Tribunal  to  treat  similar  cases  differently
     where there is no differentiating feature;  that is the more so at the
     appellate level because of the uncertainty which that creates for  the
     first instance level.  Indeed, the Court of  Appeal  held  in  Shirazi
     [2003] EWCA Civ  1562,  paragraphs  29  and  31,  concluded  that  the
     Tribunal had erred in law in where it  had  promulgated  a  series  of
     inconsistent decisions on the risk of return which was commonly  faced
     by asylum claimants.  Such a pattern of  inconsistent  decision-making
     could involve an error of law at Adjudicator level, and  is  the  more
     likely to do so in a single tier body.

137. The prospects and injustices of such inconsistencies are compounded by
     a number of factors:  the fairly recent rapid growth in the number  of
     cases at both levels, and in the number of judiciary; the  differences
     between the evidence which different claimants may adduce  to  support
     the same point, some distinctly fuller and more  recent  than  others;
     the Home Office Presenting Officers may only rely on the CIPU  Reports
     and not be present at Adjudicator level so as to provide a critique of
     other material, and individuals may be inadequately represented if  at
     all;  representatives could find the task of distilling the key  cases
     from the mass of decisions formidable or dispiriting and there  was  a
     marked but now reducing  tendency  to  recycle  favourite  quotes  and
     cases, whether representative, authoritative, or  recent  or   whether
     possessed of none of those qualities.  Nor could it be right  for  the
     jurisprudence of the Tribunal to be variable or haphazard according to
     the choice, partiality or thoroughness of the parties before it.   Nor
     should the parties' selections of cases dictate its jurisprudence.

138. The Court of Appeal in addition to  pointing  out  the  error  of  law
     involved in inconsistent decision in this jurisdiction, has also  said
     that one of the Tribunal's tasks is to give guidance on such  commonly
     occurring matters, with a view to avoiding such inconsistency, see  eg
     Manzeke v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 524, cited in DK (Croatia)  [2003]  UKIAT
     00153.  It has made the same point more recently.

139. Decisions of the Tribunal to that end had been made for  a  number  of
     years.  They were  to  be  applied  by  the  Tribunal  itself  and  by
     Adjudicators unless there was good reason, explicitly stated, for  not
     doing so.  Failure to adopt that approach was an error of law in  that
     a material  consideration  had  been  ignored  or  legally  inadequate
     reasons for the decision had been  given.   The  inconsistency  itself
     with authoritative cases would be regarded by  higher  authority  than
     the Tribunal as an error of law.  There was a need to  formalise  that
     system so that parties knew where they stood, at least as the starting
     point for consideration of their circumstances, and for  the  Tribunal
     itself to bring forward those decisions which it had  made,  which  it
     thought were representative and useful still, as a  guide  to  country
     conditions.

140. These decisions are  now  denoted  as  "CG".   They  are  not  starred
     decisions.  Those latter are decisions which are binding on points  of
     law.  The requirement to apply CG cases  is  rather  different:   they
     should be applied except where they do not  apply  to  the  particular
     facts which an Adjudicator or the Tribunal faces and can  properly  be
     held inapplicable for legally adequate reasons;  there may be evidence
     that circumstances have changed in a material  way  which  requires  a
     different decision, again on the basis that proper  reasons  for  that
     view are given;  there may be significant  new  evidence  which  shows
     that  the  views  originally  expressed   require  consideration   for
     revision  or  refinement,  even  without  any   material   change   in
     circumstances.   It  may  be  that  the  passage  of  time  itself  or
     substantial new evidence  itself  warrants  a  re-examination  of  the
     position,  even  though  the  outcome  may  be  unchanged.   It  is  a
     misunderstanding of their nature, therefore, to  see  these  cases  as
     equivalent to starred cases.  The system does not have the rigidity of
     the legally binding precedent  but  has  instead  the  flexibility  to
     accommodate individual cases, changes, fresh evidence  and  the  other
     circumstances which we have set out.

141. The comments of the Court of Appeal in S and Others [2002]  INLR  416,
     while recognising the role of the Tribunal in giving guidance,  appear
     to have thought that the Tribunal guidance on country  conditions  was
     binding as a legal precedent in the way in which a starred  conclusion
     on a point of law would be.  But S and Others was not starred for that
     guidance, but for the point of law which arose.  We have pointed  this
     out in DK and elsewhere and we hope that it is now widely  understood.
     It led to a standard being proposed for such cases, which may be ideal
     but cannot always be necessary in order for guidance to be  given  and
     for the injustice which inconsistency itself can bring to be  avoided.
     Unlike starred decisions, it is always possible for  further  evidence
     to show that the original decision was wrong or to expose other issues
     which require examination.  They  are  not  accurately  understood  or
     described as "factual precedents".

142. The system enables the parties and the judiciary to know where to look
     for what the Tribunal sees as the relevant guidance,  the  parties  to
     know what they have to deal with, and , if they  wish  to  take  issue
     with it, what it is that has to be the target  of  their  evidence  or
     argument.  It enables parties to rely on  the  material  which  others
     have had accepted without reproducing or repeating it every  time,  or
     if it has been rejected, to know that there is no point  in  repeating
     it.  Consistency and the justice which that  brings  can  be  provided
     for, even though differing and perhaps reasonable views can  be  taken
     of a wide variety of material.  It also has the advantage of  enabling
     the understanding of country conditions to be  refined  as  successive
     decisions may lead to the identification of consequential issues to be
     grappled with which had hitherto been unrecognised;  the Turkey  cases
     are an example.  There is recognised scope for improvement and parties
     can focus their evidence and arguments upon the aspect with which they
     take issue.  The IAA website has made these cases publicly accessible.

143. We can see the operation of the  system  here.   The  decision  in  FG
     should  have  been  considered  by  the  Adjudicator,  but  it   could
     legitimately have been distinguished by reference to  the  significant
     new 2004 evidence, or by reference to the practicality of safe  access
     considered in SH but not  in  FG.   The  consideration  of  the  cases
     brought forward for general use, and not just for two cases, the views
     of Professor Lewis and Dr Luling,  which  have  been  influential  and
     helpful all round.  They considered practicality  of  access  and  the
     related escort issue.   The  conflict  between  the  second  or  third
     Adjudicator decisions would have been avoided had  our  decision  been
     available and no appeal would have been necessary in the first case.
144. The system, whereby such guidance  is  given,  is  one  of  the  chief
     reasons for the Panel structure in the new AIT.  It may be refined and
     improved but it will be part of the continuing input into  immigration
     judge decision-making in  much  the  same  way  as  it  is  now.   The
     haphazard ways of old will not return.  Those ways were productive  of
     inconsistency, incoherence, injustice and waste.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
                                 Appendix A

In addition to the judgment of the House of  Lords  in  Adan  [1997]  1  WLR
1107, the following Tribunal cases were  cited:  SA  (Persecution-Eyle-Weak)
Somalia CG [2002] UKIAT 06665,  FB  (Risk-Class-Midgan)  Somalia  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 06753,  AH  (Midgan-Disabled  Woman-Relocation-Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
[2002] UKIAT 07343,  NG (Risk-Female Eyle-Internal Displacement) Somalia  CG
[2003] UKIAT 00011(previously known as G  (Somalia),  AJH  (Minority  group-
Swahili speakers) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094, AW (Article  3-Risk-General
Situation) Somalia CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00111,  AH  (Town  Tunni  regarded  as
Bravanese) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 000144,  SH  (Return-Gedo-Burden  of  Proof)
Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164, MN (Town Tunni regarded  as  Bravanese)  Somalia
CG [2004] UKIAT 00224, FG  (Risk-Single  Female-Clan  Member-Article  3)  CG
Somalia [2003] UKIAT 00175, AM (Use of Sharif  Name)  Somalia  [2004]  UKIAT
000110 and KS (Minority Clans-Bajuni-ability to speak Kibajuni)  Somalia  CG
[2004] UKIAT 00271.


                                 Appendix B



List of background materials placed before the Tribunal


CIPU assessments and reports for  April  2002,  October  2002,  April  2003,
April 2004 and October 2004.
Home Office Operational Guidance Notes: Somalia V6 May 2004.
 US Country Report on Human Rights Practices 2003 (February 2004).
UNHCR Position on the Return of Rejected Asylum-Seekers to Somalia,  January
2004.
UNHCR London Office  letter  of  2  November  2004  headed,  "Conditions  on
return, IDP camps around Mogadishu, Somalia".
The joint British, Danish and Dutch fact-finding  Mission  (17-24  September
2000).
The joint British and Danish fact-finding mission  to  Nairobi  (Kenya)  and
Baidoa and Belet Wayne, Somalia, "Report on political,  security  and  human
rights developments in southern and central Somalia,  including  South  West
State of Somalia and Puntland State of Somalia", 20 May to 1 June 2002.
The joint Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and British  Fact  finding  mission  to
Nairobi, Kenya 7-12 January 2004 published 17  March  2004  entitled  "Human
Rights and Security in Central and Southern Somalia".
Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada,  "Somalia:  The  situation  of
minority groups and their members", 9 August 2004.
Amnesty International, UK, "Get it right: how  Home  Office  decision-making
fails  refugees  (Report  excerpt:  Somalia  refusal  letter   and   Amnesty
International comment", 9 February 2004).
Global  IDP  Project  (Norwegian  Refugee  Council),  "Internally  displaced
Somalis face uncertain future after years of state  collapse",  24  November
2004.
Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "General country  report  Somalia",
22 Nov 2004.
Expert report from Professor IM Lewis dated 24 October 2004.
Expert report from  Dr  Virginia  Luling  dated  25  January  2004  entitled
"Opinion on the Return of Unaccompanied Women to Mogadishu".

There were also some  miscellaneous  other  items  notably  an  unidentified
newspaper article dated 29 July 2004  by  Richard  Walker  and  Tim  Fisher,
entitled, "Killing Rekindles asylum row" and a BBC News report dated Mon  24
January 2005.





