
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
                          MA (PROVE DESTITUTION) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 00013

HHeard at Field House on: 16 December 2004
Determination prepared      16 December 2004
Determination notified 24 January 2005
                                   Before:

                        Mr J Perkins (Vice President)
                                Mr J H Eames


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant : Mr K Kuranche, from the Refugee Legal Centre
For the respondent : Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She was born on 10  April  1941  and
so  is  now  sixty-three  years  old.   She  appeals  the  decision  of   an
Adjudicator, Mr L.J.R.  Lobo,  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  5
February 2004 dismissed her appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
State that removing her from the United Kingdom  was  not  contrary  to  her
rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 11 July 1991.   She
had leave to enter for six months.  On  3  December  1991  she  applied,  in
time, to extend her stay.  That application was  refused  on  3  March  1992
although she was granted an extension of stay for twenty-eight days.  On  11
August 1993, that is some fifteen  months  after  she  was  refused  further
permission  to  say,  the  appellant  applied  for   asylum.    Her   asylum
application was refused on 17 December 1996 and the  appellant  served  with
notice of the decision to make her the subject of a deportation order.   The
appellant appealed and the appeal was dismissed under 28 August  1998.   She
was given permissions to appeal to  the  Tribunal  and  the  appeal  to  the
Tribunal was dismissed don 23 March 2000.  On 4 February  2002  she  applied
for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  that  removal  would
be in breach of her human rights.  In  a  letter  dated  31  July  2002  the
Secretary of State explained his reasons for refusing the  application.   It
is against that decision that the appellant appealed to the Adjudicator.

The appellant was given permission to appeal to the Tribunal because it  was
arguable that the Adjudicator was wrong to  find  removal  proportionate  to
the proper purpose of enforcing immigration control.

At  paragraph  18  of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  described   the
appellant as 'an  elderly  person  who  has  difficulty  in  hearing'.   The
Adjudicator went on to say that the appellant had  had  some  difficulty  in
understanding questions that were put  to  her.   The  Adjudicator  accepted
that the appellant had lost touch with her remaining  brothers  and  sisters
and with her daughter who still lives in the Caribbean.  He said  'I  accept
that she does not know what will  happen  to  her  if  she  is  returned  to
Jamaica  and  that  she  will  not  have  a  close  involvement   with   her
grandchildren'.

These findings have to be set in the context  of  the  evidence  before  the
Adjudicator.  The appellant lives on her own in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
sees her daughter most days and frequently acts  as  a  babysitter  for  her
very young grandchildren.  It was her case that her main activity is  'being
a grandmother'.

The Adjudicator found that the appellant enjoyed a private and  family  life
in the United Kingdom.  She was an active member of a  church  and  an  'age
club' mainly favoured by older people with links to the Caribbean.

We  make  these  points  because  the  findings  at  paragraph  18  of   the
determination, on their own, could be thought to suggest that the  appellant
was a person of great frailty, heavily  dependent  on  the  support  of  her
family.  That is not what the Adjudicator found.

We have the benefit of a skeleton argument  from  Mr  Kuranche  although  we
made it plain that this was to introduce us to  his  oral  submissions.   We
would not regard it as an alternative to them.

It was not  in  doubt  before  the  Adjudicator,  or  before  us,  that  the
appellant had established a protected private and family life by  reason  of
her community and family ties and prolonged stay in the United Kingdom.

Much of the skeleton argument was  a  general  outline  of  the  appellant's
understanding of the law.  It did not help  us  very  much.   For  practical
purposes we find that the  proper  approach  is  clearly  set  out  by  Lord
Bingham at paragraph 20 of his speech in the case of R (Razgar) v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.  This  paragraph  is  quite
properly drawn to our attention in  the  skeleton  argument.   Lord  Bingham
said: 'Decisions taken pursuant  to  the  lawful  operation  of  immigration
control would be proportionate in all save a small minority  of  exceptional
case, identifiable only on a case by case basis.'

Mr Kuranche suggested that the appellant would be destitute in the event  of
her removal to Jamaica.  This is a concerning allegation.  We recognise,  of
course, that a  person  who  faces  destitution,  or  something  approaching
destitution,  may  well  be  entitled   to   say   that   her   removal   is
disproportionate to the proper purpose  of  enforcing  immigration  control.
However, if a person wants to make out that claim even though  the  standard
of proof is a low  one,  it  must  be  made  out  by  clear  evidence.   The
Adjudicator had  before  him  some  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
daughter supporting the claim that the appellant would be destitute but  the
claim was not explained or developed in any detail.  We  do  not  know  from
the evidence how the appellant has supported herself in the  United  Kingdom
for all these years or what opportunity she has had, or taken, to  build  up
capital.  Mr Kuranche said that she has been maintained by  state  benefits.
That may be right.  We are satisfied Mr Kuranche advanced  his  instructions
in good faith but there  was  no  evidence  about  that  and  there  was  no
evidence before the Adjudicator.  In any event, is far  too  superficial  to
be a proper explanation of the appellant's  maintenance  over  a  period  of
many years.

We know from the evidence that the appellant has some land in  Jamaica.   It
may not be worth very much but it is hard to think it has no value  at  all.


We are surprised that the appellant was described  as  'an  elderly  woman'.
As indicated above, she runs her own home and plays a  useful  part  in  the
care of her grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  It is not apparent  to  us
why she could not be expected to find some light work in  Jamaica.   Neither
do we have any evidence of the willingness and ability of her family in  the
United Kingdom to maintain her in the event of her return Jamaica.

Any  suggestion  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have  concluded  that   the
appellant would be destitute in the event of return  to  Jamaica  is  wholly
unfounded.  Appellants seeking to make points of that kind must prove  their
cases and do it in a way that  shows  that  they  have  seriously  addressed
their minds to returning to their country of origin  and  have  made  proper
enquiries about how they could establish themselves.  If  they  fail  to  do
that it will be most unusual for them to be able to show that they would  be
destitute in the even to return.  Such research has not been done here.

We recognise, as did the Adjudicator, that the  appellant  would  experience
significant culture shock if she tried to re-establish  herself  in  Jamaica
at this stage in her life.  It must be recognised that the  extent  of  this
culture shock would largely be a consequence of  her  own  deeds.   She  has
lived in the United Kingdom since July 1991.  At no time  during  this  long
stay has she had any proper basis for  thinking  that  she  had  any  secure
status in the United Kingdom and it is not suggested that she did.

This case does not have any of the  exceptionally  compelling  compassionate
features  that  would  be  necessary  to  show   that   removal   would   be
disproportionate to the proper purpose of enforcing immigration control.

There is no error of law by the Adjudicator.  We dismiss this appeal.






                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION

