
DR (ECO: post-decision evidence)  Morocco*  [2005] UKIAT 00038

                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  10 January 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  09/02/2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                                Mr R A McKee

Between:




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                     Entry Clearance Officer, Casablanca


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Klear of Simmons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This appeal raises a short, but important, issue as to the  effect  of
     section 85(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
     2002 on the evidence which can be  admitted  on  an  appeal  from  the
     decision of an Entry Clearance Officer.  It is an appeal  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr P M S Mitchell, promulgated on  23
     March 2004, whereby he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
     Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse him entry  clearance  for
     settlement as the spouse of the sponsor under  paragraph  281  of  the
     Immigration Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision was made on
     1 May 2003;  he was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
     intended to live together as husband and wife.
  2. The Adjudicator said of section 85:

           "7.   I can only take into account facts  in  existence  at  the
                 date of the Respondent's decision, or which  were  then  in
                 reasonable contemplation.


           8.    By virtue of Section 85(4) and  (5)  of  the  Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  I  am  constrained  from
                 taking into account facts arising  after  the  Respondent's
                 Decision.  This is a specific exclusion for all immigration
                 decisions as defined in section 82(1) of the same Act.   It
                 seems that Parliaments has expressly stopped the previously
                 accepted practise  of  allowing  adjudicators  to  consider
                 matters that arose within a short period  of  the  time  of
                 decision and could have been in reasonable contemplation of
                 the decision maker.  This constraint applies to  all  human
                 rights issues, except for those under Article 3."

  3.  Taking  the  evidence  before  the  Entry  Clearance   Officer,   the
     Adjudicator said that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  analysed  it
     soundly,  and  had  properly  concluded  that  the  evidence  of   the
     relationship and continuing devotion was very limited.  He continued:

           "19.  The lack of contact from the time that they met until  the
                 time they married is most  surprising.   It  is  an  almost
                 inevitable conclusion that the marriage was not a real  one
                 and that there were other motives for the marriage and  the
                 application before the ECO.


           22.   Having considered all the evidence that was  available  to
                 the ECO I agree with his assessment that at the time of the
                 decision that there was no evidence that the  marriage  was
                 genuine and subsisting at the appropriate standard.   I  am
                 satisfied having seen the wedding photographs that they did
                 go through a genuine marriage ceremony though."

  4. The Adjudicator did, however, consider evidence which had not been and
     could  not  have  been  before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   This
     consisted of a constant stream of subsequent communication,  evidenced
     by telephone bills.  He said that he could not take it into account:

           "18.  None of it was foreseeable at the time  of  the  decision.
                 If I could I would be satisfied that there was evidence  of
                 a  continuing  and  subsisting  relationship  between   the
                 appellant and his wife."

  5. The grounds of appeal drafted by the IAS  and  the  basis  upon  which
     permission was granted related to the effect of section 85 of the 2002
     Act on this type of evidence.

  6. Mr Klear, who appeared for the Appellant before us,  seemed  unwilling
     to pursue the argument along those lines and Ms Saunders  was,  for  a
     brief while, content that she could  agree  that  seeming  concession.
     The Tribunal did not feel that the issue was so open  and  short,  and
     pressed Ms Saunders on a number of points.

  7. Before we deal with the ground of appeal as drafted  by  the  IAS  and
     which, pace Mr Klear is not obviously a lost cause, we should  briefly
     refer to his argument, as best we understood it.  We do so even though
     he did not have permission to argue it but, in a way  which  we  could
     not follow, he said that they were related to section 85.

  8.  The  Adjudicator  was  correct  to  ignore  the   evidence   of   the
     communications  but  had  erred  in  upholding  the  Entry   Clearance
     Officer's decision when the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  mistakenly
     said that the sponsor had not been granted entry clearance as the wife
     of  her  then  husband.   This  error   infected   the   Adjudicator's
     conclusions.

  9. We reject that.  The mistake was put  right  before  the  Adjudicator.
     Nothing in his decision perpetuates it.  He would have been  wrong  to
     allow the appeal and remit it on that sole basis.

 10. It was also said that the Adjudicator was wrong to support  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer's inference that there  was  no  intention  to  live
     together based on their lack of contact, because coming from a  Muslim
     country, they could not have lived together before marriage.  There is
     nothing in this point either.  It was not prior co-habitation but  the
     minimal prior contact  despite  the  opportunities,  and  the  minimal
     knowledge of his new wife which troubled the Entry  Clearance  Officer
     and  Adjudicator.   Besides,  gross  generalisations  about  life   in
     Morocco, drawing  solely  from  an  advocate's  say  so  is  about  as
     unpersuasive as can be imagined.

 11. We now turn to the real issue in this appeal.   First,  the  statutory
     provisions.  Section 85(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act provide:

           "(4)  On an appeal  under  section  82(1)  or  83(2)  against  a
                 decision an adjudicator may  consider  evidence  about  any
                 matter which he thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the
                 decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a   matter
                 arising after the date of the decision.


           (5)   But in relation to an appeal under section  82(1)  against
                 refusal of entry clearance or refusal of a  certificate  of
                 entitlement under section 10-
                 (a)   subsection (4) shall not apply, and
                 (b)   the adjudicator may consider only  the  circumstances
                       appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."

     This appeal was brought under the 2002 Act.

 12. It is also relevant to look at the provisions in section 77(3) and (4)
     of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  This provided:

           "(3)  In considering-
                 (a)   any ground mentioned in section 69, or
                 (b)   any question relating to the appellant's rights under
                 Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention
                 the appellate authority may take into account any  evidence
                 which it considers to be relevant to the appeal  (including
                 evidence about matters arising after the date on which  the
                 decision appealed against was taken).
              4) In considering any other ground,  the  appellate  authority
                 may take into account only evidence-
                    a) which was available to the Secretary of State at  the
                       time when the decision appealed  against  was  taken;
                       or
                    b) which relates to relevant facts as at that date."

 13. Ms Saunders pointed out correctly that this was  not  the  predecessor
     provision so far as entry clearance  decisions  were  concerned.   But
     that point does not  take  her  very  far.   It  was  the  predecessor
     language used by Parliament  in  drawing  the  distinction,  where  it
     applied, between certain  appeals  or  grounds  of  appeal  where  the
     Adjudicator could look at evidence or events (however described) post-
     dating the Executive's decision and where he could not.  So it applied
     to appeals against refusals of leave to enter or remain on  non-asylum
     or human rights grounds.

 14. We note in passing that it was the interpretation of section 77(4) and
     the apparent non-application of it to non-Article 3 ECHR  cases  which
     led to the decision in SK [2002] UKIAT 05613.  This  is  reflected  in
     section 85(4).  The Adjudicator who referred to an  appeal  under  the
     1999 Act and to the limit on non-Article 3  grounds  appears  to  have
     overlooked that decision.  But it is an irrelevant error.

 15. The position so far as  evidence  of  post-decision  events  in  entry
     clearance cases before the 2002 Act was set out in Kotecha [1982]  Imm
     AR 88.  This held that because the jurisdiction when exercised by  the
     Administrative Court was a review jurisdiction, the Court was  limited
     to an examination of the lawfulness of the decision  on  the  material
     before the Entry Clearance Officer, or as  the  law  developed,  which
     showed what the position or state of affairs was at  that  date.   The
     earlier  statutory  provision  of  section  19(2)  and  (4)   of   the
     Immigration Act 1971, which enabled the Adjudicator  and  Tribunal  to
     review the determination of  any  question  of  fact  upon  which  the
     decision was based, had to be applied in the light of Kotecha.

 16. This was the approach adopted by the Tribunal.  One issue, which arose
     particularly in primary purpose marriage cases, was  whether  evidence
     of what was called "intervening devotion"  between  the  date  of  the
     Entry Clearance Officer decision and the appeal could be admitted.  It
     became the practice to admit such evidence where it could be  said  to
     illuminate what the actual state of affairs had been at  the  time  of
     the Entry Clearance Officer's decision - casting "a flood of light" on
     the true position.  The cases so holding are not very explicit  as  to
     the reasoning but an example is Patel [1986] Imm AR 440.

 17. The Tribunal also developed the practice  of  permitting  evidence  of
     post-Entry Clearance Officer decision events if they  were  reasonably
     foreseeable at that time, and a period of six months came to  be  used
     as the limit of reasonable foreseeability, probably because  that  was
     the period during which entry could be gained following the  grant  of
     clearance.

 18. Ms Saunders referred us to a 1992 Tribunal decision, ECO (Islamabad  v
     Yousaf TH/19930/90, in  which  the  question  of  maintenance  without
     recourse to public funds was at issue.  It said:

           "In an 'on entry' case the criterion is whether the requirements
           will be met on the admission of the applicant  and  not  whether
           they are met at the date of decision - as a general  rule  at  a
           date not later than 6 months after the decision, that being  the
           normal period of validity of an entry clearance."

 19. This illustrated, she said, the historic rationale for the  Tribunal's
     acceptance that an Adjudicator could look at post-decision evidence of
     what had then been reasonably foreseeable.  Yet the justification  for
     that had been removed by the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)
     Order 2000 SI No 1161 where the entry clearance decision  operated  as
     the grant of leave to enter.

 20. This practice reflected an argument accepted by Glidewell J in R v IAT
     ex parte Kwok on Tong [1981] Imm AR 214 and referred to in Kotecha, to
     the effect that where a relevant requirement of the Immigration  Rules
     was that a future event or condition be "likely", evidence about  what
     subsequently happened  was  admissible  because  it  showed  what  was
     "likely" at the date of decision.

 21. Ms Saunders submitted that the purpose of the change in the  2002  Act
     was to eliminate evidence of post-decision  events,  where  they  were
     reasonably foreseeable at that date.  In effect, she saw that as  also
     covering subsequent material which illuminated the position as at that
     date.

Conclusions

 22. First, the provisions of section 85(5) include both the disapplication
     of subsection (4) and the positive requirement only  to  consider  the
     "circumstances  appertaining"   at   the   date   of   refusal.    The
     disapplication of subsection (4) excludes "evidence which  concerns  a
     matter arising" after that, (rather than the whole of  subsection  (4)
     as a literal interpretation might require).  There is thus a  contrast
     between "circumstances appertaining" at the date of  decision  and  "a
     matter  arising"   after   that   date.    (Pedantry   would   suggest
     "circumstances obtaining at" whereas "circumstances appertain to".)

 23. Second, the 2002 Act does not simply exclude evidence about everything
     which may have happened after the date of  decision,  which  it  could
     have done.  We do not consider that that is the effect of  considering
     "only the circumstances [then] appertaining".  Subsection (4) contains
     a distinction between "evidence" and  "a  matter  arising".   What  is
     excluded is not "evidence arising" after the relevant date.

 24. Third, the purpose of that language is  to  achieve  a  different  and
     markedly more restrictive result than that yielded by section 77(4) of
     the 1999 Act, which refers to the inclusion of evidence "which relates
     to relevant facts as at that date".  This latter  phrase  was  clearly
     broad enough to cover evidence of subsequent  events  which  confirmed
     what was predicted or foreseen  at  the  date  of  decision,  such  as
     obtaining the predicted job or student place,  or  accommodation.   It
     was broad enough to cover subsequent events which illuminate the facts
     as at that date.

 25. This case provides an example of  the  distinction  within  subsection
     (5).  There was an issue about whether at the time  of  the  decision,
     the couple intended to live together as man and wife.  In the language
     of the statute, did the circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of
     decision include that intention.  Evidence that those  were  then  the
     circumstances can be provided by subsequent actions which  cast  light
     upon what the position then was.  This is not  the  same  as  evidence
     which shows that the position has subsequently changed and that  there
     now is an intention which previously was lacking.   Evidence  about  a
     subsequent change in intention is clearly excluded.

 26. Such evidence comes within the positive language of section  85(5)(b).
     It is not excluded by (5)(a) because the  existence  of  the  relevant
     intention as at the date of decision is not "a matter  arising"  after
     that date.  The evidence of telephone communications and letters after
     that date is not "evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
     date of the decision";  it is evidence which concerns a matter arising
     at the date of decision.  This illustrates the  distinction  contained
     in subsection (4) and hence in (5) between "evidence" and the  "matter
     arising" which it evidences.  There is no simple exclusion of evidence
     arising after the relevant date.  If it had been intended  to  exclude
     all evidence about anything which happened after the relevant date, it
     would have be simple enough to say so.

 27. We take a different view when  it  comes  to  evidence  about  whether
     evidence of the coming to pass of an event which had been the  subject
     of disputed predictability or likelihood is admissible.  Evidence that
     it had not happened equally would be inadmissible.  The usual issue is
     whether the particular matter or circumstance is likely at the date of
     decision;  eg obtaining employment.  The subsequent obtaining  of  the
     predicted job is a matter arising afterwards and evidence about it  is
     excluded.  It is akin to evidence being inadmissible to show  that  an
     intention has changed.  The fact that the new matter  or  circumstance
     eg the job may have been predicted or reasonably foreseeable does  not
     avoid it being  a  matter  arising  after  the  event,  nor  is  it  a
     circumstance appertaining at the time of decision.

 28.  Indeed,  the  fact  that  something  happened  does   not   logically
     demonstrate its likelihood anyway, because unlikely events do  happen.
     The value of the occurrence of an event in proving its  likelihood  of
     occurrence would have to be demonstrated by something other than  that
     it happened.  It is difficult to see, absent unduly complex  analysis,
     how it could be done.

 29. Applying those considerations to the  instant  case,  the  Adjudicator
     dealt unnecessarily with  whether  the  degree  of  communication  was
     foreseeable.  His conclusion that it  was  not  does  not  affect  the
     application of section 85(5) as we see;  it is simply irrelevant as  a
     means of admitting or excluding evidence.  However, he  does  conclude
     that it shows "a continuing and subsisting  relationship".   We  think
     that he means by that that the later evidence satisfied him that as at
     the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision,  the  couple  did
     indeed genuinely intend to live together as husband and  wife,  rather
     than that they first only intended to do so after being refused  entry
     clearance.

 30. Accordingly, taking the view of the law which  we  do,  and  differing
     from the Adjudicator's approach,  but  taking  his  view  of  the  now
     admissible evidence, the Appellant satisfies the Rules.
 31. This appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules;   we  direct  that
     entry  clearance  be  granted.   The  human  rights  appeal  does  not
     therefore arise.  It is starred for what we say about section 85.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
