
H-MGM-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 29 September 2004       |        |FM (Articles 3/8 in medical |
|                           |        |cases) Uganda [2005] UKIAT  |
|                           |        |00012                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|17/01/2005                                                        |
|.................................................                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane - Vice President                                      |
|Mr M E Olszewski                                                  |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Hart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Bailey, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Christian
                      Khan Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, who is the Secretary of State for the Home Department,
    appeals with permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
    D J Ross, sitting at Hatton Cross, in which he allowed on human  rights
    grounds the Respondent's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State to give directions  for  the  Respondent's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.

2.    The Respondent arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  1999  and  claimed
    asylum, asserting a fear of the authorities in Uganda.  The Adjudicator
    dismissed the Respondent's appeal on asylum grounds and  she  makes  no
    complaint in that regard.

3.    The Adjudicator, however, allowed the Respondent's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds. At paragraph 5.5 of the determination  the  Adjudicator
    made the following findings:-

         "5.5      I  accept  that  the  [Respondent]  suffers  from  AIDS.
              According to a letter from Dr Gary Brooke... she  has  severe
              late stage HIV, she requires antiretroviral  treatment  which
              is not available in Uganda.  If deported  he  says  that  she
              will die within 2  years.   Another  letter  from  Dr  Steven
              Dawson dated 28 November 2002  also  emphasises  her  fragile
              health, and the need for continuous treatment and monitoring.
               A further letter from him dated 7.8.03 makes it  clear  that
              the [Respondent] is being treated with a combination of three
              drugs, which in his view are  unlikely  to  be  available  in
              Uganda.  I have also considered the  reports  of  Dr  Barnett
              dated 11.6.03.  There is also a report from Dr Catalan  which
              concludes that  the  [Respondent]  is  suffering  from  post-
              traumatic stress, and dysthymic disorder.  I accept therefore
              that there are strong indications that if returned to  Uganda
              her mental and physical health will suffer, and that she  may
              die."

4.    At paragraph 5.6 of the determination, the Adjudicator contrasted the
    evidence regarding the availability of HIV/AIDS treatments  in  Uganda,
    as found in the Home Office CIPU Report,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
    report of Professor Barnett,  on  the  other.   Noting  that  Professor
    Barnett acknowledged that  treatment  was  available  in  Kampala,  the
    Adjudicator was also aware that Professor Barnett considered that  this
    would be at a cost that the Respondent could not  possibly  afford  and
    that she would also be at far greater risk in Uganda of picking  up  an
    infection.  The Adjudicator concluded that "it seems clear  that  there
    is a real risk that if returned she will not survive, and that she will
    suffer a cruel and debilitating death".

5.    At paragraph 6.2, having made brief  reference  to  various  reported
    cases, including that of D (1997) 24 EHRR 42 and Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ
    840, the Adjudicator concluded that what needed to be  shown  in  order
    for an Article 3 case to succeed where what was alleged was a disparity
    in medical treatment between the United Kingdom and Uganda, was "a real
    risk that the [Respondent] will die or suffer grievously if returned to
    her home country".  Finding that "there is a real risk that if returned
    to Uganda she would die within 2 years", the  Adjudicator  allowed  the
    appeal both under Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.    Of central importance in the determination  of  this  appeal  is  the
    status and scope of the Court of Appeal judgments in N [2003] EWCA  Civ
    1369.   There, the majority of the Court of Appeal held that  it  would
    not violate Article 3 of the ECHR to return to Uganda a female HIV/AIDS
    sufferer who was currently receiving anti-retroviral treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On the assumption that the  majority  judgments  in  N
    represent the correct  legal  approach  to  determining  the  scope  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR in its application to such cases,  there  can  in
    the Tribunal's view be  no  doubt  but  that  the  Adjudicator's  brief
    assessment at paragraph 6.2 of his determination  was  legally  flawed.
    Instead of asking whether there was "a real risk that the  [Respondent]
    will die or suffer grievously if returned to  her  home  country",  the
    Adjudicator should, in the words of Laws LJ, have found that:-

         "The application of Article 3 where the complaint in essence is of
         want of resources in the Applicant's home country (in contrast  to
         what has been available to him in the country from which he is  to
         be removed) is only justified where the humanitarian appeal of the
         case is so powerful that it could not in reason be resisted by the
         authorities of a civilised State.  This  does  not  I  acknowledge
         amount to a sharp legal test; there are no sharp  legal  tests  in
         this area.  I intend only to emphasise that an Article 3  case  of
         this kind must be based on facts which are not  only  exceptional,
         but extreme; extreme, that is, judged in the context of cases  all
         or many of which (like this one) demand one's sympathy on pressing
         grounds."

7.    To go any further would, in the judgment of Laws LJ, be to distort:

         "The balance between the demands of the general  interest  of  the
         community, whose service is  conspicuously  the  duty  of  elected
         government,  and  the  requirements  of  the  protection  of   the
         individual's fundamental rights" (paragraph 40).

8.    At paragraph 41, the Learned Lord Justice found that:

         "If on facts such as those  of  this  case  we  were  to  fix  the
         Secretary of State with a legal obligation to permit the Appellant
         to  remain  in  the  UK,  we  would  in  my  judgment  effect   an
         unacceptable - constitutionally unacceptable - curtailment of  the
         elective government's power to control the  conditions  of  lawful
         immigration.  I do not believe that our benign obligations arising
         under the Human Rights Act 1998 require us to do any  such  thing.
         Quite the contrary; our duty is to strike the very balance between
         public interest and private right to which I have referred."

9.    At paragraph 46, Dyson LJ held that:

         "It is only in a very exceptional case, where there are compelling
         humanitarian considerations in play, that the application  of  the
         extension to  the  extension  [created  by  Strasbourg  in  D]  is
         justified. It is clear that what was considered by the court to be
         very exceptional about the facts in D ... was that the Applicant's
         fatal illness had reached a critical stage and that:


         "the limited quality of  life  he  now  enjoys  results  from  the
         availability of sophisticated  treatment  and  medication  in  the
         United Kingdom  and  the  care  and  kindness  administered  by  a
         charitable  organisation.   He  has  been  counselled  on  how  to
         approach death and has formed bonds with his carers."


    It was the removal of these  facilities  in  these  circumstances  that
    would expose the  Applicant  to  the  risk  of  dying  under  the  most
    distressing circumstances.  As Judge Pettiti pointed out,  it  was  not
    the inequality of medical treatment  that  made  the  removal  of  D  a
    violation of Article 3.  It was the fact that the Applicant was  to  be
    deported in the final stages of an incurable disease".


10.   At paragraph 47, Dyson LJ went on to find that there are  sadly  many
    examples of  persons  who  enter  the  United  Kingdom  suffering  from
    HIV/AIDS and who receive treatment here that they  could  not  hope  to
    obtain in their country of origin.  If returned:

         "Their life expectancy may, and in  many  cases  almost  certainly
         will, be substantially reduced.  But, tragic though all such cases
         are, it seems to me it is clear from D that the ECtHR  would  not,
         without  more,  recognise  such  cases  as  raising   humanitarian
         considerations so compelling as to engage Article  3.   The  court
         would not regard such circumstances  as  exceptional,  still  less
         very exceptional.  The fact that an  Applicant's  life  expectancy
         will  be  reduced,  even  substantially   reduced,   because   the
         facilities in the receiving country do  not  match  those  in  the
         expelling  country  is  not  sufficient  to  engage   Article   3.
         Something more is required."

11.   At paragraph 49, the Learned Lord Justice concluded by stating that:

         "Tragic though such cases undoubtedly are, unless they  have  some
         special  feature  which  gives  rise  to  particularly  compelling
         humanitarian  considerations,  they  do  not  meet  the  stringent
         requirement that they be truly exceptional in order to satisfy the
         Article 3 criteria."

12.   If the majority judgments in N represent the law in this  area,  then
    this Tribunal is bound by them and so must find that the Adjudicator in
    the case before us erred in law in  his  approach  to  Article  3.   Ms
    Bailey, in her  forceful  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    contended, however, that N should no longer be regarded as representing
    the law.  This was because the approach of the majority  in  that  case
    had in effect been disapproved by the House of Lords  in  the  case  of
    Ullah [2004] UKHL 26.

13.   The Tribunal is unable to accept this  submission.   Nowhere  in  the
    opinions in Ullah can we find any statement  that  N  is  overruled  or
    disapproved.  Nor can it  be  said  that  N  has  been  disapproved  by
    implication.  Although the Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  Ullah  are
    referred to by Laws LJ at paragraph 31 of N, the actual conclusions  of
    the Court of Appeal in Ullah cannot in any sense be  said  to  underpin
    his judgment. The essential question in Ullah was whether and  to  what
    extent the denial of ECHR rights in a country  to  which  a  person  is
    proposed to be sent entitles that person to invoke the ECHR in order to
    resist his removal from a signatory State  to  the  country  concerned.
    Both the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords were agreed in  finding
    that a denial of rights protected by Article 3 of the ECHR could confer
    such an entitlement. The question in N, however, was what  is  required
    is required to establish a breach of Article 3, where the complaint  is
    not ill treatment at the hands of man but rather a "want  of  resources
    in the applicant's home country (in contrast to what has been available
    to him in the country from which he is to  be  removed)"  (Laws  LJ  at
    paragraph 40). None of the House of Lords' opinions  in  Ullah  can  be
    said to answer this question.

14.   As Ms Bailey said, the decision in N is, we understand, under  appeal
    to the House of Lords.  We are not aware that the  Secretary  of  State
    has indicated that he intends to concede that appeal, in the  light  of
    the House of Lords' opinions in Ullah.  In conclusion, the Tribunal has
    no hesitation in finding that N continues to represent the law and that
    the Adjudicator in the present case has erred in his application of the
    relevant legal principles identified in N to  the  facts  of  the  case
    before him. We find ourselves in complete agreement with  the  tribunal
    determination in UK (Use of N judgment as  a  benchmark  in  ill-health
    cases) Rwanda [2004]  UKIAT  00262,  where  the  importance  of  N  was
    recently confirmed.

15.   Ms Bailey submitted that, whether or not N continues  to  govern  the
    position, its facts could be distinguished from those  of  the  present
    case, in that the latter was, properly construed, an  "exceptional  and
    extreme" one of the kind envisaged by Laws L.J and Dyson LJ.

16.   Upon analysis, however, the Tribunal is unable to accept that this is
    so.  The claimant in N had been diagnosed as  suffering  from  an  AIDS
    condition.  So too has the present Respondent.  The evidence before the
    Adjudicator in the present case showed (as at 28  November  2002)  that
    the Respondent's CD4 count stood at 390 and her viral  load  was  below
    50.  As Laws L.J observed at paragraph 4 of N:

         "The progress of AIDS is monitored by what is called the CD4  cell
         count, which decreases as the immune system weakens,  and  by  the
         viral load (VL) which increases.  The CD4 cell count in  a  normal
         healthy individual is over 500."

      At paragraph 3 of the judgment, N's CD4 count was 20  and  her  viral
    load was around 50,000 copies-ML at base line.

17.   Given that the Adjudicator materially erred in law in his approach to
    Article 3, the Tribunal is not precluded from considering  evidence  as
    to the Respondent's  condition,  which  has  been  produced  since  the
    hearing before the Adjudicator. The most recent available evidence, set
    out in a letter of 27 May 2004, indicates  that  the  Respondent's  CD4
    count is now "just over 400".

18.   What is, however, plain from the latest evidence is that  during  the
    course of her treatment, the Respondent  has  developed  resistance  to
    certain named drugs (described at pages 240 and 241 of the Respondent's
    bundle) used in combination therapy.  This has necessitated the use  of
    a new combination  of  drugs,  which  includes  Abacavir,  a  drug  not
    currently available in Uganda.  Ms Bailey submitted  that  this  was  a
    distinguishing feature from the facts of N.  That is, however, not  the
    case.  The majority Lords Justice in N were at pains to emphasise  that
    they were taking the Appellant's case  at  its  highest,  in  order  to
    determine whether, if the appeal were to  have  been  remitted  to  the
    Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  the  Appellant  could   possibly   have
    succeeded  by  reference  to  Article  3  (see  paragraph  43  of   the
    judgments).  As recorded at paragraph 16 of the judgments,  it  was  Ms
    N's case that the formulation of drugs she was currently taking was not
    available in Uganda.

19.   A further feature of the latest evidence in the present case is that,
    according to the letter of 27 May 2004 from Dr Dawson, whilst a  person
    who had not already been on treatment and who had a CD4  count  of  400
    would not reach "a danger level of opportunistic infection" until after
    three years, a person who had been on anti-retroviral therapy and whose
    therapy was interrupted would be likely to suffer "a  much  more  rapid
    rebound of viral load and a much  more  precipitous  fall  in  the  CD4
    count.  It is therefore likely that the time schedule  mentioned  would
    be much more rapid and a quicker  development  of  fatal  opportunistic
    infections".

20.   The fact is, however, that (as can be seen from paragraph 3 of N)  Ms
    N had an anticipated life expectancy of "under  twelve  months  if  she
    were forced to return to Uganda".  There is  nothing  in  the  evidence
    before us to show that the Respondent's  expected  decline  in  health,
    though more rapid than for someone who had never been on therapy, would
    be any graver than that of Ms N.

21.   Professor Barnett's latest report asserts that  the  Appellant  would
    have practical difficulties in travelling to or remaining  in  Kampala,
    even if she were to obtain treatment there.  However, N  faced  similar
    difficulties (see paragraph 10 of the judgments).

22.   Ms  Bailey  submitted  that  the  latest  written  statement  of  the
    Respondent showed that she would be without any system of support, were
    she to be returned.  At present, the Respondent's aunt is looking after
    the Respondent's children but would be unlikely  to  be  able  to  look
    after the Respondent.  The  Respondent's  mother  "is  already  looking
    after seven children", is old and has not apparently  been  told  about
    the Respondent's medical condition.  There is, however, nothing in  the
    supplementary  statement  that  compels  the  conclusion  that  it   is
    reasonably likely that the Appellant's  mother,  though  burdened  with
    other obligations, and though no doubt of modest means, would be unable
    to provide some form of emotional  support  for  the  Respondent.   The
    Respondent also has brothers, each of whom  are  said  to  have  twelve
    children and to be "poor rural people".  Again,  the  point  just  made
    about the mother applies here.

23.   By contrast, five of N's six siblings had already died of HIV related
    conditions, as well as other close relatives, and both of  her  parents
    were dead (paragraph 10).

24.   Ms Bailey rightly did not seek to place any  great  weight  upon  the
    fact that the Respondent suffers from depression and has been diagnosed
    as having PTSD.  According to the letter of 2 August 2004 from Dr Shah-
    Armon, Consultant Clinical Psychologist, the Respondent is  seen  on  a
    monthly basis "largely to  provide  support".   Not  surprisingly,  the
    Respondent is said to be "very frightened of dying a painful death  and
    the impact this will have on her children who remain in Uganda with the
    Respondent's aunt".  Although the Respondent  "has  talked  of  suicide
    recently" Dr Shah-Armon considers that "she has suicidal  ideation  but
    no intent".  If returned to Uganda, the doctor is "concerned  both  for
    the mental  health  support  she  will  receive  and  also  the  social
    support".

25.   The Tribunal notes that Ms  N  had  problems  with  depression.   The
    Respondent's difficulties in this regard do not, in  our  view,  either
    alone or in combination with other relevant factors, take her case into
    the "exceptional and extreme"  category  identified  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in N.

26.   Although not cited in argument  before  the  Tribunal,  we  have  had
    regard to the Court of Appeal judgments in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165,  in
    order to see whether they might be of  assistance  to  the  Respondent.
    They are not.  What was regarded as significant in that  case  was  the
    position of the claimant's then unborn child.  That feature  is  absent
    from the present case.  Indeed, as we have  demonstrated,  the  present
    case is in all essential respects on all fours at least with the  facts
    in N.  Whilst noting that at paragraphs 31 and 32 of the  judgments  in
    CA, Laws L.J emphasised the point he had made in N that "there  are  no
    sharp legal tests in this area", there is nothing in CA that casts  any
    doubt upon the ratio in N.  At paragraph 32 of the judgments,  Laws  LJ
    found that he was  "unable  to  hold  in  the  present  case  that  the
    Adjudicator's decision, which was arrived at (as it happens) before the
    judgments in N were given was  legally  flawed  by  reference  to"  the
    reasoning in the case of N (our emphasis).  We  do  not  consider  that
    there is anything in that finding  which suggests that the  Adjudicator
    in the present case cannot be said to have erred in law, on  the  basis
    that the judgments  in  N  had  not  been  delivered  at  the  time  he
    promulgated his determination.  To suggest otherwise  would  be  to  go
    against the principle of English common law jurisprudence, that  judges
    reveal  the  law  instead  of  making  or  declaring  it  in  a  purely
    prospective fashion. Had the majority of the Court of Appeal in N meant
    their interpretation of Article 3 to be purely prospective, they  would
    have said so.

27.  Finally,  the  Tribunal  must  deal  with  Article  8.   Although  the
    Adjudicator stated in his determination that he was allowing the appeal
    under both Article 3 and Article 8, he said no more than that.  Article
    8 plainly cannot be used, by  reference  to  its  "moral  and  physical
    integrity" aspect, contained within the right to  respect  for  private
    life, so as to allow an appeal in a case, such as the present, unless a
    high threshold is met or, to put the  point  another  way,  unless  the
    circumstances are exceptional,  in  the  context  of  "ill  health"  or
    "medical" cases.  Given its qualified nature, Article 8 could avail the
    Respondent only if the circumstances of her case  were  such  that  her
    removal could not  be  said  to  be  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses open to the Secretary of State.  In this of all areas, Courts
    and Tribunals must recognise that the Secretary of State's policy  will
    be to pay particular regard to the importance of maintaining  effective
    immigration controls.  We are unaware of any authority  from  a  Higher
    Court to the effect that, in an "ill health" case such as the  present,
    the decision to remove should be regarded as disproportionate.

28.  We are fortified in our conclusion on the Article 8 issue by what  the
    House of Lords has recently said in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  about  the
    scope of Article 8 in cases involving persons whose health  or  welfare
    are said to be at risk were they to be removed to another  country.  At
    paragraph 4 of the opinions in that case, Lord Bingham,  having  quoted
    from the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Henao v  The
    Netherlands  (Application  No  13669/03,  24  June  2003,  unreported),
    regarded Henao not only as illustrating "the  stringency  of  the  test
    applied by the Court when reliance is placed on article 3 to  resist  a
    removal decision" but also as showing "importantly for the Secretary of
    State that removal cannot be resisted merely on the ground that medical
    treatment or facilities are better or more accessible in  the  removing
    country than in that to which the claimant is to be removed.  This  was
    made plain in D v United Kingdom 919970  24  EHRR  423,  paragraph  54.
    Although the decision in Henao is directed to  article  3,  I  have  no
    doubt that the Court would adopt the same approach  to  an  application
    based on article 8. It would indeed frustrate the proper and  necessary
    object of immigration control in the more advanced member states of the
    Council of Europe if illegal entrants requiring medical treatment could
    not, save in exceptional cases, be removed to less developed  countries
    of the world where comparable medical facilities were not available".

29.  After finding that the Court of Appeal in Razgar  did  not  propose  a
    test in Article 8 cases based on relative standards of treatment,  Lord
    Bingham  stated  categorically  that  the  ECHR  "is  directed  to  the
    protection  of  fundamental  human  rights,  not  the   conferment   of
    individual advantages or benefits".  At paragraph 20 of  the  opinions,
    Lord  Bingham  held  that  "Decisions  taken  pursuant  to  the  lawful
    operation of immigration control will be proportionate in  all  save  a
    small minority of exceptional cases, identifiable only  on  a  case-by-
    case basis".

30. The Adjudicator in the present case completely failed  to  explain  why
    the facts of the Respondent's case were so exceptional as to compel the
    overriding of the decision to remove her from the United Kingdom, taken
    as it was in pursuance of the lawful operation of immigration  control.
    Upon analysis, we can find nothing of  an  exceptional  nature  in  the
    facts of the present case to entitle the Respondent  to  succeed  under
    Article 8.





31.   In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that:-

         (a)      The case of N continues to be binding authority in  cases
             such as this;

          b) The  adjudicator  accordingly  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
             appreciate that  the  facts  of  the  present  case,  assessed
             against the "benchmark" of N, conspicuously fail to show  that
             the present case should be treated as exceptional and extreme.
             The use of N as a benchmark in ill-health cases of  this  kind
             has been specifically endorsed by the Tribunal in the case  of
             UK Rwanda [2004] UKIAT 00262 and that approach remains correct
             in the light of both Ullah and CA;


          c)  It  is  irrelevant  that  the  adjudicator  promulgated   his
             determination in the present case before the  judgments  in  N
             were handed down;


          d)  The adjudicator erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  under
             Article 8 in the absence of any "exceptional" feature such  as
             to override the Secretary of  State's  policy  of  immigration
             control.

32.   This appeal is accordingly allowed.



                                                                    P R LANE
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

                                        Approved for electronic distribution


