
Heard at Field House | | | |
|                                                                  |
|SL (Article 14 - Non - Jewish -Special needs) Israel [2005] UKIAT |
|00071                                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|On 23 November 2004        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                |Date heard:                   23|
|                                |November 2004                   |
|                                |Determination signed: 9 March   |
|                                |2005                            |
|                                |Determination notified:  15th   |
|                                |March 2005                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson, Vice-President                               |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, of counsel instructed by ARMB Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms F Ahmed, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr L D  Sacks,  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision to refuse to recognise her as a  refugee
      or to allow her to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  humanitarian
      grounds.

   2. The appellant, Mrs SL, is an Israeli  national  of  Ukrainian  origin.
      She is not Jewish, but she married a Jewish man whilst in the Ukraine,
      and the family repatriated to Israel,  where  they  were  all  granted
      Israeli nationality on the basis of Mr L's  Jewish  ethnicity.   Their
      son BL does not count as Jewish because  Judaism  passes  through  the
      female line, and the family experienced discrimination  in  Israel  in
      consequence of two of its  members  not  being  Jewish.  BL  also  has
      special educational needs in the autistic  spectrum  (although  he  is
      not, strictly speaking, autistic).   Since  the  family  came  to  the
      United Kingdom, the marriage has foundered, and the  appellant  relies
      on the risk for her and for BL if returned as a completely  non-Jewish
      family unit, as her ex-husband would not intend to return with them.

      Evidence

   3. The burden  of  proving  her  case  is  on  the  claimant.   Her  core
      allegation is that, returning with a special needs child, and  without
      her Jewish husband, she risks treatment which would breach  Article  3
      ECHR or the Refugee Convention.  We note that the bundle of  documents
      filed for the hearing deals with the position of trafficked women  and
      Palestinians and appears to bear very little relation to  the  account
      of this appellant. The statement of  the  appellant's  former  husband
      which was tendered is unsigned, and has never been  tested  by  cross-
      examination.  The Secretary of State has made no decision in his  case
      as yet, we were told; he remains in the United Kingdom  as  an  asylum
      seeker and if his appeal were to fail, would also be obliged to return
      to Israel.

   4. There is no expert evidence before us on special  needs  education  in
      Israel, or the position of non-Jewish Israeli nationals returned there
      now.  Mr Lewis' and his instructing solicitors did not  appear  before
      the Adjudicator, but Mr Lewis told us that they endeavoured to  obtain
      expert evidence in relation to Article 3 and 8  violations  in  Israel
      for people in this appellant's current circumstances.  No  appropriate
      expert had been identified by the date of hearing before the Tribunal.
      Mr Lewis sought an adjournment to enable them to search for an expert.
      The Tribunal considered that four years (the period  this  family  has
      been in the United Kingdom) was sufficient time to identify  necessary
      evidence, and refused that application.  We also considered  that  the
      appeal could be disposed  of  justly  without  the  necessity  for  an
      adjournment.

      The grant of leave

   5.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Vice-President  Allen,  who
      considered it arguable that the Adjudicator had not properly  assessed
      the risk to this appellant  on  return  to  Israeli  as  a  non-Jewish
      Russian with a non-Jewish son, BL, (Jewish ethnicity being  considered
      to pass through the female line). Further, since coming to the  United
      Kingdom  the  appellant  has  contracted  a  relationship  with  a  Mr
      Patterson, which was not argued  before  the  Adjudicator.   Mr  Allen
      considered that taken with the special educational needs of  her  son,
      BL, the Article 8 point was, just, arguable.

      The Adjudicator's determination

   6. The Adjudicator dismissed the appellant's appeal because  he  did  not
      believe her account of discrimination amounting  to  persecution  from
      Orthodox Jews in Israel, nor that the Israeli police force would  have
      merely ignored her complaints. He observed that both the appellant and
      her husband had been able to obtain employment in Israel despite their
      Russian language difficulties. The appellant worked in  a  dress  shop
      and the appellant's former husband got employment as a security guard.
      Their son, BL, obtained a place at a nursery school and later, medical
      intervention was available for his needs.

   7. During their stay in Israel, the family had no difficulty  in  finding
      accommodation, nor any financial  problems,  and  were  able  to  fund
      flights to the United Kingdom after only  15  months  in  Israel.  The
      Adjudicator considered that the prime reason for the appellant and her
      then husband leaving Israel was day to day fear of  terrorist  attacks
      as a result of the Arab Israeli  conflict  which  was  not  a  refugee
      convention reason, (Adan).  He  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
      genuine subjective fear of being injured  as  a  result  of  a  random
      bombing.

   8. The human rights claim failed for similar reasons, the  only  incident
      relied upon being a stone throwing incident as a result of  which  her
      head was injured. As  regards  Article  8,  the  Adjudicator  says  as
      follows:

           "31.  I now turn to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  I
           entitled to take into account when  considering  the  Article  8
           position, not only the position of the appellant  but  also  the
           position of her son, BL. The appellant does not have any  family
           in the United Kingdom, she being  separated  from  her  husband.
           There is in my opinion no family  life  of  the  appellant  that
           would be disturbed or affected, if she was returned  to  Israel.
           Further, whilst I note that the appellant's son,  BL,  has  made
           progress whilst he has been in the  United  Kingdom  educational
           system,  I  can  see  no  reason,  why  this  progress  will  be
           interfered with should he be returned to Israel.


           He is of the age where I am satisfied that he would be  able  to
           adapt to a new language and in any event, there is within Israel
           I am convinced educational facilities to assist those  that  are
           not fluent in the Israeli language, Israel  being  well-used  to
           immigration from person s from  non-Israeli-speaking  countries,
           indeed,  such  immigration  being  encouraged  by  the   Israeli
           Government who have in pl facilities to  enable  those  entering
           the country  to  become  fluent  in  the  language  as  soon  as
           possible.  The appellant's son, BL, is  of  an  age  where  this
           adaptation would not present a difficulty to him. I am therefore
           not satisfied,  having  balanced  all  the  requirements  as  to
           considering an Article 8 claim, that the appellant or  her  son,
           BL's Article 8  rights  would  be  prejudiced  by  returning  to
           Israel."

   9. The Adjudicator also considered that Article 14 would not be  breached
      since 'the treatment that the appellant has received at the  hands  of
      the Orthodox sect does not reach the standard where I can consider  it
      to be discrimination within Article 14 of the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950'.  That is a plain error of
      law; Article 14 has no separate life and must be  considered  only  to
      the extent that  it  enhances  the  operation  of  one  of  the  other
      Articles. Finally, the Adjudicator considered that internal relocation
      to a less-Orthodox area of Israel would solve the problem.

      Submissions


  10. For the appellant, Mr Lewis submitted that  on  return  the  appellant
      would fall to be treated as a non-Jewish Russian and that the case was
      appropriate for remittal. There had been considerable delay in dealing
      with this appeal on the Tribunal's behalf and there  were  new  facts,
      the breakdown of the marriage and  the  subsequent  divorce,  and  the
      close bond with her new partner.

  11. Mr Lewis argued that there was private and family life at the date  of
      decision  between the appellant, her son BL, and his father;  Mr L had
      regular contact with his son several  times  a  week  although  he  no
      longer lives with the appellant. They do not  live  far  apart;  their
      Newcastle postcode areas are NE6 and NE4.  Mr L he sees the  child  at
      weekends and holidays, for staying access.

  12. As already mentioned, Mr Lewis could  not  assist  the  Tribunal  with
      objective evidence of the treatment of non-Jewish  Russian  immigrants
      in Israel; he reminded the Tribunal of the attempts to break into  the
      appellant's apartment in Russia which he insisted were  based  on  her
      ethnicity. He relied on a paragraph in the current US State Department
      report which appears at page 17 of the appellant's rather  confusingly
      numbered bundle.  We were also referred to pages  1  and  3-4  of  the
      appellant's bundle.  The  Adjudicator  had  failed  to  apply  anxious
      scrutiny (Musisi [1997] Imm AR 250) to the appellant's  situation  and
      in particular to the relationships of her special needs son, BL.

  13. The appellant had been in the United Kingdom for almost four years and
      the family were only 26 days  outside  the  concession  period.    The
      appellant's son, BL, had clear special needs, as he needed  help  with
      language.  He could not speak easily in any language,  still  less  in
      Israeli.  He referred us to page 27 of the bundle.  The  Adjudicator's
      conclusions at paragraphs 30-33 were inadequately reasoned and made no
      reference to the likely consequences of returning the child to  Israel
      today.   It was a serious error of law to make  no  reference  to  the
      particular needs of this child in the determination.

  14. For the Secretary of State, Ms Ahmed pointed out that the  appellant's
      new relationship with Mr Patterson, who hopes to marry her and who  is
      British, had not been disclosed to the Adjudicator.  Mr Lewis disputed
      that, but his submission did not accord with the Adjudicator's  record
      of proceedings (Mr Lewis  and  his  instructing  solicitors  were  not
      instructed below).

      BL's special needs

  15. As at 8 November 2004, the report of Dr Paul Brown, SUSHO for Children
      with a Learning Disability, at the Purdhoe Hospital in Northumberland,
      describes 'both parents' as speaking Russian at  home.   It  does  not
      sound as though he were describing the  appellant's  new  relationship
      with an Englishman. The doctor records that the parents have divorced.
       The report is copied to both parents, who respectively live in  Byker
      and Elswick, both in the Newcastle upon Tyne area.

  16. BL is not autistic; he has had a diagnostic  autism  assessment  which
      was negative, though his behaviour shows autistic features.  He has no
      history of epilepsy, and no ongoing chronic medical conditions.  He is
      in good physical health and has no problems with mobility, hearing, or
      vision. He is at a special school where he is  making  good  progress.
      His teachers are pleased with him.  He causes few, if any, problems in
      class.    There  is  no  family  history  of  psychiatric  or  medical
      conditions or of learning  disability.   The  appellant's  husband  is
      attending college, working  towards  a  qualification  as  a  personal
      trainer, and is in good health.   His  mother  is  working  towards  a
      qualification in tourism.  The doctor anticipated seeing  the  parents
      again in 6-8 weeks (early 2005) and  discharging  BL  from  the  Child
      Adolescent and Autism Service.

  17. BL was 8 when the medical report was written.   He  has  significantly
      delayed language development, and did not speak until he was six and a
      half years old.  He has now developed some useful  language  (four  or
      five-word sentences) and can understand  relatively  complex  commands
      and questions in English, and in Russian which his parents speak.   He
      has rigid behaviours and a preference for a structured  routine,  with
      'significant problems' socialising with other children (although these
      have 'significantly improved' since 2002).

  18. The developmental problems were apparent before BL  was  2  years  old
      (that is, before the family come to the United Kingdom).    His mother
      and  father  have  found  that  encouragement  to  engage  in   social
      activities and have  more  flexibility  in  his  routine  has  brought
      positive results.  He shows good levels of attention and concentration
      and there are no current problems with instability in  his  mood.   He
      sleeps and eats well and has an appropriate level of overall activity.

      The appellant's mental health

  19. The appellant had a depressive episode in  May  2003  (which  was  not
      disclosed to Dr Brown who assessed BL);  she  locked  herself  in  the
      bathroom at home and threatened to harm herself.  She was assessed  by
      the deliberate self harm team, who concluded that  she  was  suffering
      from 'dysthymia with an adjustment disorder or depressive episode with
      co-morbid dysthymia'[1]. The divorce was made absolute on 30 September
      2003. She also had an ovarian cyst, which  was  dealt  with  in  2001.
      There is no indication of  any  further  problems  since  the  divorce
      became final.

      Objective materials

  20. At page 1 in the objective bundle, we see a passage which may be  from
      a US State Department Report.  Only one paragraph is extracted, and no
      reference is given.  It relates to the difficulties of getting married
      to a non-Jewish person, but  indicates  that  overseas  marriages  are
      recognised.  Similar difficulties arise in relation to burial of  non-
      Jewish persons.  We note that there are  portions  of  cemeteries  for
      persons whose Jewish identity is in doubt. There is no suggestion that
      this appellant or her son require burial at present, and by  the  time
      that she does, she may have remarried, or, since there  is  apparently
      controversy on this issue, the Israeli Government's position may  have
      softened.

  21. Another document, again a partial extract, appears to  come  from  the
      Banner of Truth, and relate to Discrimination in Israel.  Without  the
      whole document, it is difficult to  assess  this  document  correctly.
      Much of it relates to the burial and marriage issues (see above).   It
      is undated.   An  internet  search  reveals  Banner  of  Truth  as  an
      aggressively anti-Jewish American website.  We are unable to give much
      weight to the anecdotes in these excerpts.

  22. Amnesty International documents (page 7 onwards in the bundle)  relate
      to trafficking of women for sex.   This  woman  is  not  a  trafficked
      teenager but a  mature,  intelligent  and  adaptable  mother.   It  is
      difficult to see how that material is relevant.

  23. Other materials in the bundle relate to family segregation of Arabs in
      the Occupied Territories.  This appellant  is  not  an  Arab  and  the
      family has already split up.  There is no suggestion that  segregation
      relates to Russians outside the Occupied Territories.

  24. We have not derived much assistance  from  the  appellant's  objective
      evidence.

      Country Information and Policy Unit Report

  25. There is no Country Information and Policy Unit Report for Israel.  It
      is not one of the top 20  countries  from  which  the  United  Kingdom
      receives refugees. Having regard to the error of law on Article 14, we
      have examined the latest US State Department Report for Israel  (2004)
      which records some difficulties in  marriage,  burial,  and  obtaining
      citizenship or residence for non-Jews.

  26. 18% of the population  are  non-Jews  (but  that  of  course  includes
      Arabs). There are difficulties in obtaining access to state-owned land
      (but the appellant did have a home in Israel and reports no difficulty
      in that regard).  The most apposite passage is this -
      "Residency restrictions affected family reunification. Palestinians
      who were abroad during the 1967 War, or who subsequently lost their
      residence permits, were not permitted to reside permanently with their
      families in the occupied territories. Foreign-born spouses and
      children of Palestinian residents experienced difficulty in obtaining
      residency. Palestinian spouses of Jerusalem residents must obtain a
      permit to reside there. Palestinians reported delays of several years
      or more before spouses were granted residency permits. The Government
      of Israel occasionally issued limited-duration permits, but renewing
      the permits could take up to 8 months, which resulted in many
      Palestinians falling out of status. Palestinians also reported
      extensive delays in registering newborn children with Israeli
      authorities. "

  27. There are no recorded difficulties for Russians except in relation  to
      detention, which is not relevant here.

  28. Although there is no formal disability protection, there  is  also  no
      record of difficulties for autistic-spectrum children such as BL.  The
      US State Department Report gives some assistance on the provision  for
      children, in particular disabled children, in Israel today -
      "The PA provides for compulsory education through the ninth grade.
      However, girls who married before the ninth grade left at the behest
      of husbands and, in rural areas and refugee camps, boys left school to
      help support their families.
      Internal closures, checkpoints, and the separation barrier
      significantly impeded the ability of both students and teachers to
      reach educational facilities (see Sections 2.a. and 2.d.).
      In areas under curfew, all classes were cancelled. UNRWA reported that
      more than 35,000 teacher workdays were lost in the 2002-03 academic
      year. Enrolment of students from Gaza at Birzeit University in the
      West Bank declined from 370 in 2000 to 39 at year's end.
      Education and health care professionals judged that the violence
      produced lack of focus, nightmares, incontinence, and other behavioral
      problems. UNRWA reported that elementary school exam pass rates in
      Arabic, mathematics, and science declined dramatically between 2000-01
      and 2003-04.
      ...The law provides that no one under 14 can work. Those between 15
      and 18 can be employed under limited conditions (see Section 6.d.).
      There was no juvenile court system, but certain judges specialized in
      juvenile cases.
      ...In 2001, the Israeli High Court ordered the construction of new
      infant care clinics in East Jerusalem. The Association for Civil
      Rights in Israel stated that six centers now existed in East Jerusalem
      and the surrounding areas and that there was sufficient coverage for
      the local East Jerusalem population. East Jerusalem schools remained
      under-funded and overcrowded, and many students were denied enrolment
      due to lack of space. In 2001, the Israeli High Court ordered the
      municipality to build 245 new classrooms within the next 4 years, but,
      at year's end, only 2 new classrooms were finished and 28 were under
      construction
      International and domestic NGOs, including UNICEF, Save the Children,
      and Defense for Children International, promoted educational, medical,
      and cultural services for children, and other groups specialized in
      the needs of children with disabilities."

  29. We note that there are facilities for disabled children, and we remind
      ourselves of the dramatic improvement by  BL  since  he  came  to  the
      United Kingdom.

      Conclusions on this appeal

  30. The Tribunal retired to  consider  its  decision,  and  dismissed  the
      appeal at the hearing, for the reasons we now set out.

  31. We note that the Adjudicator disbelieved the appellant for the reasons
      he set out at paragraph 27:  he considered that  the  appellant  could
      resettle  in  a  less-orthodox  area  of  Israel;  that  the   Israeli
      Government was supportive of resettlement by Russian  Jews;  that  the
      appellant and her ex-husband had found work easily (he as  a  security
      guard and she in a dress shop); that the appellant had  been  given  a
      place on a college course and a nursery placement for her son, BL.  In
      particular, he disbelieved their account of lack of  domestic  support
      and considered that had the family approached the  police,  assistance
      would have been available.

  32. They had no financial problems during their stay  in  Israel  and  had
      funded a flight to the United Kingdom after only 15 months in  Israel.
      Fears of the suicide bombing campaign did not amount to persecution or
      reach the high standard necessary to engage Article  3  (although  the
      Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had a genuine subjective  fear
      of being injured in a random bombing in the Arab-Israeli conflict).

  33. We remind ourselves that, following CA [2004] EWCA 01165, per Laws LJ,
      unless the Adjudicator has made an arguable error of law  which  would
      have made a material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  the
      Tribunal is  debarred  from  reopening  his  findings  of  fact.   The
      Adjudicator's  factual  findings  are  carefully  reasoned   and   the
      appellant has not relied upon any evidence which would displace  them.



  34. The appellant contends that failing to deal with BL's special needs is
      an error of law.  The Adjudicator did deal with them  (paragraph  31).
      There is accordingly no error of law in his approach to that issue.

  35. The only error of law established is the Adjudicator's faulty approach
      to Article 14, which has no independent life and cannot do  more  than
      strengthen the operation of another Article.  We have two observations
      in that respect; first, by considering the Article as though it were a
      separate  head  of  claim,  the  Adjudicator  did  not  prejudice  the
      appellant's case but rather give to her a right which in fact she does
      not have; and second, if Article 14 is not, as the Adjudicator  found,
      strong enough to stand alone, the weight which it adds to  Articles  3
      or 8 will not be sufficient to enable her claim to succeed.

  36. We remind ourselves that the burden of proof is on the appellant,  and
      that her documentary  evidence  before  us  was  not  impressive;  her
      husband did not appear or provide a signed statement,  her  bundle  of
      documents was unhelpful and she has not  chosen  to  obtain  and  file
      expert evidence to support her claim of discrimination at the level of
      persecution  (or  Article  3  ECHR)  for  Israeli  national   non-Jews
      throughout Israel, nor of inadequate treatment for BL if they were  to
      be returned.  Given the shortage of educational places, it is again to
      the appellant's credit that she managed to obtain a nursery place  for
      BL.  It appears that assistance would  be  available  from  NGOs  with
      knowledge of disabled children's issues.  We note also that the Autism
      service has discharged him and that his progress  at  school  is  very
      good, particularly behaviourally.  There  is  no  evidence  before  us
      which satisfies the Tribunal BL  would  not  continue  to  improve  on
      return.

  37. The appellant has already surmounted all of the principal difficulties
      set out in the US State Department Report;  in  particular,  if  there
      proves to be a difficulty in her returning to reside in  Israel,  then
      she will not be at any risk at all, as she will  not  be  able  to  be
      removed.

  38. On the basis of the evidence we have, this appeal cannot succeed; that
      the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon her.

      General conclusions

  39. The evidence before us indicates some discrimination against  non-Jews
      in Israel, at the level of civil rights (marriage, burial,  Government
      land rights), although principally  for  Arabs  in  mixed  Arab-Jewish
      marriages, rather than for  Russians  such  as  this  appellant.   The
      discrimination is not at a level which could engage either  Article  3
      or the  Refugee  Convention;  the  marriage  question  is  dealt  with
      pragmatically, with Israeli citizens being expected to  travel  abroad
      to make mixed-religion marriages, and the resultant unions  recognised
      as legal marriages on return.  Overseas  marriages  undertaken  before
      entry are also recognised.  The obligation to travel abroad  to  marry
      'out' may not be entirely desirable, but we bear in mind  that  Israel
      is not a secular state and that this approach is used by many  Israeli
      nationals.

  40. Similarly, non-Jews are not denied burial. They are not buried in  the
      consecrated area of synagogue  burial  grounds.   A  similar  approach
      would be taken to  a  non-Christian  seeking  burial  in  a  Christian
      cemetery  here.   Overall,  although   we   accept   that   there   is
      discrimination, we consider that  its  effect  falls  well  below  the
      complete denial of rights required to advance an Article 8  difficulty
      to a level where it has extra-territorial effect.

  41. There is no evidence of anti-Russian discrimination at a  level  which
      could  engage  either  Convention.   Indeed,   Israel   promotes   the
      repatriation  of  Russian  Jews  and   their   families.   There   are
      difficulties for Arabs in the Occupied Territories, but  we  have  not
      heard argument on that issue, and they are not relevant to the present
      appeal.

  42. Unless there is a significant change in  the  objective  evidence,  we
      consider that it is most unlikely that a returning  non-Jewish  spouse
      and  family  will  be  able  to  establish  a  risk  engaging   either
      Convention, on the basis of this evidence.

  43. As regards the special needs of BL, we have not seen any  evidence  as
      to the  provisions  for  autistic-spectrum  children  in  the  Israeli
      educational system, but there is provision for disabled children  from
      NGOs with experience in those areas.  There are  clearly  difficulties
      in educating children in a situation of conflict, but the treatment of
      students reaches basic international norms, on the evidence  available
      to us.  Again, absent  evidence  of  a  change  in  circumstances,  we
      consider that  educational  provision  in  Israel  for  all  children,
      including disabled children, is at a level which does not  engage  the
      Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR.  It may be  that  this  question
      needs further consideration  in  relation  to  Arab  children  in  the
      Occupied Territories, but we have not heard argument on that issue.

      Decision

  44. The appellant's appeal was dismissed at the hearing.




                                                             J A J C Gleeson
                                                              Vice President

                                                         Date:  9 March 2005

-----------------------
      [1] Dysthymia is "a disorder with similar but longer-lasting and
      milder symptoms than clinical depression. By the standard psychiatric
      definition, this disorder lasts for at least two years, but is less
      disabling than major depression; for example, victims are usually able
      to go on working and do not need to be hospitalized.
      About three percent of the population will suffer from dysthymia at
      some time - a rate slightly lower than the rate of major depression.
      Like major depression, dysthymia occurs twice as often in women as it
      does in men. It is also more common among the poor and the unmarried.
      The symptoms usually appear in adolescence or young adulthood but in
      some cases do not emerge until middle age."
                     (National Mental Health Association of America website)


