
 | |
|                                                                   |
|NR (Gang warfare - Witness - Risk on return) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT  |
|00008                                                              |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:    6 September   2004                             |
|Date Signed:    1 December 2004                                    |
|Date Determination Notified: 6 January 2005                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)                               |
|Mr S Batiste (Vice President)                                      |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                               |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
| Representation      |                                             |
|For the appellant    |Miss R Dajani of Counsel                     |
|                     |Instructed by Antons Solicitors              |
|For the respondent   |Mr  J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


   1. The appellant appeals with leave  against  the  determination  of  the
      Adjudicator, Mr J.G. Macdonald, who dismissed his human rights  appeal
      under Articles 2, 3 and 8.  The appellant has rightly  not  challenged
      the determination of  his  claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms  1950.   He  has
      permission to challenge the  findings under Articles 2  and  3,  based
      upon his argument that his core account of being present at a gangland
      killing in Tivoli, Jamaica was credible and the issue for the Tribunal
      was the risk on return and, if  applicable,  the  internal  relocation
      alternative.
   2. There was a further issue in the grounds of  appeal  relating  to  the
      Adjudicator's self-direction in paragraph  110  of  the  determination
      that Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR  did  not  apply  to  those  whose
      problems were self-induced.  That  is  plainly  wrong,  as  Mr  Gulvin
      conceded, and in  that  respect  the  Adjudicator's  determination  is
      defective and cannot be sustained.

   3. The  Adjudicator  accepted  parts  of  the  appellant's  account.   He
      accepted that the appellant was a friend  of  a  notorious  drug  don,
      Willie 'Haggart' Moore, leader  of  the  Black  Roses  Crew,  and  was
      present on the occasion when Willy Haggart and two others were  killed
      in a drive-by shooting. The appellant was asked to  give  evidence  to
      the police and to attend an identity parade to discover the killer  of
      Willy Haggart.  However, the identity parade  was  cancelled  and  the
      appellant has never actually informed against the  gang  who  shot  Mr
      Haggart.

   4. It is the appellant's case that the police are unable to protect  him,
      or alternatively are unwilling to do so, and that given  the  size  of
      Jamaica, internal relocation would be difficult. The  rival  gang  are
      from Tivoli which is a known gangland area.

   5. Mr Gulvin submitted that the issue for the Tribunal was whether return
      would be a breach of Article 3  and accepted that the  arguable  issue
      would stop at  the  point  of  return  and  not  be  affected  by  the
      appellant's actions after he returned to Jamaica.

   6. Miss Dajani sought an adjournment of the appeal hearing on  the  basis
      of a last minute change of solicitors but the  Tribunal  refused  that
      request, as the appellant had been properly  served,  with  more  than
      sufficient time to prepare his case.   She then asked us  to  look  at
      the skeleton argument, the US State Department Report and news reports
      together with observations, which she accepted were obiter  dicta,  in
      the Court of Appeal decision Atkinson v The Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ  846,  in  relation  to  the  current
      position in Jamaica.   Miss  Dajani  suggested  that  there  had  been
      evidence of a threat to  the  appellant  and  that  the  Adjudicator's
      findings at paragraphs 102-105 indicated that  he  had  accepted  that
      element of the appellant's account.

   7. That strains the language of the Adjudicator's determination almost to
      breaking point.   At  paragraph  102  he  said  that  the  appellant's
      evidence was 'particularly vague' on that made the threats,  when  the
      threats were received, what was the nature  of  the  threats  and  how
      these threats were communicated. There was no evidence  that  he  knew
      the identity of his attackers and would be able to identify them, even
      if asked to do so.  The Adjudicator found that the police  were  doing
      their best to respond to the shooting and that the objective  evidence
      indicated that the police would  investigate  such  crimes  and  bring
      persons to trial to secure convictions.

   8. There was no evidence that the police had been unable,  despite  their
      limited resources, to assist the appellant and to investigate  the  18
      April 2001 murders, and there  was  no  evidence  of  pursuit  of  the
      appellant by the opposing gang after he came to  the  United  Kingdom.
      The appellant had never been a gang member of the Black Roses.

   9. Miss Dajani accepted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  a  threat  to
      annihilate friends of members of the gang and referred us to paragraph
      50 of the Atkinson decision,  which  cites  an  Amnesty  International
      report which was not otherwise before us.   She  also  referred  to  a
      gentleman called Bogle Dancer,  another  witness,  but  accepted  that
      there was no evidence of his  subsequent  risk  level  or  indeed  his
      survival.

  10. For  the  respondent,  Mr  Gulvin  contended  that  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions were sustainable despite his error at paragraph 110. There
      was no evidence that the return of the appellant would give rise to  a
      likely breach of Article 3  and no real risk. He had not been  a  gang
      member of the Black Roses and it was the leader who  was  killed.   He
      had not given any evidence which could be brought to the attention  of
      those who perpetrated the crime; there had been no identity parade and
      no follow-up. The credibility findings  did not extend  to  acceptance
      that the threats alleged had been made and a vague threat  fell  below
      the level of a real risk. That, he contended, was dispositive  of  the
      appeal.

  11. At paragraph 109 of the determination, the Adjudicator found that  the
      Jamaican authorities were wiling and able to protect the appellant  if
      necessary, and if not, relocation would  not  be  unduly  harsh.   The
      question was whether the  act  of  removal  itself  was  a  breach  of
      Articles 2 and 3 (E and R v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49). Factually, that argument did  not  get
      off the ground. The  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  sufficiency  of
      protection was sound:  if the Tribunal were against him on that  point
      there  was  objective  sufficiency  of  protection.  Jamaica   was   a
      designated country where specific evidence of risk was  required.   Mr
      Gulvin relied upon paragraphs 5.6 and 5.20-5.27 of  the  CIPU  Country
      Report for April 2004:

     '5.6     Jamaica is a constitutional parliamentary democracy. The Head
           of State is the  British Monarch and is  locally  represented  by
           the Governor-General. The legislature is bicameral and  comprises
           the upper chamber or the  Senate and the  lower  chamber  or  the
           House of Representatives.  The Senate consists of 21 Senators, 13
           of whom are appointed by the Governor-General on the   advice  of
           the  Prime Minister and 8 by the  Governor-General on the  advice
           of the leader of the opposition. In the absence of an  opposition
           leader, 8 independent Senators may be appointed to  the   Senate.
           The House of  Representatives  consists  of  60  elected  members
           called Members of Parliament....

     '5.20 The Constitution  provides for an independent  judiciary,  which
           generally exists in practice but lacks adequate  resources.   The
           judiciary consists of a Supreme Court,  a  Court  of  Appeal  and
           minor courts. The Judicial system is based on English common  law
           and practice.

     5.21   Final appeal is to the Judicial Committee of the  Privy Council
           in UK,  although  in  2001  the  Jamaican  Government  signed  an
           agreement to establish a Caribbean  Court  of  Justice  (CCJ)  to
           fulfil this function. The appellate  court  is  scheduled  to  be
           established in 2003 and will be based in Port-of-Spain, Trinidad.
           In  November  2003  Edward  Seaga  renewed  his  proposal  for  a
           referendum on the  model of government  including  the  plans  to
           supersede  the  Privy  Council  with  the  CCJ.   Jamaica's   law
           association and the main opposition party the JLP  have  insisted
           that the  Government hold a referendum  on the issue.

     5.22  The defenders of the proposed CCJ argue that the  Privy  Council
           is very expensive because of its geographical distance  and  also
           the  high cost of retaining attorneys in  England.  They  predict
           that the proximity and the lower cost  of   CCJ  will  facilitate
           more matters being heard in the final court of appeal.

     5.23  There was some opposition from the Jamaica  Bar  Association  to
           the proposed  CCJ.  The members of the  bar were  concerned  that
           there would  potential for political  influence on the   proposed
           Judicial Services Commission, which will  appoint  the    Court's
           judges. The bar association also  insisted  that  the   Court  be
           included in the member countries'  constitution  to  ensure  that
           succeeding governments would not be able to withdraw it.

     5.24   In response to the Privy Council's ruling on the use  of  death
           penalty, the Jamaican government withdrew from the  UN   Optional
           Protocol on Civil and Political Rights in 1999, giving  Jamaicans
           one less international body  to  which  to  appeal  human  rights
           cases, especially those involving the death penalty.

     5.25 According  to  the  Bar  Association  of  Jamaica,  the  Jamaican
           judicial system lacks adequate infrastructure,  support  services
           and equipment. Many courtrooms need  repairs  and  public-address
           systems, and a chronic  shortage  of  court  stenographers  force
           judges to take their own notes. As reported  in   "Jamaicans  for
           Justice" the courts are slow and for cases to get through all the
           stages allowed by the Constitution  and  International  protocols
           signed by  successive governments could take years.

     5.26    In September 2002 Supreme Court Judges and senior court  staff
           were trained under the  Legal Institution component of the Social
           Conflict and Legal Reform Project (SCLR) to prepare  them  for  a
           case and "case flow" management under the Civil Procedure  Rules.
           The aim of the initiative is to resolve civil disputes in a  more
           timely and less costly and more accessible manner.  Aims  of  the
           joint initiative by the  Canadian and Jamaican government include
           improved  information  access  and  retrieval  within  the  legal
           system. This project is under way and  involves  modernising  the
           Supreme Court and  Court  of  Appeal  as  well  as  the  resident
           Magistrate and other Courts in the Justice System of Jamaica. The
           modernisation is in terms  of  court  case  management,  document
           management, office automation,  Internet  access  and  electronic
           case filing. In September 2002 the government  introduced  a  New
           Civil Procedure Rule to improve the efficiency and management  of
           the judicial system.

     5.27  The Constitution provides for a fundamental right to  protection
           from arbitrary arrest and detention.'


  12. We indicated that Mr Gulvin  did  not  need  to  make  submissions  on
      general risk. He then asked us to dismiss the appeal.

  13. In reply, Miss Dajani referred the Tribunal to page 3 of the  skeleton
      argument, in which the references are to an  earlier  version  of  the
      CIPU Country Report and asked us to update the  references,  read  the
      report  and  see  whether  it  supported  her  contentions.   If   the
      Adjudicator had thought there was no risk of targeting, he  would  not
      have dealt with the sufficiency of protection at  paragraphs  102-103.
      She also relied on newspaper reports which appear in the bundle.

  14. We reserved our determination for postal delivery, which we now give.

  15. The core findings in the Adjudicator's determination are at paragraphs
      102-105:

      "100. The appellant's position is not that  he  fears  persecution  or
           treatment contrary to Article 3 from the state or its agents but
           rather from non-state actors, namely a rival gang.
      101.  He does refer to receiving threats and having to move to another
           house.
      102.  His evidence is particularly vague on who made the threats, what
           the nature of  the  threats  was  and  how  these  threats  were
           communicated.  There is also no evidence that he knows the exact
           identity of his attackers and would be able [to] identify them.
      103.  From the information offered by the appellant  it  seems  to  me
           that the police were doing their best to respond to the incident
           on 18th April 2001.  The objective evidence indicates  that  the
           police will investigate such crimes  and  that  they  intend  to
           bring persons to trial and secure convictions.
      104.   In  this  case  they  asked  the   appellant   to   attend   an
           identification parade.  There could have been many  reasons  why
           the parade was cancelled and the appellant acknowledged that  it
           was possible that the  police  were  trying  to  arrange  for  a
           further parade but by that time he was  already  in  the  United
           Kingdom.
      105.  There is no evidence before me to indicate that the police  were
           unable, despite their limited resources, to assist the appellant
           and investigate the murders on 18th April 2001."


  16. The evidence in the newspaper report shows that  the  death  of  Willy
      Haggart was followed by a huge public funeral.  It was regarded as  so
      significant that the Jamaican finance minister, Omar  Davis,  attended
      the funeral; an orgy of violence gripped the western belt of  Kingston
      for two months, thereafter slowly returning to normal until a raid was
      led into Tivoli Gardens by  a  controversial  policeman.  The  attacks
      which took place during that time were between the authorities and the
      gang members and there  is  no  evidence  at  all  of  any  attack  on
      potential witnesses.

  17. In particular, the  other  witness  mentioned  by  the  appellant,  Mr
      Dancer, spoke openly to the press.  At H2 in the Secretary of  State's
      bundle, a newspaper report provided by the appellant records Bogle  as
      speaking to the press -

           "Popular dancehall dancer Bogle, a close friend of  Moore,  said
           he was in a nearby house when he heard the  gunshots.   He  said
           when he ran outside he was just in time to see the men 'pumping'
           the last rounds into Moore before going back to  their  car  and
           driving away.

           'Mi inna the yard, mi see the niggas when dem a drive way.   The
           way how me vex me all start run dung the car,'  Bogle  said,  on
           the brink of tears. 'up to last night, everything was  nice  and
           straight, a pure movie star vibes, and sporting, upon de Roof [a
           club nearby], but this cramp everything.'"

  18. The appellant's other newspaper  reports  (H4)  show  the  funeral  as
      attended by 5000 people. Supporters fired  a  gun  salute  with  their
      pistols during the funeral.  Those attending included: the members  of
      the Arnett Gardens football team; Grammy winner Deejay Beenie Man (who
      sang his own version of Bob Marley's Redemption Song); Omar Davies, MP
      for the South St Andrew; Paul Burke, Region  Three  Chairman  for  the
      People's National Party, the Water Minister, the  Transport  Minister,
      another MP, and several attorneys at law.  None of them  came  to  any
      harm from public association with the funeral.

  19. Atkinson is a decision on certification and is  expressly  limited  to
      that point.   It is authority only for the point  that  an  Article  3
      claim for an informer in Jamaica and  issues  of  internal  relocation
      should not be certified as clearly unfounded.  The Court of Appeal had
      evidence before it which seemed to indicate that  the  authorities  in
      Jamaica could not provide 'any reasonable system  of  protection'  and
      that violent crime was on the increase.  There  was  'no  doubt  about
      willingness to tackle the problem' but it was another  matter  whether
      effective steps had been taken to achieve the bare minimum required to
      provide reasonable protection for informers  and  perceived  informers
      who found themselves in the situation of Mr  Atkinson,  who  had  been
      visited at home by the police and was credibly  suspected  of  helping
      the police against the JLP.

  20. That is not the factual matrix here;  this  appellant's  rather  vague
      account is that he was on his way to  a  match  with  Willie  Haggart,
      Blackdouche and Big Bunny from the Black Roses Gang, when a car pulled
      up and the other three were shot dead.  The appellant  was  also  shot
      and has a head scar.   The police never came to his house and he never
      informed on the opposing gang. Jan Ark and Bogle Dancer witnessed  the
      killing too.  Jan Ark left the country.   Bogle  Dancer  attended  the
      funeral and there is no evidence that he came to any harm.

  21. We considered  the  skeleton  argument  (pp  1-6  of  the  appellant's
      bundle). The references to the previous CIPU Country Report appear  in
      paragraph 7 (referring to paragraph 88 of the  determination)  and  in
      paragraph 9 (referring to paragraph 6.13 of CIPU Country Report),  and
      go to the history of inter-gang violence, the difficulty  of  policing
      in Jamaica and  the  deficiencies  of  the  police  in  Jamaica.   The
      equivalent paragraphs are 6.32 -

           6.32 According to the USSD Report 2003, "The police frequently
           employed lethal force in apprehending criminal suspects. There
           were 127 deaths, including those of 13 police officers, during
           police encounters with criminals [in 2003], compared with 147,
           including 16 police, in 2002. While allegations of "police
           murder" were frequent, the validity of some of the allegations
           was suspect."


      And 6.102 -


           6.102 According to the Jamaicans for Justice report "Jamaica's
           Human Rights Situation, "Jamaica today is a case study in
           tribalist politics typified by inner-city "garrison"
           communities, that are entrenched in state-built housing, are
           politically homogenous, intolerant of dissenting views, and
           defended by guns and bullets ... Out of structures created by
           political wars, "community" youth gangs have emerged to fight
           over turf and account for 20-25 percent of homicides. Criminal
           gangs linked with US "posses", UK "yardies", and now, most
           lethally, with elements of the Colombian drugs trade menace the
           entire fabric of society."

  22. The relevance of lethal force by the police  to  this  appeal  is  not
      clear; the appellant was an  innocent  witness  asked  to  assist  the
      police and is not at risk from them.   The  report  does  support  the
      control which the gangs have over particular areas, but  there  is  no
      evidence as to the current status of  Willie  Haggart  Moore's  Tivoli
      Gardens gang.  Nor is there any evidence of recent pursuit or interest
      in the claimant, either  by  the  unnamed  gang  which  killed  Willie
      Haggart,  or  by  the  authorities  as  an  anonymous   witness.   The
      Adjudicator did not believe his evidence of threats, although he found
      his account credible to the appropriate lower standard in relation  to
      the shooting itself.

  23. Otherwise, the skeleton argument merely reasserts  the  factual  claim
      below  and  takes  matters  very  little  further.    The  Adjudicator
      accepted (paragraph 109) that the police would  wish  to  protect  the
      appellant and were willing  and  able  to  apply  their  resources  to
      protect  him,  having  regard  to  operational   resources   and   the
      constraints on the provision of police protection.  That  is  in  line
      with the test in Horvath.  The appellant's evidence did not  establish
      that there was a continuing risk to him today, given his minor r�le in
      the abortive criminal proceedings against the opposing gang.

  24. We accept that the Adjudicator made a  significant  error  of  law  at
      paragraph  110  in  finding  that  the  provisions  of  the   European
      Convention on Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms  1950  were  not
      meant to apply to those whose problems were self-induced. However, for
      the reasons set out above, even if he had considered  the  Articles  2
      and 3 issues correctly, we consider that he would  have  come  to  the
      same conclusion; the appellant's evidence of current risk is too vague
      to succeed, even in the light of the  difficulties  which  the  police
      have with Jamaican gang warfare.

  25. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.





      Date: 20 January 2005                   J A J C Gleeson
                                              Vice-President
