

|                           |        |                            |
| On:  13 January 2005      |        |NM (Draft evaders - evidence|
|Prepared: 19 January 2005  |        |of risk) Eritrea [2005]     |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00073                 |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|22 March 2005                                                    |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                 |
|Mr T S Culver                                                    |
|Mr R Baines JP                                                   |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                       |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Jacobs of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen   of   Eritrea,   appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  T  Davidson,  who  dismissed  her
      appeal against the decision made on 18 March  2004  giving  directions
      for her removal following the refusal of her claim for asylum.

      Background

2.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 July  1999  with  an
      Arab family she was working for.   She left them two  days  later  and
      applied for asylum on 2 August 1999.  Her application was  refused  by
      the Secretary of State and the Adjudicator heard  the  appeal  against
      this decision on 4 June 2004.

3.    The appellant is an Eritrean national born in Asmara on 2 March  1972.
       She claims to be a Muslim from the  Jiberti  tribe.   She  has  three
      brothers and three sisters as well as a half brother from her mother's
      side and three half siblings from her father's side.  She  lived  with
      her family until she  left  Eritrea  in  1991.    Her  father  was  an
      outstanding member of the ELF, as  the  appellant  described  it,  and
      continued his membership until 1991 when he was arrested by the  EPLF.
       She was not a member of the ELF herself but  had  helped  her  father
      with his ELF papers.  The only person who knew about this was a friend
      who was arrested on 10 June 1991.   The  appellant  managed  to  avoid
      arrest even though officials came to her home looking  for  her.   She
      managed to escape to Sudan on 25 June 1991.

4.    She found work there as a domestic worker with a Sudanese family.   In
      January 1992 her uncle took her to Ethiopia so that she would be  able
      to get a contract for work in Saudi Arabia.  She  subsequently  worked
      for three different families there.   When the  war  between  Ethiopia
      and Eritrea started, Eritrean government supporters  in  Saudi  Arabia
      asked her to contribute financially to aid  the  war  effort  but  she
      refused as she did not  support  it.   She  attempted  to  change  her
      Ethiopian passport for an Eritrean one but she was threatened and told
      that she would not be considered an Eritrean national and would not be
      able to go back.   In July 1999 the Arab family she  was  working  for
      came to the United Kingdom.  She left them on 21 July 1999 and applied
      for asylum on 2 August 1999.

      The Adjudicator's Findings

5.    The Adjudicator did not accept that  the  appellant's  father  was  an
      outstanding member of the ELF but an ordinary member.  However, he did
      accept that he had been arrested and detained in June  1991  and  that
      the appellant had fled to Sudan and later worked in Saudi Arabia.   He
      was not satisfied that she was  of  any  particular  interest  to  the
      authorities because of her former  or  current  political  activities.
      He did not accept her evidence about seeking to change  her  Ethiopian
      passport to an Eritrean one and being asked for a contribution to  the
      war effort.  He found that she must have been issued with some sort of
      passport because she had said that she would not be allowed to work in
      Saudi Arabia without a passport and she would have needed one to enter
      the United Kingdom.  He held that there was no  reasonable  likelihood
      that she would be persecuted if returned to Eritrea.

6.    The Adjudicator accepted the evidence  which  showed  that  the  human
      rights situation in Eritrea was generally very  poor.   He  considered
      the argument that there would be a risk arising from  the  appellant's
      liability for military service and the possible  consequences  if  she
      refused.  He was not satisfied that the appellant  would  in  fact  be
      liable for military call up in the light of paragraph 5.56 of the CIPU
      Report which referred to women between the ages of eighteen and twenty
      seven being required to participate in the National Service  Programme
      including military training and  civilian  work  programmes.   As  the
      appellant was over the age of thirty, she would appear to have escaped
      those provisions.  The Adjudicator noted that the maximum penalty  for
      refusing to perform military service  was  three  years  imprisonment.
      Even if the appellant  were  to  be  considered  a  draft  evader  and
      arrested and imprisoned on that account, it would not amount to  harsh
      or inhuman treatment.   The appeal was dismissed on  both  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.

      The Grounds of Appeal and the Submissions

7.    Permission to appeal was granted limited to the  issues  arising  from
      the liability for military  service.   The  grounds  assert  that  the
      appellant is of military age and would be interrogated and ill-treated
      as a suspected draft evader.  They rely on MA  (Female  Draft  Evader)
      Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 0098.

8.    At  the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  Mr  Jacobs  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator had proceeded on the wrong factual  basis  when  assessing
      military service.  The evidence was that all citizens between the ages
      of eighteen and  forty  five  were  required  to  participate  in  the
      National Service Programme: A127, A139, A142 and A145.

9.    The fact that the appellant would not  have  received  call-up  papers
      was not determinative: in MA the applicant had  not  been  called  up.
      The risk arose from the perception of being a person  likely  to  have
      evaded the draft.  The claim must be set in the context of  the  human
      rights crackdown currently taking place in  Eritrea.   The  background
      evidence showed an almost fanatical drive by the authorities to  force
      those liable for military service into military camps.   Anyone  being
      returned was at risk of being suspected of  leaving   Eritrea  because
      they  wished  to  evade  the  draft.    Mr  Jacobs  argued   that   SE
      (Deportation - Malta - 2002 - General Risk) Eritrea  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
      00295 was wrongly decided and in  any  event  there  was  now  further
      evidence highlighting the risk on return for those regarded  as  draft
      evaders.

10.   Mr Ouseley submitted that it must be relevant  to  take  into  account
      whether an appellant had been called up  for  military  service.   The
      risk was for those who sought to  evade  the  draft.   The  background
      evidence should  be  considered  with  care.  The  appellant  had  not
      specifically refused to do military service.



      Consideration of the Issues

11.   The Tribunal is satisfied from the background evidence that the  upper
      age limit for military service is 40.  The Adjudicator  accepted  that
      the age limit for women was 27 but failed to  take  into  account  the
      other background evidence identified in Mr Jacob's submissions showing
      that the upper age limit in fact applied to both men and  women.    We
      are satisfied that the Adjudicator erred in law in this respect.

12.   There is no doubt from  the  background  evidence  that  the  Eritrean
      authorities have not hesitated to  resort  to  torture  and  that  the
      police have severely mistreated army deserters and draft evaders:   US
      Department of State Report 2003.  This is illustrated by the  fate  of
      the Maltese returnees in September and October 2002 when they were all
      arrested although subsequently, women, children  and  those  over  the
      conscription age limit of 40 were released.  Eighty five of those kept
      in detention appear to have been identified as conscript deserters but
      the other ninety five were still sent to secret mainland prisons: A97.
       According to the same report  National  Military  Service  is  a  key
      government policy of nation  building  representing  a  continuity  of
      military oriented mobilisation by a predominantly EPLF Government.

13.   Conscription is  enforced  by  the  regional  administrations  through
      round-ups.  The police  search  houses,  workplaces  and  streets  and
      detain suspected evaders  to  check  their  identity  documents.   The
      government's attempts to enforce the draft have included the arrest of
      thousands of people (A4) leading to  an  escape  attempt  in  which  a
      number of prisoners were killed. There is  a  BBC  Report  about  this
      incident at A6.   Initially it was denied by the Eritrean  authorities
      but this denial was later modified to the extent of  saying  that  the
      number of deaths had been totally exaggerated.

14.   In July 2004 a number of Eritreans were deported from Libya and  there
      are reports and in particular the Amnesty report of 28 July 2004 (A80-
      1) that they have been detained in military camps.  Most are  believed
      by the authorities either to have deserted from military service or to
      have evaded conscription.  This report also confirms that thousands of
      young Eritreans have fled military conscription in the past few  years
      and those caught evading service  are  detained  indefinitely  without
      charge or trial in harsh conditions and  tortured.   The  Tribunal  is
      satisfied and the evidence put before us is clear that at  present  in
      Eritrea those who are suspected of evading and  refusing  conscription
      are at risk of ill treatment and torture.

15.   The issue in this appeal is whether there is  a  real  risk  that  the
      appellant would be suspected of  being  a  draft  evader.   In  normal
      circumstances it might be argued that someone who had been out of  the
      country for many years and had not been summoned for military  service
      would not be at risk.   However,  it  is  clear  from  the  background
      evidence that the situation is not normal in Eritrea  so  far  as  the
      government's attitude towards military service is concerned.  There is
      a political impetus  to  enforce  military  service  as  part  of  the
      reconstruction of Eritrea and a failure  to  perform  it  is  seen  as
      disloyalty to the authorities.  The evidence of the returns from Malta
      and Libya indicate  that  the  Eritrean  government  is  exceptionally
      suspicious of those of military age who are  returned.    It  was  not
      only  the  draft  evaders  amongst  the  Maltese  returnees  who  were
      detained. Those of military service age, even those not identified  as
      evaders, remain in detention.  A similar  fate  has  happened  to  the
      Libyan returnees.

16.   On the evidence as it stands at present,  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied
      that there is a reasonable likelihood that this appellant might be  at
      risk.   It is not just a case of her being a returnee  of  draft  age.
      She may be additionally vulnerable because of her  family's  political
      history, the Adjudicator having accepted that her father  had  been  a
      member of the ELF.  Looking at the appellant's  circumstances  in  the
      light of the current background evidence the Tribunal find that  there
      is a real risk that she will be perceived as a draft evader leading to
      a risk of detention and ill-treatment.

17.   There is further evidence before us which was not before the  Tribunal
      in MA.  We are satisfied that being perceived as a draft  evader  does
      carry  political connotations in the eyes of the Eritrean  authorities
      to the extent that the appellant would be at risk of serious harm  for
      a  Convention  reason,  her  perceived  opposition  to   the   current
      government.  These findings distinguish this case from the position in
      SE which primarily dealt with the issue of risk for returnees as such.

 18.  Accordingly, this appeal is allowed on both asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President




Approved for electronic transmission
