
AI (Statutory Review - evidence) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00063
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  7 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                9th March 2005..............

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mrs  C
     Scott-Baker, and promulgated on 29  April  2004.   She  dismissed  the
     appeal of the Appellant from the refusal of the Secretary of State  on
     4 February 2004 to grant asylum.  He granted leave to remain until  20
     December 2005.  This was because of the age of the Appellant, who  was
     born on 20 December 1987 in Somalia.

  2. She claimed to have left Somalia in 1999 to spend five years in  Kenya
     before coming to the United Kingdom, where she claimed asylum two days
     after arrival in January 2004.  She  based  her  claim  to  asylum  on
     membership of a minority clan, the Reer Hamar.  She  was  disbelieved.
     She was refused leave to appeal,  having  produced  an  expert  report
     after the adverse determination, in order to deal  with  aspects  upon
     which  the  Adjudicator  had  disbelieved  her.   This   refusal   was
     overturned on  statutory  review  on  the  grounds  that  an  item  of
     background material had been misunderstood and because  the  Tribunal,
     in refusing leave to  appeal  ought  arguably  to  have  admitted  the
     subsequent report of the Appellant's expert.  It was thought  relevant
     to that argument that it had been produced specifically to  deal  with
     the Adjudicator's findings.

  3. We would like to make two observations about this grant  of  Statutory
     Review.  First, the Tribunal cannot admit  fresh  evidence  on  appeal
     unless there is a material error of law in the determination where the
     determination is after 8  June  2003  as  here.   The  same  principle
     therefore applies to the Administrative Court when deciding whether it
     is arguable that the Adjudicator made a material error of law and that
     the Tribunal should have so concluded.  So fresh evidence  should  not
     be adduced to it as a basis for granting review, unless it is relevant
     to showing that there was an arguably material error  of  law  in  the
     Adjudicator's determination eg procedural  unfairness  or  to  showing
     that once such an error had been found to  exist,  the  new  evidence,
     which could then become admissible, could lead to a different  outcome
     on the appeal.  Even where  the  Tribunal  admits  fresh  evidence  on
     appeal, it will not normally do so where the evidence would  fail  the
     Ladd v Marshall tests.  Thus the ultimately admissible fresh  evidence
     is nearly always confined to that  which  deals  with  events  arising
     after the Adjudicator's determination.  It is almost  never  admitted,
     even after an error of law has been found, on the slender  basis  that
     it seeks to take issue with the Adjudicator s findings.  Such evidence
     almost always fails the Ladd v Marshall tests.  It was an  unfortunate
     commonplace of the jurisdiction that Appellants sought to improve upon
     their case after it  had  been  lost,  with  further  evidence  simply
     designed to counter the Adjudicator's justified conclusions.  It was a
     practice of doubtful merit when the jurisdiction extended to fact  and
     law, but it has no place in a jurisdiction confined to points of  law.
     This will apply to reconsiderations within the AIT and on review.

  4. Second, it is for the Tribunal to decide whether or not, in an  appeal
     before it after Statutory Review, it should exercise its discretion to
     admit any evidence.  Practitioners should not assume that a  grant  of
     statutory review based on fresh evidence will mean that  the  evidence
     will be admitted.  The IAT will apply its Rules and discretions.   The
     same principles will apply to the AIT.

  5. Turning to the merits of this appeal, there were three reasons why the
     Adjudicator rejected the claim that the Appellant was a member of  the
     Reer Hamar.  First, she thought it implausible in  the  light  of  the
     background evidence that there would have been two  marriages  between
     minority and majority clans as the Appellant's evidence alleged.   The
     grandmother who gave evidence said that she was a Reer Hamar  who  had
     married into the Majerteen sub-clan of the Darod majority  clan.   The
     Appellant's mother had then married out of that majority clan into the
     Reer Hamar.  It was accepted that  mixed  marriages  were  rare;  both
     these marriages would have preceded the  1991  civil  war;   a  female
     majority clan member marrying into a minority  clan  was  implausible;
     the argument that because the grandmother had made a mixed marriage, a
     second mixed one was the more likely was  rejected.   The  Adjudicator
     said:

           "I am not  persuaded  that  two  cross-clan  marriages  in  this
           situation  is  particularly  plausible,  particularly   as   the
           appellant's grandmother would have known of  the  advantages  of
           marrying into a majority clan and the security that  would  have
           been offered to her."

  6. Second, the Adjudicator thought that the non-use of Reer Hamar by  the
     Appellant would mean that the Appellant would not be  perceived  as  a
     member of the Reer Hamar. At paragraph 49, she said:

           "Expert evidence could have been  produced  to  assist  on  this
           vexed  question  of  language  which  in  particular  here   was
           complicated by intermarriage between clans but on my  assessment
           of the facts I am not persuaded through the non-use of the  Reer
           Hamar dialect that the appellant would be perceived as  being  a
           member of the Reer Hamar clan and  identified  as  such.   There
           would be family living in Somalia who are of the  majority  clan
           as the appellant's witness  told  me  that  she  had  had  seven
           children and therefore there would be some family in Somalia."

  7. Third, the Adjudicator shared the Secretary of State's  concerns  that
     if the Appellant were indeed Reer Hamar she had  stayed  in  Mogadishu
     until 1998:

           "The objective material before me indicates  that  the  Benadiri
           clans were particularly at risk and vulnerable during the  early
           years of the civil war conflict and whilst she  stated  that  it
           was not her choice but her elders'  choice  for  her  to  remain
           living in Mogadishu I am not persuaded that the family would not
           have moved at a much earlier date if she had been  of  the  Reer
           Hamar clan as she claims as they would have been  at  particular
           risk.  Her account in this regard is therefore implausible."

  8. The Adjudicator had finally concluded that the Appellant had  come  to
     the United Kingdom to join her grandmother, knowing that she was here,
     rather than because she was in need of international protection.   She
     had family living in Mogadishu, and even if a Reer Hamar,  had  family
     on her mother's side in a majority clan who could  provide  sufficient
     protection.

  9.  The  first  ground  of  appeal  challenged  the  conclusions  on  the
     plausibility of the two inter-clan marriages.  It  was  accepted  that
     there was no arguable ground here without the expert's report.  As  we
     say in respect of the other grounds, there is  no  error  of  law  and
     there is no basis for its reception.  It cannot show that there was an
     error of law by the Adjudicator.  We cannot admit it.

 10. Even if there had been an error of law in another aspect, it  is  very
     doubtful that we would have considered it because it fails the Ladd  v
     Marshall tests and it  does  not  cast  a  light  on  other  new  post
     determination evidence.  There was no reason why it  should  not  have
     been produced to the Adjudicator.  The reason given was that until the
     determination was received, the Appellant and her grandmother did  not
     know  that  the  inter-marriage  would  be  an  issue  which  went  to
     credibility.  Yet the Appellant knew full well that what was at  issue
     was her asserted membership of a minority clan.  The Appellant was  on
     notice from the Secretary of State's refusal letter that the  language
     issue was important;  she could call an expert to deal with it  if  an
     expert were relevant.  There  was  cross-examination  at  the  hearing
     before the Adjudicator about both clan and  parentage.   The  evidence
     about the relationships was her way of overcoming the problem that she
     knew nothing of the speech of the minority clan.  (We  use  that  word
     because there is an issue, although it does  not  arise  here,  as  to
     whether Reer Hamar is a different language from Somali, or  a  dialect
     or a different means of pronouncing the same words.)   Where  evidence
     is given to overcome credibility problems it should be obvious to  all
     that it itself risks being disbelieved and may create further problems
     in the process.

 11. In any event, as Ms Kotak accepted, such marriages were rare, and  her
     expert's report said that the Reer Hamar tradition was to  marry  from
     other Reer Hamar subgroups.  The contention that there had for a while
     after 1960 been a freer attitude said nothing about frequency, or  the
     prospect of a majority clan female marrying a minority clan male.  And
     two in the family is not discussed on the  basis  put  forward  by  Ms
     Kotak that somehow one made a second less implausible.   Nor  does  it
     deal with the specific point about intermarriage of the Benadiri  upon
     which the Adjudicator specifically  relied.   It  does  not  help  the
     Appellant.

 12. The next ground which we take relates to the adverse  comment  by  the
     Adjudicator as a result of the Appellant remaining in Mogadishu  until
     1998.  Ms Kotak and the judge referred to a passage from the  Minority
     Groups Report as showing that 30 percent of the Reer Hamar had  stayed
     in Mogadishu.  But that is a misunderstanding of what  it  means.   It
     says:

           "Because of this, and because the Reer Hamar are unarmed,  their
           homes were repeatedly looted.  The same sources  estimated  that
           more than 70% of the Reer Hamar population in Mogadishu fled the
           country during the civil war.   In  January  1999  the  War-torn
           Societies  Project  (WSP)  in  Nairobi  and  other  UN  agencies
           informed  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  that  the  Benadiri
           community was still facing serious human  rights  violations  in
           Mogadishu, and that members of  this  community  would  probably
           never be able to return in safety to Mogadishu."

 13. "This" refers to the wealth of the Reer Hamar.  The Report  refers  to
     "more than" 70 percent fleeing.  That "more than 70 per cent" were not
     those who just fled from Mogadishu but those  who  fled  the  country,
     with the implication that some others  at  least  left  Mogadishu  for
     elsewhere in Somalia.  The "civil war", during which more than 70  per
     cent fled the country, refers to 1991-1992 and so the passage does not
     refer at all to the number who might have remained  in  1998.   It  is
     only plausible to infer not that 30 per cent  remained  in  Mogadishu,
     but that over the succeeding years to 1998, many more would have  left
     as their numbers diminished rapidly.  It is not  a  statement  of  the
     numbers in Mogadishu in 1998 or later.  The  Report  said  later  that
     there were still  some  Benadiri  in  Mogadishu  but  the  number  was
     unknown.

 14. Thirdly, we deal with the speech or language issue.   There  was  some
     discussion about whether or not Reer Hamar was a language,  a  dialect
     or accent.  But that is irrelevant to this case.  It is certainly  not
     the case that the Appellant lost because she did  not  understand  the
     differences between those words, let  alone  the  differences  between
     their equivalents in Somali, if any.  The point was that the Appellant
     did not understand people talking in the way in which Reer Hamar  did.
     It was  the  Appellant  whose  evidence  asserted  that  there  was  a
     difference, however described, and that it  was  one  which  made  her
     unable to converse with Reer Hamar.  She  had  to  explain  how  as  a
     member of that sub clan she was unable to converse in that manner with
     them, speaking only Somali.  The Adjudicator simply finds that as  she
     is unable to speak in that manner, she would not be thought of as Reer
     Hamar, even if in effect her family was as inter-married as she  said.
     That is not a challengeable conclusion.

 15. The background evidence to which we were  referred  is  irrelevant  to
     that issue. It only serves to show that there are  dialects  and  sub-
     dialects spoken by the Benadiri  and  that  the  Reer  Hamar  speak  a
     dialect called Af Reer Hamar.  Most are also  able  to  speak  Somali.
     The explanation that the Appellant could not speak it even though  her
     father was Reer Hamar, because her mother did not speak it,  and  that
     her mother did not speak even though her mother but not her father had
     spoken it, was obviously not persuasive.  This is what then led on  to
     various attempts to explain that the differences were  not  so  great.
     But that does not undermine the conclusion that she would not be  seen
     as Reer Hamar.

 16. The conclusion that she had family from a majority clan  in  Mogadishu
     who could protect her contains no error of law.

 17. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say  about  the
     evidence on Statutory Review.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
