


|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 30 November 2004        |        |TB (PSG - women) Iran [2005]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00065                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|09 March 2005                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey - Vice President                                    |
|Mr A L McGeachy - Vice President                                  |
|Mrs M E McGregor                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr K Behbahani, of Scudamores, Solicitors,
                 London
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, who is a national of  Iran,  appeals  with  permission
    against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator  Mr  Michael   Watters
    promulgated 13 May 2004, wherein he dismissed  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent who had refused to vary leave  to  enter  or
    remain and asylum and human rights claims.  We were  provided  with  an
    Appellant's bundle, a country expert report by Ms Anna Enayat -  Senior
    Associate, St Anthony's College, Oxford, a skeleton argument,  list  of
    essential reading, and copies of decisions in ZH (Women as a Particular
    Social Group) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00207, JO (Internal Relocation -  No
    Risk  of  Re-trafficking)  Nigeria  [2004]  UKIAT  00251    and   Ozkan
    Degirmanci [2004] EWCA Civ 1553 by Mr Behbahani.  A copy of the October
    2004 Iran Country Report from the Country Information and  Policy  Unit
    of the Home Office was provided by  the  Respondent.   When  I  granted
    permission in this matter I was satisfied that  the  grounds  showed  a
    basis for an appeal and that both sufficiency of  protection  available
    to this Appellant and her ability to  relocate  within  Iran  could  be
    argued. The treatment of the membership of a  particular  social  group
    issue by the Adjudicator was also clearly at issue.

The Adjudicator's Determination

2.    The Adjudicator noted the Appellant was a 20 year old,  single  woman
    from Iran.  She gave evidence along with her mother and  step-  sister.
    The  Appellant's  claim  was  summarised  in   paragraph   7   of   the
    determination in the following manner:

      "i.       The Appellant's father is a Colonel of the  Entezami  Force
              (police  force)  and  a  member  of   Etelaat   (intelligence
              service). He was wounded twice in the war  between  Iran  and
              Iraq.  Due to an injury the  Appellant's  father  suffered  a
              personality change he became  moody  and  unpredictable.   He
              started berating and hurting  the  family.   The  Appellant's
              mother wanted to get a divorce.

      ii.   In 1989 the Appellant and her mother left her father  and  went
              to Mashad and stayed there for five days.  On the  sixth  day
              the Authorities raided the house and arrested the Appellant's
              mother who was accused of escaping from home  and  kidnapping
              the Appellant.  The Appellant and her mother were required to
              return home and her mother was badly beaten by her father.

      iii.  In 1991 the Appellant's father attacked her  mother  and  step-
              sister.  They were taken to hospital.  The Appellant's  uncle
              encouraged her mother to make a complaint to the  Authorities
              against her father.  Four  months  after  the  complaint  the
              Appellant's uncle was accused of political activities against
              the regime and  he  was  executed.   The  Appellant's  father
              threatened to have the Appellant and  her  mother  killed  if
              they did anything against him.

      iv.   In 1996 the Appellant's mother tried to commit suicide.

      v.    On 9 July 2001 the Appellant and her mother were in her  aunt's
              building.  They saw demonstrators attacked in the  street  by
              the security forces and the Appellant and her  mother  opened
              the door of their building and let  some  of  them  in.   The
              Appellant and her mother were arrested.  Haj [AR],  a  friend
              of the Appellant's father arranged for them to  be  released.
              He  was  a  Mullah  and  head  Aghidati-Siasi  Department  of
              Entezami Forces.  He was a friend of the Appellant's father.

      vi.   In 2003 the Appellant obtained a  diploma  in  mathematics  and
              passed an entrance exam to go to university.  On  23  October
              2003 the Appellant's father told her that Haj [A R] wanted to
              marry  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant's  father  was   very
              pleased.  Mr AR was about 60 years of age and already married
              with four children.  The Appellant  wished  to  continue  her
              studies at university and she did not wish to marry.   Mr  AR
              gave the Appellant a ring and they were formally engaged.   A
              wedding date was set.  The Appellant and her  mother  decided
              to leave Iran and go to the UK.

      vii.  On 4 November 2003 the Appellant and her mother arrived in  the
              United Kingdom.

      viii. On 6  November  2003  the  Appellant's  father  telephoned  the
              Appellant's step-sister and demanded that the  Appellant  and
              her mother return to Iran."

3.    The Adjudicator then, after noting the decision  of  the  Respondent,
    considered the background  material,  including  the  CIPU  Report  for
    October 2003 and other objective material produced by  the  Appellant's
    representatives, which he accepted as material.   He  noted  from  that
    while the Constitution, adopted by Iran, granted women  and  men  equal
    rights, women however did face social and legal  discrimination.   They
    could work or study but the choice was dependent upon the husband.  The
    state enforced segregation in most public places and  prohibited  women
    and men mixing openly.  Women suffered discrimination in the legal code
    particularly in family and property matters.  He went on to  note  that
    little detail was known of the degree of  domestic  violence,  although
    surveys indicated that the level of domestic violence  was  very  high,
    that women had almost no legal redress and that there was a fair amount
    of social tolerance of domestic violence.

4.    He noted the two types of marriage, permanent and temporary, and  the
    fact that the husband could terminate a marriage at any time  and  that
    men were allowed up to four permanent wives  and  unlimited  number  of
    temporary wives.

5.    He then made his findings of credibility and fact.  Firstly, from the
    oral evidence of the Appellant, he  noted  that  she  had  visited  the
    United Kingdom on two previous occasions.  The first of these was three
    or four years before the hearing and the second occasion seven or eight
    months before.  During the last trip to the UK the Appellant  said  she
    did not claim asylum, as her father had not threatened to marry her  to
    the Mullah at that time.  She said that her main fear now  was  of  the
    arranged marriage to the Mullah who was 60 years of age  and  had  four
    children and she had heard from her father that "he had  signed  orders
    for executions".  The findings of the Adjudicator, in relation  to  the
    Appellant's mother's evidence, taken from her statement and evidence at
    the hearing, were noted.  She had visited the United Kingdom  with  the
    Appellant on a number of occasions and always returned to Iran  at  the
    end of the visits.  She said that the problem was with her husband  and
    his intention to force the Appellant to marry one  of  his  associates.
    She knew what her husband and his friends were capable of and they were
    really scared.  She  advised  that  she  did  not  need  her  husband's
    permission every time she left Iran as he had given permission once and
    this was sufficient.  She also stated that she had tolerated the  abuse
    of her husband, as he was an influential man.   She  did  not  wish  to
    claim asylum herself before this, but now  that  her  daughter  was  in
    danger she felt that she had to.  She feared they would both be  killed
    if they were returned to Iran.

6.    Evidence from the Appellant's  step-  sister  was  also  noted.   She
    adopted her witness statement.  She had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1997 and been granted permanent residence based on  her  marriage
    in 1997.  She said that her mother had visited the UK on five occasions
    the Appellant on three, including the present visit.  She also recorded
    she had personally received ill treatment from her stepfather and still
    had scarring as a result of that.   She  had  never  thought  that  the
    Appellant and her mother would claim asylum but the  proposed  marriage
    to the Mullah had changed all that.

7.    It was noted that it was clear from the objective evidence  that  the
    Appellant, who was over the age of 18, did not require permission  from
    her father to leave Iran.

8.    The Adjudicator accepted the credibility of the Appellant's  accounts
    "of the incidents she  related  as  having  occurred  to  her  and  her
    mother."

9.    His findings were then set out in paragraph 20-22 where he stated:

      "20.  In Shah and Islam (1999) IMM AR 283 the  House  of  Lords  held
              that women  in  Pakistan  constituted  "a  particular  social
              group".  In Iran, as  in  Pakistan  there  is  discrimination
              against women in matters of fundamental human rights  on  the
              ground that they are women.  I am persuaded by  the  evidence
              presented   to   me   that   there    is    institutionalised
              discrimination against women by organs of the State in  Iran.
              I  have  to  consider  whether  the   Appellant   will   face
              persecution  if  she  were  to  be  returned  to  Iran.   The
              Appellant could have attempted to seek  redress  through  the
              proper Authorities before seeking  international  protection.
              At question 44 of the asylum interview the  Appellant  stated
              that the actions of her father and the Mullah  were  illegal,
              but at no time did she  seek  protection  from  the  relevant
              Authorities in Iran.

      21.   Even if I am wrong that there is a real risk for the  Appellant
              in her home area, she could get round  that  risk  by  moving
              elsewhere within Iran.  It  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to
              expect the Appellant to relocate.  She is a young  woman  and
              while she  might  find  it  difficult  to  find  housing  and
              employment these matters are not determinative.

      22.   Mr  Behbahani  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  rights  under
              Article 3 of  the  1950  Convention  are  engaged.   For  the
              reasons I have set out above, I am  not  satisfied  that  the
              Appellant faces a real risk of suffering inhuman or degrading
              treatment, were she to return to Iran."

The Appellant's Submissions

10.    Mr  Behbahani  invited  us  to  agree  that,  given  the  particular
    circumstances of this Appellant, as were accepted by  the  Adjudicator,
    she was  entitled  to  surrogate  protection  under  both  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR.  He asked us to note from the determination in
    ZH (paragraph 50) that the Tribunal had stated:

      "It is necessary to start with Shah and Islam.  We emphasise in doing
        so that Lord Steyn and Lord Hoffmann said:  Everything  depends  on
        the  evidence  and  findings  of  fact  in  the  particular   case:
        generalisations as to the place of women  in  particular  countries
        are out of place when dealing with Refugee Status; [1999] 2 AC  629
        and 635 E 655 F."

      He also asked us to note the recent determination of the Tribunal  in
    JO (paragraph 18) where the Tribunal had stated:

      "However we do   think  it  arguable  that  Miss  Finch  successfully
        identified the existence in Nigeria of a combination of  legal  and
        social measures of discrimination sufficient to demarcate women  as
        a particular social group.  We accept that  these  may  not  be  as
        comprehensive as those identified by the House of Lords  when  they
        reached their judgment in  Shah  and  Islam  [1999]  2  AC  629  as
        obtaining for women  in  Pakistan.   However,  in  our  view  their
        Lordships made clear in their judgment that the PSG category should
        not be interpreted narrowly.  The fact that since  Shah  and  Islam
        women have not been found by the IAT or the courts to be a  PSG  in
        more than one or two countries  suggests  to  us  that  too  little
        regard has been paid to the fact that all that was required in Shah
        and Islam (per Lord Hoffman) was the existence of legal and  social
        conditions which were discriminatory against women.  Possibly  also
        there has been  too  much  focus  on  rejecting  PSG  arguments  by
        reference to sub-categories (e.g. women at risk of FGM, as  at  one
        point in this case  trafficked  women).   The  more  delimited  the
        proposed category, the greater the prospect there is of circularity
        in definition."

11.   He submitted that while the reasoning in JO differed  in  some  ways,
    and possibly contradicted the overall approach in  ZH,  the  two  cases
    showed the paramount need to guard against basing individual decisions,
    in these types of cases, on generalisations relating to the  status  of
    woman in any particular country.  In this case therefore  the  Tribunal
    was invited to approach this Appellant's  claim  by  reference  to  the
    particular facts of her claim and not base it on  the  overall  general
    situation regarding women in Iran which was accepted  as  different  to
    the general situation regarding Pakistani women, at  the  time  of  the
    decision in Shah and Islam.

12.   We were also asked to note that the Respondent had not cross appealed
    nor filed a Respondent's notice and this left two  central  issues  for
    determination which were:

      (i)   The sufficiency of protection available, and

      (ii)  The issue of internal flight.

13.   Mr Behbahani then addressed the issue of sufficiency  of  protection.
    He submitted that the findings of the Adjudicator  that  the  Appellant
    could have sought domestic  protection  before  claiming  international
    protection, against her father and the Mullah, were perverse and it was
    highly unlikely that this  Appellant  could  access  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.  The Adjudicator failed to have regard  to  several  highly
    relevant factors.   He  submitted  the  character  of  the  Appellant's
    father, and that of the Mullah, and their  intent,  given  their  track
    record of subjecting the Appellant and her family to past ill-treatment
    and  further  threats  of  ill-treatment,  together  with  their   very
    influential positions within the  Iranian  legal  organs,  were  highly
    relevant factors that should have been taken into account.

14.   He asked us to note that Iranian law conferred property rights on the
    father to the extent that the Appellant was effectively the property of
    her father.  This was noted in Article 1170 of the Iranian  Civil  Code
    and is referred to in Mrs Enayat's report (page 1).  Next  he  referred
    us to Iranian law and custom entitling a father to arrange and/or force
    his daughter's marriage against her will (section 2.1 of  Mrs  Enayat's
    report).

15.   Several other factors from Mrs Enayat's report were also  brought  to
    our attention in  this  regard.   We  note  these  (with  the  relevant
    material submitted in support) as:

      (i)   Iranian law dictated that the Appellant would not  be  able  to
              marry without her father's permission  (Section  2.2  of  the
              Enayat report.)

      (ii)  Iranian law not  only  offered  no  real  practical  protection
              against  violence  of  the  father   but   also   effectively
              legitimised ill treatment and even murder. (Sections 2.3  and
              3 of the Enayat report, an attachment to  the  Enayat  report
              "Shirin Abadi as the legal  punishment  for  murdering  one's
              child",  and  a  Canadian  Refugee  Board  Report,  "Domestic
              Violence and Murder" contained at page 108 of the Appellant's
              bundle)."

      (iii) Iranian law empowered the Mullah with  "exceptional  influence"
              against the Appellant. (Section 2.4 of the Enayat Report,  an
              extract from the UN Special Rapporteur  on  Violence  Against
              Women, dated March 2004 - page 124 of the Appellant's bundle,
              a Human Rights Report, page 95 of the Appellant's bundle, and
              a further UNHCR Report "Independence of the Judiciary"  pages
              137, 138 and 145 of the Appellant's bundle.)

      (iv)  In addition to the above the general and discriminatory  nature
              of  Iranian  law  and  custom  would  add  obstacles  to  the
              appellant trying to obtain sufficiency of protection.  (These
              he noted at section 1 of the Enayat Report, the  report  from
              Professor  Haleh  Afashar  -  page  39  of  the  bundle,  and
              Elizabeth Mayer pages 10, 11, 19 and 21  of  the  Appellant's
              bundle."

16.   On the issue of internal flight he  submitted  the  findings  of  the
    Adjudicator  were  irrational  given  the  particular  facts   of   the
    Appellant's case. Regard should be given to the position of her  father
    and the significant influence of the Mullah, which  could  be  used  to
    apprehend the Appellant immediately on her return to Iran  irrespective
    of her ability to exercise internal flight.  We were  referred  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Degirmenci, which highlights  the  need  to
    consider the issue of immediate risk  on  return  in  relation  to  the
    reasonableness of  internal  flight  (paragraphs  18  and  19  of  that
    determination).

17.   In this regard it was submitted that the Appellant,  if  returned  to
    Iran, would be detained and questioned  (Amnesty  international  Report
    page 77 of the bundle). At that time the Iranian authorities could  use
    the procedures they have in  place  to  identify  and  investigate  the
    background of the Appellant.  Beyond this we were asked  to  note  that
    the Appellant had stated, in her SEF (page A12) that in November  2003,
    her father had telephoned her step sister and threatened  her  and  her
    mother if they went back to Iran.He stated that he would force them  to
    go back to the Iranian Embassy and "We knew that they would kill us  if
    we go back to Iran."  In the light of such threats, and  the  influence
    of the Appellant's father and the Mullah, it was submitted that it  was
    reasonably likely the authorities in  Iran,  or  even  the  Embassy  in
    London, already had notice that would alert the  authorities  on  their
    return.  In such a context it was submitted that it  was  not  possible
    for the Appellant to discreetly return to Iran without exposing herself
    to the real risk of her father and/or the Mullah  having  knowledge  of
    their return.

18.   For all the reasons submitted  we  were  invited  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had established her claim for international  protection.   We
    were  urged  to  take  into   account   the   UNHCR   observation   and
    recommendation that:

      "All in all, the situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran is a  very
        complex and complicated one.  It is extremely  difficult  to  apply
        very strict and clear guidelines when assessing  the  claim  of  an
        Iranian asylum seeker.  Apart from the clear cases in which,  based
        on objective facts and events,  there  is  an  evident  problem  of
        credibility, in other cases in which credibility is not  the  issue
        but the issue is interpretation of the level  of  persecution  with
        regard to the individual case, one should always take into  account
        global or arbitrariness and inconsistency  in  application  of  the
        legal system that is part of every  day  life  in  Iran.   This  is
        indeed one of the commitments that President Khatami  has  promised
        to address whilst stressing the importance  of  the  Rule  of  Law.
        However it is clear that the situation is still far from being  one
        in which the interpretation of Rules and application of the law  is
        clear cut and consistent.  One should therefore liberally  use  the
        principle of the benefit of the doubt when credibility is  not  the
        issue with respect to Iranian asylum claims."  (UNHCR  Report  page
        181 of the bundle).

19.   We requested Mr Behbahani to take us to where there was evidence that
    the Appellant would be at a real risk of maltreatment from the  Mullah,
    as opposed to that which appeared  to  have  been  established  in  the
    Adjudicator's determination, at the hands of  her  father.   We  stated
    that we were seeking this information,  noting  the  Mullah's  position
    within Iranian society and, whether or not given his  position  he  was
    able to bring the forces of the Iranian State  into  play  in  possible
    maltreatment of the Appellant on return.  We indicated  that  we  could
    possibly see the argument that there were Article  3  ECHR  risks,  but
    also wanted to investigate the Refugee Convention nexus, of "membership
    of a particular social group."

20.   Mr Behbahani submitted that the risk of persecution to this Appellant
    was reasonably likely to  arise  from  the  Appellant's  reluctance  or
    refusal to marry the Mullah.  He submitted that if  she  did,  possibly
    under duress, decide to marry the Mullah then, that of  itself,  was  a
    breach of her rights to marry someone of her own choice  and  could  be
    seen as persecutory.  This, combined with the evidence of  violence  in
    the past and threats from both the father and the Mullah, established a
    real risk, in his submission.  He also  referred  us  to  the  expert's
    report, which covered the relationship that  was  evident  between  the
    Mullah and the Appellant's father.  The Appellant was engaged to a high
    profile figure, who she had apparently  rejected  and  run  away  from.
    This placed the Mullah and her father in a position where there  was  a
    serious loss of face.  He referred us to page 9 of the  Enayat  report,
    and part of the section 2.4 "The Influence  of  the  Mullah".   Firstly
    this notes that the Mullah, to whom she was engaged, was  the  head  of
    the "Aqidati" in the Niru-Entezami  (Law  Enforcement  Forces  -  LEF).
    This organisation is the political and ideological bureau of the  armed
    forces and is  established  especially  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring
    loyalty of  the  armed  forces  through  surveillance  and  ideological
    indoctrination.  Mrs Enayat considered that:

      "The head of the 'Aqidati' bureau of the Law Enforcement Forces would
        enjoy considerable influence.  Such an individual  would  certainly
        have been able to arrange the client's (Appellant's)  release  from
        detention following the 9 July 2001 demonstrations in Tehran...

      The head of the Aqidati is also the person to whom the  [Appellant's]
        father would have appealed  for  help  in  rescuing  his  wife  and
        daughter even if he were not friends with the man...

      The 'favour' as Iranian favours, even  among  friends  routinely  do,
        would have generated a cultural 'debt'.

      So the father's refusal to arrange the requested marriage would  have
        meant a loss of goodwill by someone who could destroy him and would
        have put him in a potentially hazardous position.   His  acceptance
        of the alliance, on the other  hand,  would  have  brought  general
        rewards.  There can be little doubt that a woman who is the  object
        of such an arrangement would fear a reaction whether she went along
        with her father's plans or rejected them.

      There are many ways in which punishment for the 'slight'  would  have
        been meted out by the person in the Mullah's position.  For example
        through what is known as the 'Gozinesh' system, which was put  into
        place soon after the 1979 revolution.  Gozinesh is  a  process  for
        'selection' to ensure that those admitted to universities and other
        institutions of higher learning, or to state  employment,  (and  in
        other large private sector  institutions),  conform  ideologically.
        The process has ideological and security components....

      A word from the Mullah could prevent [the Appellant] from ever taking
        a university place and having access to  the  more  respectable  or
        desirable types of employment (indeed this would be one of the most
        difficult problems she  would  face  if  she  were  to  attempt  to
        relocate.  Since Gozinesh background  checks  are  conducted  on  a
        nationwide basis any application for say a  secretarial  job  in  a
        government, or indeed many private organisations would  immediately
        reveal her whereabouts.

      Once married [the Appellant] would, except by her husband's  consent,
        have little hope of obtaining a divorce."

21.   He also asked us  to  note  the  distinction  between  an  "arranged"
    marriage and a "forced" marriage and the comments in the Enayat  Report
    in  that  regard.   He  submitted  that   the   Appellant   could   not
    realistically marry another man without the permission  of  her  father
    (CIPU paragraph 6.151) and that, while an application to the court  was
    technically possible, the expert report indicated this was  theoretical
    rather then real and would of course  expose  the  whereabouts  of  the
    Appellant to her father.

22.   In his final submissions to us Mr Behbahani referred us to  a  number
    of places in the Appellant's evidence  where  the  Appellant  had  made
    reference to threats from the Mullah and the likely  result  of  those.
    In particular he asked us to note:

      (i)   The last three paragraphs of the  Appellant's  statement  (A11,
              A12), here the Appellant had stated:

            "My father threatened even to kill me  himself  if  I  did  not
               marry Haj [A] and  also  told  me  that  Haj  [A]  could  be
               dangerous if I did not marry him.  Two days  later  Haj  [A]
               visited me and told me that he loved me  and  threatened  me
               again.  He gave me 24 hours to  think  about  it.   We  knew
               there is no safe place in Iran for us and they would find us
               easily...the next day Haj [A] and his sisters  came  to  our
               house and gave me a ring and we were engaged formally"

      Also in the last paragraph it was stated:

            "On 6/11/03 my dad phoned SD (sister-in-law) and threatened  us
               if we did not go back to Iraq.  He said he would force us to
               go back by Iranian Embassy.  We were worried about my  uncle
               but we knew that they would kill us if we go back to Iran."

      (ii)  At questions 9 and 10 of the interview record  sheet  (B4)  the
               Appellant was asked: "Who threatened you?" and she  replied:
               "The Mullah and my father".  She was then asked:  "What  did
               they threaten you  with?"  the  reply  to  this  was:  "They
               threatened me that he will bring up again the history of  my
               criminal case  and  also  my  mother's  life,  she  is  sick
               already. ...I was arrested in  a  student  demonstration  in
               2001.  I was in the uprising of students and I brought a few
               of the students to my aunt's house, which was in  the  area.
               A few of the security guards saw us and we  went  into  that
               house and were dragged out."


      (iii) Replies given by  the  Appellant  to  questions  50-58  in  the
               interview record (B12 and B13), he submitted also  indicated
               real risks to  the  Appellant  from  the  Mullah.  In  these
               questions the Appellant stated that the  Mullah  would  kill
               her if she refused to marry him (and that her  father  would
               do the same).  When asked why she considered the Mullah  was
               capable of carrying out the threat she replied: "Because  he
               has done things - killing is nothing to him, he has  ordered
               to kill my uncle my mother's brother.  He told us".

      (iv)  In the answer to the  final  question  72,  the  Appellant  had
               replied to the question: "Who  do  you  fear?  And  replied:
               "from my father and that Mullah."   He submitted that  these
               references indicated not only the substantive  risk  to  the
               Appellant, at the hands of her father, but also  those  from
               the Mullah.  In addition the position and influence  of  the
               Mullah would, in his submission, mean that the organs of the
               Iranian state could be brought into  play  as  part  of  the
               persecution against the Appellant under  the  influence  and
               direction of the Mullah.

23.    We  were  next  referred  to  the  objective  evidence  showing  the
    implication of senior Iranian officials in violence against women.   In
    particular the UNHCR - Iran Report of March 2003 and the United Nations
    Economic and Social Council Report "Integration of the Human Rights  of
    Women and Gender Perspective - Violence Against Women" (3 March 2004  -
    page 124 of the bundle).  This stated:

      "97   On 3 January 2003 the Special Rapporteur sent  a  communication
              to the government in  connection  with  information  received
              regarding  the  existence  of  violence  and   discrimination
              against women in the Islamic Republic of Iran.  According  to
              information  received,  women  face  discrimination  in   the
              criminal  justice  system  and  are  subjected  to  forms  of
              torture, such as  stoning,  amputation  and  blinding,  which
              amount to torture, forced marriages, high levels of  domestic
              violence and sexual  violence  at  the  hands  of  gangs  and
              organised  crime   rings.    Furthermore,   information   was
              transmitted of allegations  of  widespread  violence  against
              women prisoners and political opponents that purportedly took
              place primarily during the time of Ayatollah Khomenini was in
              power and included alleged rape,  torture  and  exclusion  of
              many women.   The  special  Rapporteur  expressed  particular
              concern about the reported involvement and senior  state  and
              religious officials in these crimes, and about allegations of
              continued torture and sexual abuse of women prisoners."

24.   It was noted that this illustrated  further  support  for  the  well-
    foundedness of fears held by the Appellant, particularly when her  risk
    arose "from the slighting" of a senior official within the intelligence
    forces.

25.   Referring to the comparison with the determination in Shah and  Islam
    Mr Behbahani submitted that the discrimination in Iran was probably  of
    a more sophisticated nature but was arbitrary in nature and systemic to
    the Iranian regime.

The Respondent's Submissions

26.   Ms Holmes submitted that the Adjudicator's determination  did  appear
    to be at fault by failing to engage  fully  with  the  risks  from  the
    Appellant's father and the Mullah in the assessment of the  Appellant's
    case. She accepted that the mechanics of how the risks to the Appellant
    did arise have not been covered and therefore the  determination  would
    appear to be in error.  However she submitted we could  reach  our  own
    conclusions.  She submitted that the Enayat Report did  not  cover  the
    extent of the Mullah's authority.  It  stated  that  he  was  a  senior
    official in the LEF but did not explain whether his power was local  or
    national and it was thus speculative to reach conclusions  on  how  the
    Mullah would  react  at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's  return.   She
    submitted that it could be equally  likely  that  the  Mullah  and  the
    Appellant's father would not contact officials either at the airport or
    elsewhere so that a lookout could be made for the  Appellant,  as  this
    would expose them to embarrassment and further loss of face.   In  this
    situation therefore, it was equally likely they would keep quiet.

27.   She also submitted that the use of the Gozinesh was also  speculative
    and there was no evidence to suggest that the Mullah would use  such  a
    system against the Appellant.  In this situation she submitted that the
    likelihood of risks to the  Appellant  through  the  Mullah  using  the
    organs of the Iranian state were remote.

28.   Beyond this she submitted that the risk was also reduced  given  that
    there was no evidence to suggest the father or the  Mullah  would  know
    when the Appellant had returned.  Thus in this situation the reality of
    any risk to this Appellant on return to Iran was  not  established  and
    thus the Appellant's claim should be dismissed.

29.   She then turned to the determination in ZH  and  submitted  that  the
    Appellant in that case was in a worse position  and  more  at  risk  of
    domestic violence than this Appellant. The linkage to  risks  from  the
    Mullah as submitted was quite tenuous and therefore the risks  to  this
    Appellant  were  less  than   that   which   had   been   rejected   in
    ZHh...........LLLLLLLH.  Finally she submitted that the Enayat  Report,
    in relation to coerced marriages, appeared to refer to these  marriages
    being with younger girls and  the  Appellant  may  therefore  not  fall
    within the type of risk and  profile  as  put  forward  in  the  Enayat
    Report.

30.   In reply Mr Behbahani submitted on the coerced  marriage  point  that
    the Appellant was  indeed  only  19  when  she  was  coerced  into  the
    engagement to the  Mullah  and  accordingly  hardly  fell  outside  the
    situations discussed in the Enayat Report.

31.   He submitted that we were in a position to reach our own  conclusions
    but that, if we did not consider the Adjudicator  had  made  sufficient
    findings on the risks to this Appellant  from  the  Mullah,  we  should
    remit the matter for a fresh hearing  or  alternatively  hear  evidence
    ourselves including, at that  time  from  the  expert  Mrs  Enayat,  if
    necessary.

32.   After a short consideration of whether the matter should be  remitted
    we advised the parties that we considered we had sufficient information
    before  us  to  reach  our  own  conclusions.   We  indicated  that  we
    considered, on the evidence there appeared to  be  a  real  risk  of  a
    breach of  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  but  we  needed  to  reserve  our
    determination on the asylum issue.

The Issues

33.   We found the issues before us to be:

      (i)   On the basis  of  the  submissions  put  to  us,  and  our  own
              consideration of the determination of  the  Adjudicator,  was
              that decision one that contained any material error of law?

      (ii)  If so, were we  able  to  reach  our  own  conclusions  on  the
              evidence before us?

      (iii) In reaching those conclusions is there a real risk  of  serious
              maltreatment in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR on return?

          iv) Is there a real risk of the Appellant  being  persecuted  for
              reasons of  one  or  more  of  the  five  Refugee  Convention
              reasons?


           v) If the answer to (iii) and /or (iv) is "Yes," is an  Internal
              relocation alternative available to this Appellant?

Decision

34.   On the first issue we are satisfied that there are material errors of
    law in the determination of the Adjudicator.  Firstly the  findings  in
    paragraph 20 of the determination made by  the  Adjudicator  failed  to
    give reasoned consideration to evidence that had been accepted  by  the
    Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator considered the Appellant would not be  at
    risk because she would seek redress through proper authorities in Iran.
     However prior to this he had accepted the credibility of the Appellant
    in relation to the incidents she had related and also  that  there  was
    institutionalised discrimination against women by  the  organs  of  the
    state in Iran.  The failure to give reasoning for the conclusion which,
    on the face of it would appear to be  somewhat  perverse,  is  a  clear
    error of law.  Secondly the  findings  in  paragraph  21,  relating  to
    relocation also lack reasoning.  The Adjudicator has not  engaged  with
    the objective evidence or the accepted evidence of the  Appellant.   He
    has failed to recognise that the Appellant's father and the Mullah  are
    in apparently highly influential  positions  and  could  be  reasonably
    expected to use their positions to locate and  maltreat  the  Appellant
    elsewhere in Iran (as they had in the  past-and  as  explained  further
    below).  The failure to  consider  these  issues,  which  were  clearly
    relevant is also a further error of law.  The reasoning in paragraph 22
    is also similarly flawed.

35.   Addressing the second issue we find that as there are clear  material
    errors of law in the  determination  and  as  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant, and her witnesses, has  been  accepted,  we  can  go  on  to
    consider risks to the Appellant, reaching our own  conclusions  on  the
    totality of the evidence now available to us.

36.   Turning therefore to the third issue, whether there is a real risk of
    persecution or maltreatment in breach of Article 3 of the  ECHR?   This
    has required us to make an in depth assessment of the evidence provided
    by the parties, including the country expert report by Ms Anna  Enayat,
    the CIPU Report of October 2004,the United Nations and  UNHCR  material
    and  the  objective  evidence  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.   In  this
    assessment it is necessary to ascertain whether there are real risks to
    the Appellant of serious harm either from her father,  the  Mullah,  or
    organs of the state of Iran that could  be  influenced  by  either  her
    father, the Mullah, or both of them, to persecute or maltreat her.   In
    respect of the assessment of real  risk  of  serious  harm,  since  the
    father and the  Mullah,  in  their  personal  capacity,  are  non-state
    actors, consideration should also be given as to whether she  would  be
    at real risk from the  failure  of  state  protection.   Also  in  that
    regard, if a real risk from non- state actors were found to be present,
    the issue of internal relocation would need  to  be  considered  (Issue
    (v)).

37.   We are satisfied that the evidence provided  by  the  Appellant,  her
    mother and step sister, when viewed with the objective evidence, and in
    particular  the  evidence  of  the  Enayat  Report,  (which   was   not
    significantly  challenged  by  the  Respondent),  shows  there   is   a
    reasonable likelihood the Appellant would suffer serious  harm  at  the
    hands of her father on return.

38.   We would agree that evidence of past  persecutory  treatment  by  the
    father has been more directed towards the Appellant's  mother  than  to
    the Appellant herself.  In 1989 and in 1991 the Appellant's mother  was
    attacked.  In 1991 there was an attack on the Appellant's step-  sister
    as well.  The  evidence  indicates  that  the  Appellant's  father  had
    threatened  the  Appellant  if  she  did  anything  against  him.   The
    substantive risks to her however, as she claimed, have arisen since her
    father decided she should be married to  the  Mullah.  Apparently  this
    arose in repayment for the cultural debt to the Mullahh  following  his
    actions in obtaining the release of the Appellant from the authorities,
    after  she  was  detained  for  taking   students   involved   in   the
    demonstration into the home of her aunt.  The evidence of the Appellant
    was that her reluctance to marry  the  Mullah  had  led  to  her  being
    threatened by her father with death.  Her evidence was that he had told
    her that he would kill her  and,  based  on  his  past  behaviour,  she
    considered he was capable of doing so.  In support of this she set out,
    in her evidence, that her uncle had been killed in  a  revenge  killing
    arranged by her father, which  involved  the  uncle  being  framed  and
    executed in 1992. This was after the maternal uncle had  been  involved
    in assisting the Appellant's mother to try and obtain  a  divorce  from
    the Appellant's father.

39.   We have set against this evidence that the Appellant had been able to
    continue her schooling until 2003, when  she  completed  a  diploma  in
    mathematics and passed the entry exam for university.  In addition  the
    Appellant has travelled to this country on two previous occasions, and,
    it would appear, it must have been with the consent of the  Appellant's
    father.  His control over her therefore in the past  has  possibly  not
    been  as  all  encompassing  as  the  Appellant's  evidence  sought  to
    establish.   However,  in  this  regard,  we   note   the   Appellant's
    explanation that all of this took place prior to her  father  arranging
    the marriage to Haj [A] and her  reluctance  to  marry  him,  and  then
    subsequent flight.  We agree that there is substance in the  submission
    that the father would have suffered a considerable loss  of  face,  not
    only with Haj [A], but also obviously with his peer group in Iran.   We
    have noted the submission of Ms Holmes that the Appellant's father (and
    indeed the Mullah) would be unlikely to enlist  the  support  of  state
    organs in persecuting or maltreating the Appellant as this could expose
    both of them to embarrassment.  However we must set  against  that  the
    evidence that  when  the  Appellant's  mother  attempted  to  obtain  a
    divorce, with the assistance of her brother, in 1991-1992,  the  father
    had no compunction in going to the authorities at that time,  obviously
    making some explanation, and framing his brother-in-law, such  that  he
    was executed. He clearly overcame any possible loss  of  face  on  that
    occasion.

40.   Thus, taking into account the totality of the evidence, including the
    significant position held in the police force and intelligence  service
    by the Appellant's father, there is a reasonable  likelihood  he  would
    wish to persecute his daughter and also could enlist the assistance  of
    colleagues, within the  intelligence  services,  in  carrying  out  his
    revenge for the embarrassing slight.   He  has  been  demeaned  by  his
    daughter, (and of course his wife).  We are satisfied that the level of
    risk that arises in this case is a real one.  As there are  threats  of
    death, and/or serious physical abuse, we  consider  these  fall  within
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  We find there  are  substantive  reasons
    for concluding there is a real risk to the Appellant  of  a  breach  of
    either Articles 2 or 3  of  the  ECHR  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    returned.  Those risks could rise either from  the  likelihood  of  her
    being noted  upon  her  return  by  colleagues,  "tipped  off"  by  the
    Appellant's father and/or the Mullah,  or  if  she  was  able  to  pass
    through the airport, then when the Appellant attempted  to  access  any
    services from the state, this would expose her to a real risk that  her
    father would find out and then seek his revenge. Beyond this  we  agree
    with the submission that if she wished to marry another man  she  would
    have to obtain her father's consent and this would place her at a  real
    risk of him finding her whereabouts.

41.   We now turn  to  the  issue  of  whether  there  are  real  risks  of
    persecution or maltreatment to the Appellant from the Mullah  Haj  [A].
    Here we find although the risks are possibly somewhat  less  than  with
    the father, nevertheless  clearly  the  Mullah  and  father  are  close
    colleagues. Hence information held by  one  is  likely  to  be  quickly
    shared with the other.  Haj [A] is also in a position where he has been
    slighted and not only may wish to seek retribution for that against the
    Appellant's father but also against the Appellant herself.   There  are
    two risks that arise at this point.  Firstly the risks to her simply by
    her return on the basis of her rejection of Haj [A] and then flight  to
    UK and secondly, if she did proceed with the  marriage,  the  treatment
    that is reasonably likely to occur after marriage.  In  both  of  these
    situations we consider, based on the  totality  of  the  evidence,  the
    risks from the Mullah, while possibly lower than from the  father,  are
    real and not remote or speculative.  He is shown from the evdence to be
    a man of considerable power, which he has exercised in the past.  There
    is a cultural debt due to him by the Appellant's family, which has  not
    been repaid.  The abuse of women in positions such as the Appellant  is
    recognised by the objective evidence as being prevalent within Iran and
    the evidence shows that leading figures  within  the  Iranian  security
    forces are involved themselves.  Evidence  of  this  is  shown  in  the
    United  Nation's  Economic  and  Social  Council  Report  noted  above.
    Assessing the risk therefore, at the lower level, we consider that  the
    Appellant is at real risk of persecution or serious maltreatment either
    directly from  the  Mullah,  or,  also  with  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood, from organs of the Iranian state that he would instruct  to
    carry out persecutory acts.

42.   We move to the issue of whether or not  the  appellant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of one or more of the five
    Refugee Convention reasons.   Nationality  and  race  are  clearly  not
    relevant.   Political opinion may be possibly  arguable  on  the  basis
    that Iran, being a theocratic state, where all  religious  matters  are
    inherently political, means  that  religious  issues  effectively   are
    also political issues.   However, such an argument  is  a  tenuous  and
    possibly strained one, and in the circumstances of  this  appeal,  will
    not be pursued.  This leaves us with the remaining grounds of  religion
    and membership of a particular social group (PSG).   We turn  first  to
    consideration of PSG and the causal nexus of whether this appellant  is
    at a real risk of being persecuted for reasons of her membership  of  a
    particular social group.

43.   We are of course initially guided by  the  findings  in  the  seminal
    House of Lords determination in Shah and  Islam.    We  also  note  the
    decision of the President of this  Tribunal  in  ZH  and  the  Tribunal
    determination (Dr Storey, Vice President) in JO.  These three decisions
    were considered in the  submissions  at  the  hearing  before  us.   We
    consider, however, it is necessary to  take  into  consideration  other
    determinations, particular  those  post-dating  Shah  and  Islam.   The
    decisions on the analysis of PSG we follow or are assisted by are:  the
    Court of Appeal judgments in Montoya [2002] EWCA Civ 620;  [2002]  INLR
    399, Skenderaj [2002] All ER 267, P and M v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1640,  the  Australian  High  Court
    determination    in    Applicant    S     v     MIMA     [2004]     HCA
    25(www.austlii.edu.au/cases/cth/HCA),   and   the    recent    Tribunal
    determination (Dr Storey, Vice  President)  in  H  M  (Somali  Women  -
    particular social group) - Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT (HX/19177/03).    We
    have also been assisted by  the  New  Zealand  Refugee  Status  Appeals
    Authority determination in: Refugee  Appeal  No.  71427/99  (16  August
    2000).

44.   As Dr Storey pointed  out  in  HM  (Somalia)  at  paragraph  20,  the
    starting point for any post Shah and Islam discussion  of  PSG  is  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Montoya, where the Court of  Appeal  agreed
    that the Tribunal determination in Montoya (01/TH/00161)  had  given  a
    broadly correct summary of the existing law, binding on the court,  and
    which was then followed.  We set out the Summary of Conclusions,  taken
    from the Tribunal determination in Montoya , the Court of Appeal refers
    to. These are:

      "55. Summary of Conclusions


         A. The Adjudicator was correct to  conclude  that  the  respondent
         could not show  a  Convention  ground  of  political  opinion  but
         incorrect  to  conclude  that  he  had  made  out  the  ground  of
         membership of a particular social group (PSG).  In  deciding  that
         private  landowners  were  a  PSG  in  current-day  Colombia   the
         Adjudicator overlooked the judgment of the House of Lords in  Shah
         and Islam [1999] 2 A.C. 629 and in consequence applied  the  wrong
         criteria for evaluating  the  PSG  category.  She  also  erred  in
         failing to consider whether there was a causal nexus  between  the
         respondent's well-founded fear of  persecution  and  this  alleged
         PSG.


         B. Taking stock of post-Shah and Islam cases both here and abroad,
         the Tribunal considers  that  the  basic  principles  that  should
         govern assessment of a claim based on  the  PSG  category  are  as
         follows:


         (i)  in order to succeed under the Refugee Convention  a  claimant
         who has a well-founded fear of persecution must show not only  the
         existence of a PSG (the "PSG question"), but also a  causal  nexus
         between his membership of the PSG and that fear (the "causal nexus
         question");


         The PSG Question


         (ii)  the PSG ground should  be  viewed  as  a  category  of  last
         resort;


         iii)  persecution may be on account of more than  one  ground   If
         the principal ground is membership of a PSG, then focus should  be
         on that;


         (iv)  the PSG ground must be interpreted in the light of the basic
         principles and purposes of the Refugee Convention;


         (v) if the PSG  ground  had  been  intended  as  an  all-embracing
         category, the five enumerated grounds would have been superfluous;


         (vi) the  PSG  ground  is  further  limited  by  the  Convention's
         integral reliance on anti-discrimination notions inherent  in  the
         basic norms of International Human Rights Law;


         (vii) applying the  eiusdem  generis  principle  to  the  other  4
         grounds, the PSG category must be  concerned  with  discrimination
         directed  against  members  of  the  group  because  of  a  common
         immutable characteristic;


         (viii) a broad range of groups can potentially qualify as  a  PSG,
         including private landowners;


         (ix) but whether any particular group is a PSG in fact must always
         be evaluated in the context of historical time and place;


         (x) in order to avoid tautology, to qualify as a PSG  it  must  be
         possible to identify the group independently of the persecution;


         (xi) however the discrimination which lies at the heart  of  every
         persecutory act can assist in defining the PSG. Previous arguments
         excluding any identification by reference to  such  discrimination
         were misconceived;


         (xii) a PSG cannot normally consist in a disparate  collection  of
         individuals;


         (xiii)  for a PSG to exist it is a necessary  condition  that  its
         members  share  a  common  immutable   characteristic.    Such   a
         characteristic may be innate or non-innate. However, if it is  the
         latter, then the non-innate characteristic will only qualify if it
         is one which is beyond the  power  of  the  individual  to  change
         except  at  the  cost  of  renunciation  of  core   human   rights
         entitlements;


         (xiv) it is not necessary, on the other hand, for such a group  to
         possess   the   attributes   of   cohesiveness,   interdependence,
         organisation or homogeneity;


         (xv) there is nothing in principle to prevent the size of the  PSG
         being large  (e.g.  women),  but  if  the  claim  relies  on  some
         refinement or sub-category of a larger group, care must  be  taken
         over whether the resultant group is still definably  independently
         of their persecution;


         (xvi) a PSG can be established by reference to discrimination from
         state agents or non-state agents (actors) of persecution;


         (xvii) it is not necessary in order to qualify as  a  PSG  that  a
         person actually has the characteristics of the group in  question.
         It is enough that he will be perceived  to  be  a  member  of  the
         group.


         The Causal Nexus Question


         C. The words "for reasons  of"  require  a  causal  nexus  between
         actual or perceived membership of the PSG and well-founded fear of
         persecution.  Caution should be exercised against applying  a  set
         theory of causation.  In Shah and Islam and  the  Australian  High
         Court case of Chen no final choice was made between "but for"  and
         "effective cause" tests, but  the  "but  for"  test  was  said  to
         require a taking into account of the context in which  the  causal
         question was raised and of the broad policy of the Convention."


45.   Further consideration of Shah and Islam, and Skendaraj was  given  in
      ZH,  at paragraphs 63-67, by Ouseley J, who stated:

         "63. In our judgment, the following conclusions ought to be drawn.
          First, women in Pakistan formed a social group not  just  because
         they were women, but because they were also discriminated against.
         This appears in the speeches of all three  in  the  majority,  and
         indeed from the rejection of that  proposition  by  Lord  Millett.
         Second,  it  appears  inescapably  from  the  way  in  which   the
         discrimination has been described that  it  includes  legislative,
         judicial and police discrimination in the way in which women could
         obtain, and indeed suffer from  seeking,  state  protection.   The
         lack of state protection is inherent in the discrimination  relied
         on.


         64.  Third, the women were not persecuted "for  reason  of"  their
         membership of their group by the husbands against whom  the  state
         was unwilling or  the  women  were  afraid  to  seek  the  state's
         protection.  Whilst that would have been a possible analysis,  the
         majority, confirmed by the rejection of their  reasoning  by  Lord
         Millet, clearly rejected as unrealistic the view that the husbands
         were persecuting their wives for a Convention reason. It  was  the
         serious harm done by the husbands in combination with  the  states
         inaction in providing protection or reinforcing of the  harm  when
         protection was sought, which gave rise to the persecution  and  to
         the persecution for a Convention reason.


         65.  Fourth, whether such circumstances give rise to or evidence a
         particular social group depends very  much  on  the  circumstances
         within any country at the relevant time, and  the  extent,  nature
         and intensity of the social and state discrimination including the
         real risk that seeking protection would rebound in further serious
         ill-treatment.  The same is true of whether there is  persecution,
         or persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or  a  lack  of  state
         protection.


         66.  Thus, this is a case, on the particular evidence  as  to  the
         circumstances in Pakistan, of state persecution for  a  Convention
         reason. Discriminatory lack of state protection was a component of
         persecution, and  of  the  reason  for  the  persecution  and  the
         availability of state protection, but it  was  also  part  of  the
         definition  of  the  social  group  through   its   relevance   to
         discrimination.


         67.  The crucial issue which is relevant to the definition of  the
         group, though not necessarily determinative  of  it,  relevant  to
         persecution, to the ascertainment of the  Convention  reason,  and
         indeed to the final component of the overall refugee definition is
         the nature of the state's protection."


46.   We agree with the conclusion then reached by Dr Storey  at  paragraph
      22 of HN, referring to the determination in ZH:

            "22.  It is clear from the above for the PSG requirement to  be
                 met in respect of women in  a  particular  country,  there
                 must not only be a combination of measures  of  legal  and
                 societal discrimination; these must also reach  a  certain
                 level and intensity: see paragraphs 65 and 79:   "what  is
                 striking about evidence in Pakistan was the widespread and
                 intense nature of the discrimination"".


47.   The High Court of Australia last  year  in  Applicant  S  v  MIMA,  a
      decisio noted with apparent approval by the UK, Court of Appeal in the
      recent determination in F and M , concluded that, during the  time  of
      the Taliban regime  in  Afghanistan  'able  bodied  young  men'  could
      constitute a particular social group.  As noted  later  the  Court  of
      Appeal appear to have found the  conclusions  of  the  High  Court  of
      Australia supportive of their findings in F and M. The conclusions  in
      Applicant S, given by Gleeson CJ, Gummow, and Kirby JJ,  at  paragraph
      36, are also instructive. They state:

                 'Conclusions as to 'particular social group'

            36. Therefore, the  determination  of  whether  a  group  falls
                 within the  definition  of  'particular  social  group'  in
                 Article 1A(2)  of  the  Convention  can  be  summarised  as
                 follows.  First,  the  group  must  be  identifiable  by  a
                 characteristic or attribute common to all  members  of  the
                 group. Secondly, the characteristic or attribute common  to
                 all members of the group  cannot  be  shared  fear  of  the
                 persecution. Thirdly, the possession of that characteristic
                 or attribute must distinguish the  group  from  society  at
                 large. Borrowing the language of Dawson J in  Applicant  A,
                 a group that fulfils the first two principles, but not  the
                 third, is merely a 'social group'  and  not  a  'particular
                 social group'. As this  court  has  repeatedly  emphasised,
                 identifying  accurately  the   'particular  social   group'
                 alleged is  vital  for  the  accurate  application  of  the
                 applicable law to the case in hand'.

48.   As can be seen, this summary  by  the  High  Court  of  Australia  is
      largely in accord with the UK jurisprudence we have noted above.   The
      difference in the Australian approach is one of  emphasis,  with  more
      stress being placed in the Australian jurisprudence on the requirement
      that the existence of the 'particular social group' requires that  the
      group be  distinguished  or  set  apart  from  society  at  large.  At
      paragraph 27 in Applicant S it states:

             'The  general  principle  is  not  that  the  group  must   be
             recognised or perceived within society, but  rather  that  the
             group must be distinguished from the rest of society.'

49.   The debate on whether a particular social group required  members  of
      that group to share innate, or immutable characteristics  that  cannot
      be changed and were so fundamental to  their  identity  or  conscience
      that they should not be forced to renounce them,  as  against  whether
      the group had a distinct identity in the society of their nationality,
      is one that was pursued strenuously by academics and  judges  in  this
      field in the late 1990s - 2000, 2001. It  appears  now  to  have  been
      resolved following the UNHCR  Global consultations  (50th  anniversary
      of the Convention) that took place in 2001/2002.  This resulted in the
      UNHCR  issuing  revised  guidelines.  ('Guidelines  on   International
      Protection : Membership of  a Particular  Social  Group'  within   the
      context of Article 1A(2)  of  the  1951  Convention  and/or  its  1967
      Protocol relating to the Status of  Refugees',  HCR/GIP/02/02,  7  May
      2002).  Paragraphs 6, 7, 10, 11,12 and 13 are relevant and state:


           '6.   The  first,  "the  protected   characteristics"   approach
                 (sometimes referred  to  as  an  "immutability"  approach)
                 examines  whether  a  group  is  united  by  an  immutable
                 characteristic  or  by  a  characteristic   that   is   so
                 fundamental to human dignity that a person should  not  be
                 compelled to forsake it. An immutable  characteristic  may
                 be innate (such as sex or ethnicity)  or  unalterable  for
                 other reasons (such as  the  historical  fact  of  a  past
                 association, occupation or status). Human rights norms may
                 help to identify characteristics deemed so fundamental  to
                 human dignity that one ought not to be compelled to forego
                 them.  A  decision-maker  adopting  this  approach   would
                 examine whether the asserted group is defined: (1)  by  an
                 innate,  unchangeable  characteristic,  (2)  by   a   past
                 temporary or voluntary  status  that  it  is  unchangeable
                 because  of  its  historical  permanence,  or  (3)  by   a
                 characteristic or association this is  so  fundamental  to
                 human dignity that group members should not  be  compelled
                 to  forsake  it.  Applying  this  approach,   courts   and
                 administrative bodies in a number  of  jurisdictions  have
                 concluded  that  women,  homosexuals  and  families,   for
                 example, can constitute a particular social  group  within
                 the meaning of Article 1A(2).


           7.    The second approach examines whether or not a group shares
                 a common characteristic  which  makes  them  a  cognizable
                 group or sets them apart from society at large.  This  has
                 been referred to  as  the  "social  perception"  approach.
                 Again,   women,  families  and   homosexuals   have   been
                 recognised  under  this  analysis  as  particular   social
                 groups, depending on the circumstances of the  society  in
                 which they exist.


             10. Given the varying  approaches,  and  the  protection   gaps
                 which can result, UNHCR believes that the  two   approaches
                 ought to be reconciled.


           11. The protected characteristics approach may be understood  to
                 identify a set of groups that constitute the  core  of  the
                 social perception analysis. Accordingly, it is  appropriate
                 to adopt a single standard that incorporates both  dominant
                 approaches:


                    A particular social group is  a  group  of  persons  who
                    share a common characteristic other than their  risk  of
                    being persecuted, or who are perceived  as  a  group  by
                    society. The characteristic will often by one  which  is
                    innate, unchangeable, or which is otherwise  fundamental
                    to identity, conscience or the exercise of  one's  human
                    right.


                   12.     This definition  includes  characteristics  which
                 are historical and therefore cannot  be  changed,and  those
                 which, though it is possible to change them, ought  not  to
                 be required to be  changed  because  they  are  so  closely
                 linked to the identity of the person or are  an  expression
                 of fundamental  human  rights.  It  follows  that  sex  can
                 properly  be  within  the  ambit  of   the   social   group
                 category,with women being  a  clear  example  of  a  social
                 subset defined by innate and immutable characteristics, and
                 who are frequently treared differently to men.


           13.    If a claimant alleges a social group that is based  on  a
                 characteristic determined to  be  neither   unalterable  or
                 fundamental,  further  analysis  should  be  undertaken  to
                 determine whether the group is nonetheless perceived  as  a
                 cognizable group in that society.  So, for example,  if  it
                 were determined that owning a shop or  participating  in  a
                 certain occupation  in  a  particular  society  is  neither
                 unchangeable nor a fundamental aspect of human identity,  a
                 shopkeeper or members  of  a  particular  profession  might
                 nonetheless  constitute a particular social group if in the
                 society they  are  recognised  as  group  which  sets  them
                 apart.'

50.   In the UK and European Union context the inclusion of both approaches
      is made directly in the EC Council Directive 2004/83/EC  of  29  April
      2004 on 'Minimum Standards  for  Qualification  and  Status  of  Third
      Country Nationals or Stateless Persons  as  Refugees  or  Persons  who
      otherwise  need  International  Protection  and  the  content  of  the
      Protection granted' (OJ L 304/12 of 30.9.2004).  Under our obligations
      to compliance with  EC  law  we  of  course  are  bound  to  move  our
      jurisprudence towards consistency with this Directive, which will come
      into force next  year.  Article  10  of  the  directive  'Reasons  for
      Persecution' states at Article 10(1)(d):

            '(d) A group shall be considered to form  a  particular  social
                 group where in particular:


 - Members of that group share an innate characteristic or common background
   that cannot be changed, or share a characterise  or  belief  that  is  so
   fundamental to their identity or conscience that a person should  not  be
   forced to renounce it; and


 - that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country, because it is
   perceived as being different by the surrounding society;


                 Depending on the circumstances in the country of origin,  a
                 particular social group might include a group  based  on  a
                 common  characteristic  of   sexual   orientation.   Sexual
                 orientation cannot be understood to include acts considered
                 to be criminal in  accordance  with  national  law  of  the
                 Member States: Gender related aspects might be  considered,
                 without by themselves alone creating a presumption for  the
                 applicability of this Article;'

51.   Before leaving on the Directive we should set out the UNHCR  Comments
      on Article 10(d). These state:

            'In UNHCR's view, the term "social group" should be interpreted
            in a manner open to the diverse and change nature of groups  in
            various societies and to evolving  international  human  rights
            norms. Two main schools of thought as  to  what  constitutes  a
            social group within the meaning  of  the  1951  Convention  are
            reflected in  the  Directive.  The  "protected  characteristics
            approach"  is  based  on  an  immutable  characteristic  or   a
            characteristic so fundamental to human dignity  that  a  person
            should not be compelled to forsake it.  The  "social perception
            approach" is based on a common characteristic which  creates  a
            cognizable group that sets it apart from the society at  large.
            Whilst the results under  the  two  approaches  may  frequently
            converge, this is not always the case.  To avoid any protection
              gaps,  UNHCR   therefore  recommends  that   member    States
            reconcile the two approaches to permit alternative, rather than
            cumulative, application of the two concepts.


            States have recognised women,  families,  tribes,  occupational
            groups and homosexuals  as  constituting  a  particular  social
            group for  the  purpose  of  the   1951  Convention.  To  avoid
            misinterpretation, UNHCR would  encourage   Member   States  to
            provide in their legislation for further  examples  of  "sexual
            orientation".  Other examples would be gender, age, disability,
            and health status.


            With respect to the provision that  "[g]ender  related  aspects
            might be considered, without by  themselves  alone  creating  a
            presumption for  the  applicability  of  the   article",  UNHCR
            notes that courts and administrative  bodies  in  a  number  of
            jurisdictions  have  found  that  women,   for   example,   can
            constitute a particular social  group  within  the  meaning  of
            Article 1A(2).  Gender is a clear example of a social subset of
            persons who are defined by innate and immutable characteristics
            and who are frequently subject to differentiated treatment  and
            standards.  This does not mean that all women  in  the  society
            qualify for refugee status. A claimant must demonstrate a well-
            founded fear of persecution based  on  her  membership  in  the
            particular social group.


            Even though less has been said in relation to the age dimension
            into interpretation and application  of  international  refugee
            law, the range of potential claims  where  age  is  a  relevant
            factor is broad, including forcible  or  under-age  recruitment
            into military service, (forced) child marriage, female  genital
            mutilisation, child trafficking, or child pornography or abuse.
            Some claims that are age-related  may  also  include  a  gender
            element and compound the vulnerability of the claimant.


            UNHCR encourages States, in cooperation with  UNHCR,  to  adopt
            guidelines on assessing the asylum applications  of  women  and
            children.'

52.   As we will note in our  conclusions  and  agreed  definition  of  the
      particular social group applicable in this case, gender and age status
      are included. The PSG we identitfy appears to be consistent both  with
      the EU Qualifications Directive and UNHCR comments.

53.    In this appeal the Adjudicator, did not  consider  it  necessary  to
      consider whether the appellant fell within a PSG.He merely  dismissed
      the appeal on the basis the Appellant should have  sought  protection
      from the Iranian authorites or  alternatively  internally  relocated.
      The Adjudicator did find however, at paragraph 20  of  his  decision,
      (set out at paragraph 9 above), after  noting  the  determination  in
      Shah and Islam that:

           "In Iran, as in Pakistan there is discrimination  against  women
           in matters of fundamental human rights on the ground  that  they
           are women.  I am persuaded by the evidence presented to me  that
           there is institutional discrimination against women by organs of
           the state in Iran."


54.   From our own analysis of the objective evidence we find ourselves  in
      general agreement with those conclusions. In our findings relating to
      the nexus issue, later in the determination, we adopt this finding by
      the Adjudicator in support of our conclusion that the causal nexus in
      this case arises between the persecution and  the  failure  of  state
      protection.

55.     As  stated  in  paragraph  34  we  consider  the  findings  of  the
      Adjudicator contain material errors of  law.   We  are  thus  in  the
      position where we ourselves  must  seek  to  determine  whether  this
      appellant falls  within  a  PSG,  guided  by  the  jurisprudence  and
      analysis above,  particularly  noting  the  conclusions  set  out  in
      Montoya and the EC Qualifications Directive

56.   It can be seen that it is necessary, in PSG gender cases, firstly  to
      establish, objectively, on  the  facts  as  found,  the  general  and
      prevailing country conditions as they relate both to women and to the
      specific applicant. Then the specification of the PSG  can  be  made.
      The PSG initially suggested by Mr Behbahani was: "Women in  Iran  who
      are forced by their fathers to marry high ranked  Iranian  officials,
      such as Mullahs".   At the outset we note that the  more  generalised
      PSG definition: "Women in Iran", was considered in ZH (paragraph  74)
      where it was found in that case  that  it  was  not  considered  that
      "Women in Iran" formed a PSG.  We consider that, on the  totality  of
      the objective evidence now  available,  particularly  that  from  the
      UNHCR  and  United  Nations  Economic  and  Social   Council   Report
      (paragraph 23  above),  the  High  Court  of  Australia  decision  in
      Applicant S v MIMA and the New Zealand Refugee  Appeal  No.  71427/99
      (none of which were before the President in ZH), that it  could  well
      be argued now that "Women in  Iran"  may  form  a  particular  social
      group.  However, in this case, for reasons, which we set out below, a
      more confined PSG is a realistic assessment for  the  predicament  of
      this appellant.

57. The PSG identified by Mr Behbahani, in our view, appeared   capable  of
   being circulatory, as the group could be said to be  partly  defined  by
   the persecution. Women who are forced  to  marry  obviously  implies  an
   element of coercion, and possibly persecution, within it. Even  if  more
   of the potential persecutory treatment may arise after the marriage.  We
   therefore did not accept the group submitted by Mr  Behbahani  could  be
   applicable.  We also considered that Mr Behbahani wrongly laid stress in
   the causation on the "forced" marriage, rather than the reality of  this
   appellant's situation, where the risks to her arise from her refusal  to
   enter into an arranged marriage. Mr Behbahani agreed with  us  that  the
   PSG should not be defined in a circulatory manner so as to  include  the
   persecution feared.  In this situation we considered a more  appropriate
   PSG to be: "Young Iranian  Women  who  refuse  to  enter  into  arranged
   marriages".  We must now consider whether this group, so defined,  is  a
   valid one and whether the appellant has a  well-founded  fear  of  being
   persecuted for reasons of her membership of that  group.   While  noting
   and agreeing with the caution set out in JO (paragraph 18), at paragraph
   10 above, we consider that the more confined PSG, we have set out, is  a
   realistic approach to the factual situation of this appellant.  We  also
   consider the group we define, is not defined by the persecution,  as  in
   many cases nothing may happen to the young women in  this  predicatment.
   It does however, based on the assessment of the objective evidence here,
   have the necessary element of discrimination,  and  that  discrimination
   against such young women may assist in the identification of the  group.
   It is also a group recognisable in Iranian society, due to their lack of
   acceptance of generally acceptable cultural and social mores.


58.  The  PSG,  so  defined,  therefore  is  in  a  similar  discriminatory
   situation, as required under the other  four  Convention  grounds  (sub-
   paragraphs 55B (vi),(vii),and (xi) of Montoya).  In this regard, we note
   in particular the section in the Enayat Report: "2.4. The  Influence  of
   the Mullah" and the punishment for a "slight," that could be  meted  out
   by a person in the Mullah's position, when a "cultural debt"  or  favour
   is offered, but not fulfilled.  Beyond this  we  note  the  UN  material
   referred to above, in relation to the treatment of young women as  well.
   We also have considered that the PSG, as defined,  exists  in  that  its
   members share a common immutable characteristic, which they are not in a
   position to change without there being a breach of core human rights, in
   particular the right to marry persons of their own choice (Article 23(3)
   ICCPR,1966).

     59.    As was established in Shah and Islam, and later in Horvath,  by
      the House of Lords, persecution by  non-state  actors,  must  involve
      both a real risk  of  serious  harm  and  also  a  failure  of  state
      protection: P = SH + FSP.  We have established that we consider there
      would be a risk of serious harm from both the appellant's father  and
      the Mullah.  Would there also be a failure  of  state  protection  in
      this situation?  We are satisfied that, from the objective  evidence,
      at the required level of proof, that there  would  be  a  failure  of
      state protection.  In this regard we agree with the conclusion of the
      Adjudicator (paragraph 20 of his determination).  The whole nature of
      the Iranian authorities attitude to the treatment of women  as  shown
      by the objective evidence, illustrates a real risk that the state, or
      authorities acting in the name  of  the  state  carry,  out  actions,
      either through their own activities, or operation of  the  law,  with
      impunity, against women at a  level  of  intensity  that  is  clearly
      discriminatory.  The UN material set out above  clearly  shows  this.
      That  discrimination  effectively  condones  behaviour  by   men   in
      situations akin to that  of  the  father  and  the  Mullah.   Indeed,
      particularly in the case of the Mullah, the evidence  indicates  that
      the Mullah  would  use  the  organs  of  the  state  to  extract  his
      retribution  or  revenge  upon  the  appellant.   The  risk  of  that
      happening is, on the evidence accepted here, beyond being  remote  or
      speculative and is, in our conclusion, well-founded.

    60.     Our conclusions, therefore are that not only is this  appellant
      at risk  of  being  seriously  maltreated  for  reasons  of  personal
      retribution or vindictiveness on the  part  of  her  father  and  the
      Mullah, which self evidentily, are not  Refugee  Convention  reasons,
      but, given the discriminatory attitude of the state to  young  women,
      in the appellant's situation, there  would  be  a  failure  of  state
      protection.   In  this  case  we  consider  the  nexus  between   the
      Convention reason and the persecution is provided by the  failure  of
      state protection.  Thus, while in this case the risk of serious  harm
      may  arise  for   predominantly   non-Convention   reasons,   because
      persecution includes, within  it,  a  failure  of  state  protection,
      (which would not be available in this case) the required causal nexus
      is established.  Accordingly we find that the appellant is at a  real
      risk of persecution for reasons of her membership of  the  particular
      social group we identify.

61.   For clarity we refer back to the formula set out in Shah  and  Islam:
      P=SH+FSP.  We note there must be a nexus between the persecution  and
      the Convention reason.  The persecution, in this case arises from the
      combination of serious harm and  the  failure  of  state  protection.
      There  is  here  a  clear  linkage  between  the  membership  of  the
      particular social group and the failure of state protection and thus,
      logically the necessary causal nexus is established. In  other  words
      the nexus can arise through either limb of the above formula.

62.   For a useful and instructive discussion on the logic we have  adopted
      we have been assisted by the New Zealand decision in  Refugee  Appeal
      No. 71427/99.   Additionally,  we  find  that  similar  reasoning  is
      apparently adopted by the Court of Appeal in the very recent decision
      of the Lord Chief Justice in  P  and  M.  At  paragraph  37  of  that
      judgment (in the Decision section) the Lord Chief Justice states:

           "... if the position was not made clear by the decision of  Shah
           and Islam, it is clear by the decision of  the  Australian  High
           Court in S v MIMA [2004] HCA 25, that we  would  apply  also  in
           this jurisdiction.  The Adjudicator's decision  was  correct  on
           her findings of fact as to the position of women  in  Kenya  and
           society.  Secondly, the  Adjudicator  properly  identified  that
           that  constituted  persecution.   Thirdly  she  concluded   that
           persecution feared was due  to  P's  membership  of  the  social
           group.  It was also because of the  membership  of  that  social
           group that she would not receive adequate  protection  from  the
           police, who on behalf of the state had  the  responsibility  for
           providing  protection  for  her.   Fourthly  and  finally,   the
           Adjudicator was entitled to find that P's  fear  of  persecution
           was well founded." (Italics added)


63    The sentence we have placed  in  italics  we  consider  confirms  the
      reasoning that the nexus can arise either through the serious harm or
      failure of state protection.  Further acceptance of this  appears  to
      be set out in paragraphs 44 and 45 (particularly the first  sentence)
      where the Lord Chief Justice appears to accept the submission made by
      Mr Kovats, on behalf of the Secretary of State in that case.

64.   Further support for our analysis is given in the UNHCR Guidelines  on
      International Protection 'Membership of a particular social group' (7
      May 2002) referred to above in paragraphs 22 and 23 which state:

           '22.  There may also arise situations where a  claimant  may  be
                 unable to show that the harm inflicted  or  threatened  by
                 the non-State actor is related to one of the five grounds.
                 For example, in   the situation  of domestic abuse, a wife
                 may not always be able to  establish that her  husband  is
                 abusing her based on her membership  in  a  social  group,
                 political   opinion   or    other    Convention    ground.
                 Nonetheless,  if  the   State  is  unwilling   to   extend
                 protection based on one of the five grounds, then she  may
                 be able to establish a valid claim for refugee status: the
                 harm visited upon her by  her  husband  is  based  on  the
                 State's unwillingness to protect  her  for  reasons  of  a
                 Convention  ground.


           23.  The reasoning may be summarised as follows. The causal link
                 may be satisfied: (1)where either there is a real risk  of
                 being persecuted at the hands of  a  non-State  actor  for
                 reasons  which  are  related  to  one  of  the  Convention
                 grounds, whether or  not  the  failure  of  the  State  to
                 protect the claimant is Convention related;  (2) where the
                 risk of being persecuted at the hands of a non-State actor
                 is unrelated to a Convention ground, but the inability  or
                 unwillingness of the  State to offer protection is  for  a
                 Convention reason.'

65.   We consider, given  the  autocratic  and  theocratic  nature  of  the
      Iranian state, and the Mullah, who is one of  the  parties  that  the
      appellant is at risk from, that the Convention reason  of  "religion"
      may also be arguable.  However, in this case, as we have  found  that
      the risk of being persecuted  has  been  established  for  reason  of
      membership of a particular social group it is unnecessary for  us  to
      go on and give that  consideration,  particularly  as  this  was  not
      argued before us.

66.   However, before leaving the issues involved in  cases,  where  it  is
      argued that women, or various classes of women, are being  persecuted
      for reasons of membership of a particular social group, we note  that
      the  above  analysis  and   our   following   comments   may   assist
      Adjudicator's  in  these  gender  related  claims.  We  observe  from
      experience that such cases often appear to become,  bogged  down,  in
      pedantic, and often unnecessary, argument as  to  definition  of  the
      particular social group.

67.   There are two fundamental questions that need  to  be  asked  in  all
      these cases.  The first is, even if it  is  accepted  and/or  assumed
      that women, or various sub  categories  of  women,  in  a  particular
      country can constitute a PSG, are they being persecuted  for  reasons
      of being women, in that country?  In such a situation, while  it  may
      be clear that being a woman is an inherent and innate characteristic,
      not capable of change, and is obviously recognised as a group by  the
      society, the reasons for the persecution are  not  because  they  are
      women in their country of nationality, but because of  vindictiveness
      or attitudes of some men, and sometimes  other  women  as  well,  who
      abuse them.   In  other  words  the  reasons  for  the  serious  harm
      question should be addressed and  answered  first.   Then,  in  cases
      where the harm is not from the state, and a  real  risk  of  harm  is
      established from a non state actor, the issue of whether  there  will
      be a failure of state protection must then be  considered.   At  this
      point the whole analysis of discrimination at  the  state  level  and
      possible failure of state protection, should then be carried out,  as
      was done in Shah and Islam, and usefully in cases from Somalia in the
      recent decision of HN. If there is valid  state  protection  (at  the
      Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489 level) clearly protracted  analysis  of  what
      the PSG definition might be is an irrelevant exercise.

67.   We must now turn to the final  issue  of  internal  relocation.   The
      Adjudicator considered this was open to the appellant.  Unfortunately
      he provided no reasoning for this conclusion. He did concede  however
      that she might find it difficult to obtain housing and employment  on
      her  return.  We  consider  that  the   Adjudicator's   analysis   is
      insufficient.  It overlooked the position in Iranian society of  both
      the appellant's father and more particularly, the Mullah.   As noted,
      both are members of the LEF.   The Mullah is the head  of  a  Bureau.
      There is thus a reasonable likelihood that he could contact officials
      at the airport to watch out for the appellant, for example by way  of
      a mere noting of computer records, let alone possible  contacts  that
      may have been made with the Iranian embassy in the UK (as claimed  in
      the evidence).  Additionally, a similar  request  could  be  made  to
      other members of the LEF throughout Iran.  Effectively, therefore the
      risks  to  this  appellant  are  greatly  heightened  by  the   state
      authorities and mechanisms  available  to  both  of  the  appellant's
      potential persecutors.   Beyond this, even if the appellant were able
      to pass through the airport, as soon as  she  endeavoured  to  engage
      with any local security or police, for example if she wished to marry
      another man, the risk of this being relayed to  her  father,  or  the
      Mullah,  becomes  realistic,  rather  than  speculative.    In   this
      situation therefore we do not consider that  an  internal  relocation
      alternative is realistically available to this appellant. There is  a
      reasonable likelihood of her being exposed to  risks  of  persecution
      that cannot be realistically avoided by her relocation to other parts
      of Iran, on the evidence in this case.

69.   In conclusion, therefore, we set out our findings on each issue;

      i)     There  are  substantive  material  errors  of   law   in   the
           determination of the Adjudicator.


      ii)   We are able to reach our own conclusions on the totality of the
           evidence before us, including substantive objective evidence and
           jurisprudence, not provided to the Tribunal in ZH. We were  also
           able to rely on the accepted credibility of the appellant's  own
           evidence.


      iii)  There are substantive reasons for concluding there  is  a  real
           risk of a breach of Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if  this  country
           returns this appellant to  Iran.   Noting  the  logic  from  the
           starred determination of the Tribunal in Kacaj* we consider that
           this appellant would also be at a reasonable likelihood of being
           persecuted on return to Iran.


      iv)   The real risk of  this  appellant  suffering  serious  harm  on
           return to Iran is  primarily  for  non-Convention  reasons  (the
           vindictiveness and retribution of the appellant's father and the
           Mullah).  However, as we consider there would also be a  failure
           of state protection against that  serious  harm,  we  find  that
           there is a causal nexus between the persecution (accepting that:
           Persecution = failure of state protection +  serious  harm)  and
           her membership of a particular social group.  We find  therefore
           that the appellant is at a real risk  of  being  persecuted  for
           reasons of her membership of a particular social  group  namely:
           "Young Iranian Women who refuse to enter into arranged marriages
           ".


v) The findings of the Adjudicator in relation to internal  relocation  are
   substantively flawed as they lack reasoning.  We find that  an  internal
   relocation  alternative  is  not  available  to  the  appellant  in  the
   circumstances of this case.


vi)   We find therefore the appellant is a refugee within  the  meaning  of
   Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention and there is a real  risk  of  a
   breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.


70.   The appeal is therefore allowed.


                                                                  A R MACKEY
                                                              Vice President
                                        Approved for electronic promulgation



