
DMG
|RT ( 2000 Procedure Rule 22(7) )Cameroon [2005] UKIAT 00078      |
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On:  31 January 2005       |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|31st March 2005                                                  |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr D K Allen - Vice-President                                    |
|Mrs R M Bray JP                                                  |
|Mr M G Taylor CBE                                                |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                       |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms  L  Hooper,  Counsel  instructed  by  Derby
                    Law Centre
For the Respondent:          Mr C Trent, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon.  He appeals  to  the  Tribunal
      with permission against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  A
      O'Malley, in which he dismissed his appeal against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision of 24 May 2001 to issue directions  for  his  removal
      from the United Kingdom and refusing asylum.

2.    This appeal has  a  complicated  procedural  history.   Following  the
      decision to issue removal directions and the refusal  of  asylum,  the
      appellant's appeal against that decision came before Mr O'Malley on  1
      November 2001 and his determination was  promulgated  on  16  November
      2001.  In that determination he found the appellant to be  essentially
      credible, but concluded that there was no Refugee Convention reason in
      the case and nor did he face a real risk of breach of his human rights
      on return to Cameroon.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  a  Vice-President  on  3  January
      2002.  The essence of the challenge was that the  Adjudicator  was  in
      error in concluding that there was no Refugee Convention reason,  that
      there was not available appropriate protection, and that the  findings
      on risk were flawed.

4.    The matter came before  a  Tribunal  chaired  by  the  then  President
      Collins J on 11 April 2002.  In its determination the Tribunal  stated
      that there was not a Refugee Convention  reason  and  that  an  asylum
      appeal could not succeed.  As regards the  human  rights  issues,  the
      Tribunal did not come to a concluded view concerning  risk  on  return
      and protection,  but  was  concerned  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not
      considered the issue of relocation in the context of the Human  Rights
      Convention.  The Tribunal acted under Rule 22 (7) of  the  Immigration
      and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000.  That states as follows:

      "Where the Tribunal decides to admit any evidence under this rule,  it
          may direct that it be given, either -

          (a)    orally, in which case the Tribunal may  take  the  evidence
              itself or remit the appeal to the same or another Adjudicator
              for the taking of that evidence; or


          (b)    in writing, in which case it shall be given in  any  manner
              and at any time that the Tribunal may direct.


      The Tribunal stated that in order to decide whether there was  a  real
      risk of treatment contrary to Article  3,  the  question  of  internal
      relocation might be relevant and as a consequence it was necessary  to
      obtain further evidence from  the  Adjudicator  in  relation  to  that
      issue.  It was stated that if the appellant desired  to  give  further
      evidence then he should be permitted to do so to enable that  question
      to be answered.  The appeal was adjourned part-heard.

5.    The matter came back in front of Mr O'Malley on 12  August  2002.   He
      heard evidence from the appellant.  He  noted  that  evidence  in  his
      determination.  He came to the conclusion  at  paragraph  10  of  that
      determination that it would be unduly harsh to require  the  appellant
      to move to another part of the Cameroon and it was not  reasonable  to
      expect him to locate elsewhere.

6.    It appears that thereafter  Mr  O'Malley's  second  determination  was
      perceived to be a conclusion of the matter and the file  was  sent  to
      storage.   Clearly  that  was  wrong,  as  can  be   seen   from   the
      determination of the Tribunal which made it clear, as  we  have  noted
      above, that the matter was adjourned part-heard.  There was a  further
      complication  that  by  this  time  this  administrative   error   was
      discovered Collins J had ceased to be President of the Tribunal and it
      was not feasible therefore for the appeal to continue to be treated as
      being part-heard.  Accordingly a transfer order was made by the Deputy
      President on 15 December 2003 ordering that the appeal  be  considered
      afresh but taking account of all  the  material  now  available  by  a
      different panel from that which had sat previously.

7.    The matter came before the Tribunal on 13 September 2004.   Ms  Louise
      Hooper, instructed by Derby Law Centre,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant, and Mr M Blundell appeared on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
      State.

8.    There was some discussion as to the status  of  Mr  O'Malley's  second
      determination.  It also transpired that there was on the file a  draft
      respondent's notice to which it appeared  no  consideration  had  ever
      been given.

9.    There was an adjournment to enable Mr Blundell to enquire  as  to  the
      action proposed with regard to the respondent's notice.   It  appeared
      that it had not in fact been formally  lodged  and  that  this  was  a
      conscious decision as it was contended that in sending the appeal back
      to the Adjudicator  under  Rule  22(7)  the  Tribunal  had  wanted  Mr
      O'Malley to receive evidence and not to make findings on the evidence.
       He had purported to make a finding of undue harshness.  If  that  was
      right then it had to be questioned to what extent he  had  overstepped
      his task and it was argued that in making a finding of undue  hardship
      he had gone too far but it had to be  questioned  where  the  dividing
      line was.  Mr Blundell understood Ms Hooper to say that  the  dividing
      line  was  established  by  the  risk  of  physical  ill-treatment  at
      checkpoints, but the problem was that the appellant was  from  Douala,
      and going from there to elsewhere did not necessarily arise if he  was
      returned to the capital which was prima facie a  safe  area  so  there
      would be no need to go through the checkpoints.

10.   Ms Hooper stated her view that the status of the second  determination
      was at issue and she argued that the determination of  Collins  J  was
      part of the determination of the Tribunal as  a  whole,  and  in  this
      regard she placed reliance on Rule  45(2)(a)  of  the  2000  Procedure
      Rules which states as follows:

      "Where any proceedings  are  transferred  to  another  Adjudicator  in
          accordance with paragraph (1) - ...
          (a)    any notice or other document which is sent or given  to  or
              by the Adjudicator from whom the proceedings were transferred
              shall be deemed to have been sent  or  given  to  or  by  the
              Adjudicator to whom the appeal is transferred."


11.   The matter was adjourned to be listed in October for mention for  this
      matter to be ventilated further.

12.   At the aforementioned hearing on  14  October  2004  Ms  Hooper  again
      appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Ms Pal appeared on behalf  of
      the Secretary of  State.   At  this  point  an  Article  8  claim  was
      mentioned and it was clear that evidence would have to be provided  by
      the appellant and his partner.

13.   The matter came before the Tribunal again on  13  December  2004.   Ms
      Hooper again appeared on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  Mr  C  Trent
      appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.  Miss Hooper referred us
      to the  appellant's  statements  and  exhibits  and  attachments  from
      various organisations and a letter from his GP.

14.   Mr Trent referred to the respondent's notice and the wording  of  Rule
      22(7)(a).  He contended  that  the  words  "for  the  taking  of  that
      evidence" referred to the sole function of  the  Adjudicator  in  that
      context.  It contrasted with the wording of  Rule  23  which  made  it
      clear  that  the  matter  was  remitted  for  determination   in   the
      circumstances envisaged in that rule.  He argued that paragraphs 2,  3
      and 4 of Mr O'Malley's second determination  contained  findings  that
      were open to him on the evidence but that the conclusions at paragraph
      5 onwards were not open to him.  Credibility was for the  Tribunal  in
      Mr Trent's view since the Tribunal could alternatively  take  evidence
      itself.  The Tribunal was seized of the appeal.  Reliance had not been
      placed on sub-paragraph (b) of Rule 22(7) whereby the  evidence  could
      have been given by written statement and it would not be  possible  to
      rely on demeanour in such a case.

15.   Ms Hooper submitted that the rule was unclear.   She  argued  that  it
      could not be looked at in isolation from the determination of  Collins
      J.  Clearly it was the Adjudicator's role to deal with  the  evidence.
      It would be very odd if all he was required to do was  to  write  down
      the evidence as the Tribunal could  as  easily  do  that.   Ms  Hooper
      wondered whether the rule's purpose was to  allow  an  Adjudicator  to
      complete his findings on evidence where otherwise  full  findings  had
      been made, rather than the Tribunal  wishing  to  deal  with  all  the
      evidence from the start.  As a matter of common  sense  she  suggested
      that if an Adjudicator was only required to write  down  the  evidence
      you would simply get a written statement and there must  be  a  reason
      for sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) existing separately.

16.   Mr Trent suggested that with regard to paragraphs 5 and 6  of  Collins
      J's judgment, especially the last  five  lines  of  paragraph  5,  the
      Tribunal expected to make the findings on undue hardship.  The  matter
      had been adjourned part-heard.

17.   Ms Hooper  suggested  that  this  was  more  problematic  and  it  was
      probably better left to the Tribunal.  Again it was a problem  of  the
      drafting of the Rules.  In her view the Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
      make findings of fact on the evidence  and  from  those  findings  the
      Tribunal was entitled to find that relocation would be unduly harsh.

18.   We adjourned to consider the issue.  We concluded that the purpose  of
      the adjournment and the direction of the Tribunal in this case was for
      the Adjudicator to take evidence  including  making  findings  on  the
      credibility or otherwise of such evidence but not concluding the legal
      point which is whether that evidence indicated in this  instance  that
      it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  relocate.   In  effect
      therefore we concluded that Mr O'Malley had  exceeded  his  powers  in
      determining at paragraph 10 of his second determination that it  would
      be unduly harsh to require the appellant to move to  another  part  of
      the Cameroon and that it was not reasonable to expect  him  to  locate
      elsewhere.  Paragraphs 2 and 3 of that determination contain a summary
      of the evidence  given  to  him  by  the  appellant  and  paragraph  4
      summarises  Ms  Hooper's  submissions.   The  Adjudicator   thereafter
      assessed the appellant's evidence and noted aspects of  the  objective
      evidence at paragraph 5.  He made  findings  about  the  problems  the
      appellant would no doubt have in finding a job and earning a living in
      a place where he had no support from his own ethnic group particularly
      as a relatively unskilled worker who would have no  doubt  to  compete
      with a large number of people who, unlike him, would be native to  the
      area.  Thereafter he noted objective evidence concerning  problems  of
      moving around Cameroon and the difficulties with  roadblocks  and  the
      problems he would have obtaining help from the police as he would have
      to explain his connection with the Douala killings.

19.   In our view the Adjudicator's role was limited to noting the  evidence
      and making findings on whether or not the Adjudicator found it  to  be
      credible, as we have noted above.  It was not part of his role to make
      findings on that evidence: that  we  consider  was  a  matter  to  the
      Tribunal, as envisaged initially by Collins J at paragraph  6  of  his
      determination.  It is clear  to  our  mind  that  this  was  what  was
      anticipated by Collins J in the final sentence of paragraph 5  of  his
      determination.  There he said the following:

      "But we do need evidence from which we can judge whether  there  would
          be undue hardship in expecting the appellant to  locate  elsewhere
          in the Cameroons or whether there is any other reason  apart  from
          the fear of the ability of the families to find him  and  to  deal
          with him which would mean that it was not reasonable to expect him
          to locate elsewhere."

20.   This in our view delineates very clearly and  properly  the  differing
      roles of the Adjudicator and the Tribunal in the context of  paragraph
      22(7) of the 2000 Procedure Rules.

21.   Thereafter Mr Trent sought permission  to  cross-appeal  out  of  time
      under Rule 18(3) of the 2002 Procedure Rules.

22.   Ms Hooper said  that  she  appreciated  Mr  Trent's  difficulties  but
      argued that the notice had not been served on the day of  the  hearing
      and earlier it had been indicated by Mr Blundell that  reliance  would
      not be placed on the draft respondent's notice.  With  regard  to  the
      reference in the respondent's notice to the Tribunal determination  in
      AL (Afghanistan) [2003] UKIAT  00076,  she  did  not  agree  with  the
      reasoning in this necessarily.   Ultimately  she  did  not  object  to
      allowing the respondent's notice but asked that her concerns be noted.

23.   We decided that it would be proper in the circumstances to  allow  the
      respondent's notice and therefore that it could  be  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator  erred  in  applying  the  wrong  test  with   regard   to
      relocation.  The remaining issues before us concerned the Human Rights
      Convention.  It is clear from the judgment of Collins J on the  appeal
      against Mr O'Malley's first determination what view the Tribunal  took
      of that point of the Refugee Convention argument and we were minded to
      take the same view of that issue.

24.   With regards to Article 8 Ms Hooper made the point that  these  issues
      only arose after Mr O'Malley's second determination and that it was  a
      case under the 1999 Act.

25.   Mr Trent undertook not to certify with regard to an  Article  8  claim
      that might be brought.

26.   In the light of that Ms Hooper stated that she would  not  pursue  the
      Article 8 issue before the Tribunal at this time.

27.   Thereafter Ms Hooper referred us to the  initial  grounds  of  appeal.
      She did not  rely  on  the  grounds  concerning  risk  on  account  of
      membership of the Bassa tribe.  She  relied  on  paragraph  3  of  the
      grounds but not with regard  to  the  tribal  connections.   She  also
      relied on Ground 3(c).  She also referred to what Collins J  had  said
      about what needed to be determined, the question of whether there  was
      a risk of ill-treatment on return and if so what degree of  protection
      was available.

28.   She referred to paragraph 11 of  Mr  O'Malley's  first  determination.
      This contained his findings  of  fact.   The  incident  of  the  later
      demonstrations occurred as had been stated by the appellant and a  mob
      had come to his house and ransacked  it  and  set  it  on  fire.   The
      Adjudicator also found at paragraph 13 of his first determination that
      the appellant's cousin (               ) became a target  because  she
      was an original complainant and because her boyfriend was involved  in
      the arrest and the suspected murders.  The boyfriend had  subsequently
      been sentenced to sixteen  months'  imprisonment,  having  been  found
      guilty of disobeying orders.  The house and its occupants had become a
      focus for public anger.  These matters were accepted  at  the  end  of
      paragraph 13.  There was nothing to prove that the appellant's  cousin
      had reappeared and if she had it would be clear  evidence  of  safety,
      but it was hard to prove a negative.

29.   The death threats and the attacks on  and  destruction  of  the  house
      amounted  to  ill-treatment.   It  was  not  clear  whether  that  was
      challenged; it had not been up to now.

30.   At that point the appellant had fled Cameroon in  fear  of  his  life.
      The Adjudicator had then found that there was  no  Convention  reason.
      As regards paragraph 16  of  the  determination  the  Adjudicator  had
      considered the human rights issues.  As regards future risk he had not
      taken into account the past ill-treatment and gave no  reasons  as  to
      why he did not believe the appellant would face the same  problems  on
      return.

31.   Ms Hooper then addressed  us  on  the  issue  of  current  risk.   She
      referred us to the original skeleton argument at paragraph 5(v).   Two
      of the boys  who  had  been  killed  were  the  sons  of  one  of  the
      appellant's friends, so he was known personally to at least one of the
      fathers.  She also referred to  paragraph  6(i).   There  had  been  a
      closed trial.  There were lesser sentences, including that imposed  on
      the  cousin's  boyfriend,  and  others  had   been   acquitted.    The
      complainants were therefore not satisfied that they had  got  justice.
      That was the only publicly available evidence of which Ms  Hooper  was
      aware.  The active interest in the disappearance of the nine  children
      remained and there was nothing  to  indicate  that  their  desire  for
      revenge or justice had been  satisfied.   She  accepted  that  it  was
      difficult, three years on, to prove conclusively that there was  still
      a risk to the appellant, but there was enough  to  show  a  reasonable
      degree of likelihood of ongoing interest.  Clearly he would  be  known
      to them and was therefore at risk.  There was no evidence of a  change
      in  the  circumstances  since  his  past  ill-treatment,  for  example
      somebody being found guilty on a serious charge.  They  had  not  seen
      justice.

32.   The other issue upon which Ms  Hooper  addressed  us  was  protection.
      The Adjudicator noted that the appellant had not reported  the  matter
      to the police.  The appellant had dealt with that at B6 in  answer  to
      Question 4 where he said that the police were aware and did  not  come
      to protect his home.  He had said similar things in  interview.   Also
      more relevantly, as a matter of law, he did not have to report to  the
      police for  the  Tribunal  to  find  that  there  was  an  absence  of
      protection, and it was clear that the demonstrations were a matter  of
      public knowledge and the police had  attempted  to  intervene,  having
      dispersed the weekly demonstrations.  The boyfriend was a captain in a
      now dispersed operational command, so he was high up in  the  security
      forces.  His girlfriend was being targeted, but they could not protect
      their house.  There was  clear  evidence  of  a  failure  to  protect.
      Clearly the appellant was previously of interest  and  was  threatened
      and it was not just the burning down of  the  house  but  it  was  the
      cousin's house from which the gas bottle was stolen.  As a parent  one
      might well conclude that the people who initially reported  the  theft
      were responsible for the deaths of the children.  Otherwise why  would
      they act as they did in going to the house.

33.   The only change in circumstances was the lapse of time.  The C9  group
      had not disappeared in that time.  There was nothing  in  any  of  the
      latest material to show a change in circumstances.  This  was  a  very
      particular and very individual case and only return would decide  what
      actually happened and this was too big a risk to take.   It  would  be
      very unfortunate if it was decided now by the Tribunal that  the  lack
      of publicly available evidence meant that he failed when the delay was
      the Appellate Authority's fault.

34.   One could not be sure that he  would  be  targeted  on  return.   Miss
      Hooper relied  on  what  was  said  in  her  skeleton  argument  about
      protection and referred us to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
      Bagdanavicius.  The appellant was a law-abiding citizen with  problems
      from a mob seeking justice due to state activities  and  there  was  a
      high duty to protect  in  the  circumstances.   In  Bagdanavicius  the
      authorities were aware of the risk.  The US report referred at page  3
      of 22 to mob violence and this occurred even across  the  street  from
      the police station, and the other case was of relevance in this regard
      also.  There were therefore instances  of   mob  violence  leading  to
      death and generalised  information  concerning  violence  in  Cameroon
      which was relevant to protection for the  appellant.   They  had  been
      unable to assist him although it was a very high-profile case.

35.   With regard to the second determination  of  Mr  O'Malley,  Ms  Hooper
      relied on the second skeleton argument.  The Adjudicator's findings of
      fact were summarised at paragraph 14 of that skeleton argument.   Sub-
      paragraph (iv) was of particular relevance, where the Adjudicator  had
      found that the appellant was likely to encounter physical danger  from
      the security forces in travelling from his own area to another for the
      purpose of relocation.  As  regards  AL,  even  on  the  Adjudicator's
      findings it was contended that he was at risk of a breach of Article 3
      on return on attempting to relocate.  She referred us to the  decision
      of the Court of Appeal in AE and FE with regard to relocation where it
      was said that it was necessary to  prevent  a  person  being  sent  to
      circumstances where they were compelled to return to  their  place  of
      origin, so a comparison had to be made in order  to  prevent  indirect
      refoulement.

36.   Mr Trent raised the point that it was likely that the appellant  would
      be returned to Yaounde.

37.   Ms Hooper  contended  that  it  could  be  assumed  that  Yaounde  was
      Francophone and if it was found that the appellant could  be  returned
      to Yaounde in safety then the issue was whether he could realistically
      remain there and if not he would have to return to his home area.

38.   Upon consideration Ms Hooper was unhappy with the fact that return  to
      Yaounde was raised at this stage.  It had been open to the Home Office
      to raise this when the Adjudicator considered relocation.  Also as  it
      had not been dealt with before she could not deal with it now when  it
      was unclear for example what Yaounde's ethnic breakdown was.   If  the
      C9 group complained against the government they could  go  to  Yaounde
      where the government was.  The Bamileke which was the C9 group were  a
      dominant tribe favoured by  the  government  whereas  the  appellant's
      tribe were mainly in the  south-west  and  the  tribes  discriminated.
      This was relevant to the viability of remaining in Douala.

39.   At this point we considered it was appropriate  to  adjourn  in  order
      for further evidence to be obtained about return or  returnability  to
      Yaounde and the situation that the appellant might face there  in  the
      context of the issue of relocation.

40.   We reconvened on 31 January 2005.  Ms Hooper put in  the  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal in P and M [2004] EWCA Civ 1640 and  also  the  US
      State Department Report.  She relied on paragraphs 33 and 34 of P  and
      M with regard to relocation, concentrating particularly on  the  point
      where it was stated that in the absence of  evidence  suggesting  that
      there was an alternative location to which an appellant could go where
      they would not be at risk,  Adjudicators  could  not  be  expected  to
      investigate such issues for themselves on their  own  initiative  when
      they had not been raised by the Secretary  of  State.   She  contended
      that this issue had not been raised by the Secretary of State but  had
      been raised by the Tribunal.  She appreciated that there had been some
      passage of time, but on the basis of the principle of litigation being
      conducted fairly and justly she contended that  the  right  place  for
      this issue to have been raised was before the Adjudicator.

41.   In the alternative, she  referred  us  to  Mr  Trent's  letter  of  31
      December 2004.  That referred to the  fact  that  returns  could  take
      place to Yaounde though special arrangements had to be put  in  place.
      If the Tribunal were to  decide  on  that  basis,  then  it  would  be
      necessary to make it clear that the Secretary of State would  have  to
      follow that, since removal directions were to Cameroon and this  would
      usually be to Douala, so as things stood there  was  a  risk  that  he
      would be returned to Douala.

42.   If the Tribunal found that the appellant was at risk in his home  area
      and relocation was the only issue  and  agreed  with  the  Adjudicator
      concerning the risks involved in travel, then he would  be  a  refugee
      when he left Cameroon and would only not be a refugee because  special
      arrangements could be made for him to be returned to a place to  which
      he could not have got safely on his own.  Flying into a place where he
      had no contacts and where he had never  been  before  was  clearly  of
      relevance.

43.   In assessing risk in Yaounde  it  was  necessary  to  start  with  the
      Adjudicator's findings, which could be found at  paragraph  9  of  his
      second determination.  He had found that the appellant was  likely  to
      encounter physical danger from the security forces in travelling  from
      his own area to another for the purposes of relocation and that if  he
      succeeded it was likely he would not have a job and would not be  able
      to support himself.  He would be without the support of family or clan
      and would be in a very vulnerable position indeed.  It  was  also  the
      case that he was an unskilled worker.

44.   Clearly the Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  come  to  these  findings.
      There was a risk that the conditions would be such that he would  feel
      compelled to return to his place of origin.  Pages 1-4 of the skeleton
      concerning risk in his home area were the starting point for assessing
      risk in Yaounde.  Although the problems  had  commenced  in  his  home
      area, the government was in Yaounde so at its  highest  from  time  to
      time leaders of the campaigning group would go to Yaounde to lobby the
      government and the evidence was clear that they would need  to  target
      the authorities  at  some  stage.   The  US  State  Department  Report
      referred generally to conditions in Cameroon and the situation  should
      be assessed in the light of the fact that he would not have a  job  or
      support or tribe contacts.  Page 5 of that report was  concerned  with
      arbitrary arrest and detention.  The Tribunal  was  also  referred  to
      evidence at page 6 concerning the climate of impunity to an extent for
      policemen  and  gendarmes  and  the  serious  problems  of   arbitrary
      prolonged detention with people sometimes being held incommunicado for
      months or even years.  Sweeps carried  out  by  police  authorised  by
      administrative authorities continued to  occur  in  Yaounde,  and  the
      appellant would be likely to be in the category of people who would be
      the victim of sweeps.  There was also the relevance to  relocation  of
      Yaounde squatters, of whose number the appellant would likely  be  one
      given his circumstances.  From page 17 it could be  seen  that  ethnic
      groups commonly gave preferential treatment  to  fellow  ethnic  group
      members both in business  and  social  practices  so  it  was  clearly
      important to have ties.  The appellant's  group,  the  Bassa,  were  a
      coastal tropical forest people who were mainly  to  be  found  in  the
      south-west.  They comprised some 12% of the  total  people  living  in
      that region.  That whole combination of circumstances meant  it  would
      be unduly harsh to require him to be flown back to Yaounde  and  there
      was a real risk he would feel compelled to return to Douala  where  at
      least he would have an available support network.

45.   Mr Trent made the point at the outset that relocation  was  raised  in
      the reasons for refusal  letter  at  paragraph  8  and  therefore  the
      strictures set out in P and M did not apply.  Thereafter he went on to
      deal with the question of undue harshness in Yaounde.   This  was  the
      capital of Cameroon.  He would be happy to undertake to use  his  best
      endeavours to ensure return to Yaounde and not to Douala.  He drew our
      attention to the appellant's statements concerning his  qualifications
      obtained while in Cameroon and since coming to the United Kingdom  and
      his experience and skills.  It seemed that he now spoke  English  well
      enough to teach it to other asylum  seekers.   He  had  experience  of
      working with various groups.  He had shown a degree  of  adaptability.
      He had come to the United Kingdom and learnt the language  and  fitted
      into the culture, and he could do so on return to Yaounde.  There  was
      nothing to indicate that no Bassa lived in  Yaounde.   The  fact  that
      they were from the south-west did not mean that  none  of  them  lived
      elsewhere in Cameroon.

46.   He referred  us  also  to  his  letter  of  31  December  2004.   This
      indicated at paragraph 5.5 from the  Country  Information  and  Policy
      Unit fact-finding mission of January 2004  that  there  were  in  fact
      problems for the Bepanda 9 group rather than  them  causing  problems.
      This indicated that there would be a sufficiency of protection for the
      appellant in any event.  He would be an opponent of  the  government's
      opponents.  Therefore there was no well-founded  fear  of  persecution
      for a Convention reason.  It was up to him if on return to Yaounde  he
      chose to return to  Douala.   Return  to  Cameroon  would  not  breach
      Article 3 and it would not be unduly harsh.

47.   By way of reply Miss Hooper was not sure that an undertaking  from  Mr
      Trent to use his best endeavours was sufficient  to  ensure  that  the
      appellant was not returned to Douala.  It remained the case that there
      was a risk.  As regards the skills and achievements of  the  appellant
      while in the United Kingdom, the culture and support available in  the
      United Kingdom was very different  from  that  in  Cameroon.   It  had
      always been accept that the Bepanda 9 group suffered problems with the
      authorities.  There was evidence of  violent  demonstrations  on  both
      sides.  Members of the group had attacked the appellant's house.  This
      did not give the full proper picture.  There was  not  an  appropriate
      level of protection to avoid the risk of future targeting.

Determination and Conclusions

48.   The appellant's evidence before  the  Adjudicator  was  that  he  left
      Cameroon because he was being persecuted by members  of  the  Bamileke
      tribe who were seeking revenge because their children had been killed.
       He had been living with his cousin (          )and her three children
      in Douala.  On his  return  from  work  one  day  in  January  2001  (
      ) told him that her gas bottle had been stolen and she suspected  some
      boys living in the same street.  Her boyfriend had been  told  of  the
      theft.  He was an  army  captain  in  Operational  Command  which  was
      suspected of torturing its victims and causing them to disappear.

49.   On the next day nine boys were arrested  by  Operational  Command  for
      the theft of the gas bottle.  Two of them were sons of a friend of the
      appellant.  All nine were held in custody and not released and in  the
      third week of February it was believed that they  had  been  murdered.
      Their bodies were never found.

50.   Demonstrations followed protesting the deaths and commencing in  March
      2001.  The families of the victims swore to take revenge by killing  (
            )and her boyfriend and they also wanted to  kill  the  appellant
      because he lived with(       ).  He did not dare go out, and according
      to his evidence thousands of people demonstrated  outside  the  house.
      Eventually the house was completely destroyed.  (        )  left  with
      her children, presumably to live with  her  boyfriend.   Although  the
      police were fully aware of what was going on they did  not  help  him.
      He fled from Cameroon and came  to  the  United  Kingdom  via  France,
      arriving on 31 March 2001.

51.   The Adjudicator accepted the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  what  had
      happened to him in Cameroon and the reasons why he  feared  a  return.
      The Adjudicator found that he  was  not  ill-treated  because  of  his
      membership of a  particular  social  group.   The  asylum  appeal  was
      therefore dismissed.  As regards  the  human  rights  appeal,  on  the
      appellant's own account the Adjudicator considered that he had made no
      report of the demonstrations and threats to  the  police  and  had  no
      evidence that the police were either unable or  unwilling  to  protect
      him from those who would seek to  ill-treat  him  and  indeed  to  the
      contrary noted that the government last  November  (i.e.  in  November
      2001), had announced  their  intention  to  investigate  the  unlawful
      killings in Douala by the Operational Guard.  He  therefore  dismissed
      the human rights appeal.

52.   Permission to appeal having been granted on the  basis  that  we  have
      set out above, the matter as we have noted came  before  the  Tribunal
      chaired by Collins J on 11 April 2002.  Collins J made clear his  view
      that there was no Refugee Convention reason and indeed it  seems  that
      it was not a matter that was pressed very strongly before him by  Miss
      Hooper nor has it been pressed before us.  We consider that  there  is
      no Refugee Convention reason in this case and the only issue before us
      therefore is that of Article 3.  As we have  noted  above,  the  issue
      concerning which the matter  was  remitted  back  to  Mr  O'Malley  to
      provide missing evidence on concerned the issue  of  relocation.   The
      Tribunal did not reach a concluded view as to whether he faced a  real
      risk of revenge by the families, and  whether  he  would  be  able  to
      obtain any police protection from this.

53.   Thereafter, as we have seen, in his second determination, Mr  O'Malley
      took into account the appellant's evidence that it was  impossible  in
      Cameroon to move to another part of the country and in particular as a
      French speaker he could not go to the Anglophone area.   He  would  be
      subject to economic exploitation and would be unable to get a job.  He
      knew no-one outside Douala.  The murder of the  nine  boys  was  known
      throughout the country and he would therefore be inhibited in  seeking
      assistance from  the  authorities  as  he  would  have  to  admit  his
      association with the murders, and in any event the police were corrupt
      and would not protect him.

54.   The Adjudicator concluded at paragraph  5  that  the  appellant  would
      find it difficult to find a job and earn a living in a place where  he
      had no support from his own ethnic group, particularly as a relatively
      unskilled worker.  He would no doubt have  to  compete  with  a  large
      number of people who unlike him would be native to the area.  He noted
      that there were practical difficulties in moving  around  in  Cameroon
      and agreed with the submission of Ms Hooper that it was  difficult  to
      see how with neither money nor influence he would be able to negotiate
      roadblocks manned by corrupt security forces.  He concluded as we have
      seen that it would be unduly harsh to require the appellant to move to
      another part of the Cameroon.

55.    We  return  to  our  above  finding  at  paragraps  18-20  that   the
      Adjudicator, though he was clearly entitled to make  findings  on  the
      credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence   concerning   issues   of
      relocation was not empowered or entitled to  come  to  conclusions  on
      relocation but that that was a matter of the Tribunal  as  it  is  now
      presently constituted.

56.   We consider first the question of whether the appellant is at risk  in
      his home area.  Ms Hooper has helpfully drawn our attention to a  good
      deal of objective evidence  in  this  regard  concerning  the  ongoing
      activities of the families of the nine children and problems of police
      ineffectiveness and corruption.  We did not  understand  Mr  Trent  to
      pursue very vigorously the issue of risk in the home area.  He did say
      towards the  end  of  his  submissions  with  regard  to  the  matters
      contained in his  letter  of  31  December  2004  that  there  was  an
      indication that there would  be  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
      appellant given the problems that the supporters of the nine  continue
      to have with the government.  In this  context  we  bear  in  mind  Ms
      Hooper's point that there had been problems for the  families  of  the
      nine from the authorities all along,  and  we  consider  that  on  the
      evidence the support offered by  the  authorities  in  Douala  to  the
      appellant has been at a very low level and of course it  is  the  case
      that his home was burnt down although they  were  well  aware  of  the
      problems that he was experiencing.  We accept therefore that he  faces
      a real risk of breach of his Article 3 rights in his home area.

57.   There remains then  the  question  of  relocation.   There  are  three
      issues in particular here.  The first is whether this issue is  before
      us at all.  In P and M [2004] EWCA Civ 1640 at paragraph 33 the  Court
      of Appeal did not accept that  the  Adjudicator  in  P  was  bound  to
      determine the issue of relocation when it was not before her,  and  if
      such an  issue  had  not  been  raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      Adjudicators could not be expected  to  investigate  such  issues  for
      themselves.  In this case it is clear however from paragraph 8 of  the
      reasons for refusal letter that the issue of relocation was raised  by
      the Secretary of State, and we conclude therefore that the Adjudicator
      was required (as he subsequently did)  to  consider  the  issue.   The
      second is whether as a matter of practicality he can  be  returned  to
      Yaounde or could return under his own steam as it  were,  and  thirdly
      whether the conditions there would be of such a degree of harshness as
      in effect to make it  likely  that  he  would  return  to  Douala  and
      effectively be forced back to the place where we have found he  is  at
      risk.

58.   We note and bear in mind of course the points made in evidence  before
      Mr O'Malley in the course of the second hearing before him  and  which
      are  recorded  in  his  determination  concerning  the  problems   the
      appellant would find in gaining work and the lack of support he  would
      have from his own ethnic group in that area.  We consider that he  was
      entitled to  conclude  as  he  did  that  the  difficulties  that  the
      appellant would experience en route to Yaounde from Douala would  make
      it practically impossible for him to get there but  in  any  event  we
      have found that he would be at risk on return to Douala.

59.   In this context we consider that it is important to bear in  mind  the
      appellant's evidence as regards his  skills  and  qualifications.   At
      paragraph 5 of his statement of 30 October 2001 he said  that  he  was
      well educated, having  completed  secondary  school  and  also  having
      completed a three-year course at college in mechanical studies.  Since
      leaving college he had had various jobs and before leaving Cameroon he
      worked as a chauffeur and earned a reasonable income.   He  states  at
      paragraph 13 of his addendum statement dated 6 August 2002 that he  is
      French-speaking and thought that if he lived in an Anglophone area  he
      would be separated from others as he would be  identified  as  French-
      speaking.  He goes on in that statement to refer to the fact  that  he
      attends Lackworth Tertiary College in Derby and that  he  has  studied
      various courses in English and IT and has currently begun a course  in
      training to become a teacher.  On qualification he  will  be  teaching
      other French-speaking asylum seekers how  to  speak  English.   He  is
      actively involved in the Derby Asylum  Seekers'  Association  and  has
      been appointed treasurer of the association with the responsibility of
      putting together a programme of activity to  meet  the  needs  of  the
      asylum seekers in Derby.   This  will  involve  working  with  various
      agencies  and  asylum  seekers  to  arrange  counselling  and  leisure
      services, sorting out problems  with  NASS  and  arranging  for  legal
      advice.

60.   It is  clear  to  us  on  this  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  an
      intelligent and resourceful young man.  We do not  consider  that  the
      gloomy picture painted by the Adjudicator is one that can be  said  to
      apply to him if returned to Yaounde.  For a start it is clear that his
      level of English is good to  the  extent  as  can  be  seen  from  his
      statement that he was in a position  in  2002  to  be  able  to  teach
      English to French-speaking asylum seekers.  He has clearly a range  of
      skills and experience which would certainly stand him in good stead in
      Yaounde.  In addition there is no evidence, as Mr Trent suggested,  to
      indicate that, though the Bassa's  home  is  in  the  south-west  that
      members of the Bassa are not to be found in Yaounde which is after all
      the capital of Cameroon.  We bear in mind the point made by Ms  Hooper
      concerning differences in support and facilities  between  the  United
      Kingdom and Cameroon, but consider nevertheless that  the  skills  and
      experience and qualifications that the  appellant  has  are  of  clear
      relevance to assessing his ability to cope in Yaounde.  We do not  see
      him as a person who would end up as a squatter or otherwise ending  on
      the fringes of society  given  the  circumstances  to  which  we  have
      referred above.  Any risk from those whom he fears in  Yaounde  is  in
      our view purely speculative, likewise any risk that his involvement in
      the matter that caused him to flee  would  be  or  become  known  also
      speculative.  Though the  lack  of  family  or  clan  is  not  without
      relevance, we do not consider that they are matters  of  a  degree  of
      materiality as taken with the other issues relevant to the question of
      relocation to make it unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
      Yaounde.  We therefore conclude that, taking into account the evidence
      accepted by the Adjudicator in his second determination that to return
      the appellant to Yaounde would not be unduly harsh.

61.   There remains the question of whether he can get to Yaounde.  Here  we
      are grateful to Mr Trent for his researches as evidenced in his letter
      of 31 December 2004.  It is clear from that letter that  the  majority
      of returns to Cameroon are affected via Douala  because  there  are  a
      greater number of route options available.  It is said however that if
      there is a specific request for a  routing  to  Yaounde  this  can  be
      booked via Brussels, Nairobi or Paris.  It is clear  that  flights  to
      Yaounde do not stop in Douala.  We also have Mr Trent's undertaking to
      use his best endeavours to ensure that the appellant would be returned
      to Yaounde and not to Douala.  This, as Ms Hooper pointed out, is  not
      a guarantee.  However we consider that, given that it is clear that  a
      specific request for routing to Yaounde can be  made,  and  given  the
      feasibility of this and the reliance that we are sure we can place  on
      Mr Trent's undertaking in this regard, we can be  confident  that  the
      Secretary of State in returning the appellant to Cameroon would ensure
      that he was placed on a flight that went to Yaounde and did  not  stop
      in Douala.  We do not consider that the situation the appellant  would
      face in Yaounde is such as to give rise to a real risk of his  Article
      3 rights.  Insofar as that is a question of  internal  relocation,  we
      consider that it would not be unduly harsh for him to  return  and  be
      expected to live in Yaounde.

62.   This appeal is therefore dismissed.




                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
