
H-M2M-AM-V2
|                                                                 |
|AB and others (Risk- Return - Israel Check Points) Palestine     |
|[2005] UKIAT 00046                                               |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|Date of Hearing: 6 September  and 15 November  2004              |
|Date Signed: 6 January 2005                                      |
|Date Determination Notified: 1 February 2005                     |
|Decision reserved                                                |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Before:                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|Mr J Barnes - Vice President                                     |
|Mr L V Waumsley - Vice President                                 |
|Mr J G Macdonald (First Day Only)                                |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|Appellants                                                       |
|                                                                 |
|And                                                              |
|                                                                 |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                       |
|Respondent                                                       |
|                                                                 |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                        |

For the First Appellant:     Mr B Tattersall of Counsel, instructed by
                 Noden
                         & Company Solicitors
For the Second Appellant:    Mr J Middleton of Counsel, instructed by
                         Bolton and District CAB
For the Third Appellant:     Mr J Rene of Counsel instructed by MacLaren
                         Britton, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    These appeals  have  been  heard  jointly  because  they  concern  the
essential issue of whether  there  is  a  real  risk  of  persecution  of  a
returned failed asylum seeker of Palestinian  ethnicity  from  the  Occupied
Territories at the point of return when he  will  have  to  pass  through  a
checkpoint manned by the Israeli Authorities in order  to  regain  the  West
Bank or the Gaza Strip as the case may  be.   In  the  present  appeals  the
first and second Appellants were formerly resident in the West Bank and  the
third Appellant was formerly resident in the Gaza Strip.  The hearing  on  6
September concerned only the first and second  Appellants.   The  appeal  of
the third Appellant was initially listed for hearing before Mr D  Allen  and
Mr Barnes on 23 September 2004.  Mr Rene indicated that he  wished  to  call
oral expert evidence of
Dr Azzam Tamimi and that application was granted.  By consent  that  hearing
was adjourned to enable the  third  Appellant's  appeal  to  be  listed  for
hearing jointly with the appeals of the first and second Appellants on
15 November 2004, the date to which their appeals had been  adjourned  on  6
September as appears later in this determination.  At the hearing of
23 September 2004 the removal directions in the case of the third  Appellant
were formally amended by Mr Elks, the Presenting Officer,  to  Gaza  in  the
Occupied Territories.

2.    The first Appellant was born on 18 August  1971  and  claims  to  have
entered the United Kingdom clandestinely by lorry on  4  January  2002.   He
came to the attention of the Asylum Directorate when he applied  for  asylum
on 9 January 2002.  Following the submission  of  a  Statement  of  Evidence
Form and an interview with a further written statement, his application  was
refused by the Secretary of State for the reasons set out in a letter  dated
23 May 2003.  On 15 August 2003 the Secretary  of  State  issued  directions
for his removal to the 'Palestinian authority (West  Bank)'  as  an  illegal
entrant after refusal of his asylum application.  He appealed  against  that
decision on both asylum and human rights grounds and his  appeal  was  heard
on 29 September 2003 by Mr James R Devittie, an  Adjudicator,  who  did  not
believe his core account although he accepted that  he  was  of  Palestinian
ethnicity and formerly resident in the West Bank.   He  therefore  dismissed
the asylum and human rights claims made by the  first  Appellant.   He  then
sought and was granted permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal  both  against
the adverse credibility findings made by the Adjudicator and  on  the  basis
that it was arguable that any possible risk to  the  Claimant,  if  he  were
returned via Israel, had not been adequately addressed.

3.    The second Appellant is also of Palestinian ethnicity although he  was
born in Kuwait where his family had moved but  they  were  forced  to  leave
Kuwait in the aftermath of the first Gulf War in 1991 and then  returned  to
and lived in  the  West  Bank  of  the  Occupied  Territories.   The  second
Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  February  2001  and  claimed
asylum on arrival.  Following an initial  interview,  the  submission  of  a
statement of additional  grounds  and  a  further  interview  at  which  his
passport issued by the Palestinian authority was produced,  his  application
was refused by the Secretary of State for the reasons contained in a  letter
dated 15 September 2003.  On 23 September 2003 the Secretary of  State  gave
notice of his intention to remove him also to 'the  West  Bank  (Palestine)'
following  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  after  refusal   of   his   asylum
application.  He too appealed against  that  decision  on  both  asylum  and
human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 10 December 2003 by
Ms Geraldine McLachlan, an Adjudicator.  She found that  the  Appellant  had
not been targeted for persecution because of his ethnicity or  his  religion
by the Israeli forces and that he had no political involvement in  the  West
Bank although she accepted that one of his brothers was involved in an anti-
Israeli political group there and was  proactive  in  violence  against  the
Israelis. But, the Israeli forces did not hold the  Appellant  in  detention
and nor had they subjected  other  members  of  the  Appellant's  family  to
questions about his brother's activities.  There had been  a  random  attack
by a Jewish settler some two and a half years prior  to  his  departure  but
the Adjudicator found this was not a matter  in  respect  of  which  he  had
sought protection either from the Palestinian  Authorities  or  the  Israeli
Authorities and it had played no part in his  decision  to  leave  the  West
Bank.  There was no evidence to support a claim that he would be of  adverse
interest to the Palestinian Authorities or any of the  political  groups  in
the West Bank if returned.  The Adjudicator found that he had  come  to  the
United Kingdom for economic betterment and had had no well-founded  fear  of
persecution.  She concluded that  he  could  be  returned  without  risk  of
persecution either at the point  of  entry  or  within  the  West  Bank  and
dismissed both his asylum and human rights claims.

4.    The second Appellant also sought permission to appeal to the  Tribunal
which was granted on the ground that the Adjudicator had not properly  dealt
with the issue of his safety at the point of return.  In  the  case  of  the
second Appellant, therefore, that is the only issue before us.

5.    The third Appellant was born in Gaza in the Occupied Territories on
14 July 1980.  He does not know where his mother is or the identity  of  his
father.  He was brought up there by Fatima Tissera  who  decided  to  go  to
Egypt when the Appellant was 13 years old and took him with her.  After  six
months or so she said she could no longer afford to support  him  and  since
then he  has  lived  variously  and  unlawfully  in  a  number  of  European
countries, doing odd jobs to support himself.  Some six months prior to  his
arrival in the United Kingdom illegally on 19 December 2000, he had gone  to
Spain to which he was returned on the same day.   The  Spanish  Authorities,
however, refused to accept him back and returned him to the  United  Kingdom
on 23 December 2000 when he applied for asylum.   After  two  interviews  in
January  and  June  2001,  that  application  was  finally  refused  by  the
Secretary of State for the reasons set out in  a  letter  dated  7  November
2003.  On 14 November 2003 the Secretary of State issued directions for  his
removal to 'Israel'.  He appealed against that decision on both  asylum  and
human rights grounds and his appeal was heard on 10 February 2004 by
Mr E A W Jones, an Adjudicator.  He accepted  the  Appellant's  history  but
found that he had no well-founded fear of persecution  or  of  treatment  in
breach of his protected human rights in Israel or, indeed, in Egypt,  Italy,
France or Spain in all of which countries he had lived for some  time.   The
Adjudicator found that the Appellant was a 'national of  Palestine  resident
in Israel' and  so  was  not  stateless.   He  dismissed  his  appeal.   The
Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the Tribunal by
Mr Waumsley.  The grant of permission was in the following terms:

            "The grounds on which the Claimant seeks  permission  to  appeal
      may be summarised as follows:

      (i)   as a stateless Palestinian, he would not be allowed to  re-enter
      Israel, the country of his former habitual residence;


       (ii) the Adjudicator erred in concluding that the  only  risks  which
      would face the Claimant on return to Israel are those associated  with
      a state of civil war;


       (iii)      the Adjudicator failed to give proper consideration to the
      expert evidence which was before him;


       (iv) the figures quoted by the Adjudicator at  paragraph  17  of  his
      determination for the number of Palestinians killed between  September
      2000 and June 2003, and for the number of Palestinians resident in the
      Occupied Territories are incorrect.


            With respect to  the  Adjudicator,  there  are  aspects  of  his
      determination which  give  rise  to  legitimate  concerns  as  to  the
      correctness of his conclusion.  In particular, in the  first  sentence
      at paragraph 16 of his determination, he has stated, 'I find  that  he
      [the Claimant] is a national of Palestine resident in Israel so is not
      stateless'.  In light of the fact that Palestine is not a  country  or
      territory recognised under international law,  and  is  therefore  not
      capable of conferring nationality, and  that  by  the  Claimant's  own
      account, he was resident prior to his departure in the Gaza  Strip  in
      the  Occupied  Territories,  not  in  the   State   of   Israel,   the
      Adjudicator's  conclusion  that  the  Claimant  is  not  stateless  is
      questionable, to put it at its lowest.


            In addition, it appears from the Adjudicator's comments set  out
      in paragraph 16 of the determination that  he  has  misunderstood  the
      effect of the decision of the House of Lords in Secretary of State for
      the Home Department v Adan [1998] Imm AR 338, [1998] INLR 325.


            In light  of  the  concerns  caused  by  these  aspects  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination, I am persuaded that this is a fit case in
      which to grant permission to appeal generally."

6.    Returning to the claim of the first Appellant, it was  his  case  that
in July 1999 he met and began a relationship with an Israeli girl  and  that
this placed him in difficulties with Fatah and his father.  In January  2000
when the Intifada was declared Fatah had called  upon  all  Palestinians  to
join in the uprising and a prominent member of Fatah named  Rashid  came  to
the Appellant's home and asked him to  join  the  Intifada.   The  Appellant
told him that he  had  no  political  affiliation  but  would  consider  the
request and there the matter rested until in April 2001 his father  informed
him that Fatah knew about his relationship with the  Israeli  girl  and  put
pressure on him to bring that relationship to an end.   The  Appellant  said
he did as his father requested.  Following the assassination of the  Israeli
Tourism Minister in October 2001  the  Israeli  Defence  Forces  raided  the
Appellant's family home looking for weapons,  but  found  none.   They  then
left.  Later that night Rashid came to the house and accused  the  Appellant
of causing the arrest of a Palestinian fighter and of  being  able  to  gain
entry with ease to the Israeli settlements to see his girlfriend.   He  told
the Appellant that he had managed to defer a decision by a senior member  of
Fatah to arrest him, again called  upon  him  to  prove  his  patriotism  by
joining the Intifada and said that he would return  in  a  few  days.   This
occurred, according to the chronology  produced,  on  24  October  2001  and
nothing further then ensued until 20 November  when  Rashid  again  returned
and accused the Appellant of being a traitor who  would  be  reported  as  a
collaborator because he was involved with an  Israeli  woman  and  had  been
seen entering an Israeli settlement without being stopped.  On  25  November
2001 his father told him that he would take his life rather  than  leave  it
to Fatah to do so and the Appellant left home and went to  the  house  of  a
friend by whom  arrangements  were  made  for  him  to  leave  the  Occupied
Territories for Jordan which he did  on  26  December  2001.   Although  the
chronology claims that the Appellant hid with his friend,  a  local  trader,
from 25 November until his departure that is  not  an  assertion  which  was
made either at interview or in either of the two  written  statements  filed
on behalf of the Appellant.

7.    The Adjudicator did not believe the first Appellant's  claims  and  he
gives his reasons for that conclusion at paragraph 4  of  his  Determination
in the following terms:

      "4.   I deal firstly with the credibility of his account.   I  do  not
      believe his evidence.  I set out my reasons below:

      (a)   The appellant claims that Rashid was a high standing  member  in
      Fatah and that he was the one exerting pressure on him to join.  It is
      his evidence that Rashid first approached him in January 2001 and then
      he approached him again  in  October  of  that  year.   On  these  two
      occasions he did not express a willingness  to  join.   He  says  that
      Rashid approached him again in October and then in November 2001.   On
      the latter occasion he accused him of being a traitor.   There  is  no
      reason that readily suggests itself from the appellant's  evidence  as
      to why a relatively senior figure in  Fatah,  as  Rashid  was,  should
      devote so much time for such a long  period  in  trying  to  coax  the
      appellant into joining Fatah.  The objective evidence,  in  particular
      the US Department of State  Report  shows  that  the  Intifada  was  a
      popular uprising amongst the youth.  It does not therefore seem likely
      that the appellant would have been the object of such a sustained  and
      patient effort at recruitment by senior persons  in  Fatah.   He  does
      make the suggestion in his interview that his matter was even  brought
      to the attention of persons of higher seniority than Rashid.  He  says
      that Rashid told him this.  On the evidence before me it is not  clear
      what qualities or background the appellant had that would have  caused
      Rashid to pursue the appellant with such single minded resolve.


      (b)   The appellant claims that at their last encounter Rashid  seemed
      to accuse him of having informed the Israelis about a Fatah combatant.
       He said he was accused of being a traitor.  He states  that  in  this
      regard it was pointed out to him that he  had  been  observed  passing
      checkpoints without apparent difficulty in the company of  an  Israeli
      girl.  On the face of it these were serious allegations being levelled
      at him.  It would seem unlikely therefore that if Rashid believed  him
      to be a traitor he would at that same encounter have still  sought  to
      persuade the appellant to join Fatah.  It is possible of  course  that
      Rashid was merely seeking to intimidate  the  appellant  and  that  in
      truth he had no basis to believe that he was a traitor.  That  however
      is not what the appellant  claims.   On  the  contrary  the  appellant
      claims that Rashid mentioned the appellant's liaison with the  Israeli
      girl in support of his view that the appellant  was  a  traitor.   The
      objective evidence speaks of the Palestinians inflicting serious  harm
      on those considered to  be  collaborators.   The  appellant's  account
      therefore is not consistent with what is known about how  Palestinians
      treat persons viewed as traitors to their cause.


      (c)   The objective context makes it unlikely that Rashid  would  have
      accused him of being a traitor and then sought to persuade him to join
      the Fatah.  There is no reason that the appellant suggests why  Rashid
      would have treated him with such leniency.  I do not therefore believe
      that Rashid told him that he had intervened on more than one  occasion
      to prevent his arrest.


      (d)   The appellant does not say that he decided  to  flee  after  the
      very serious threats made by Rashid.  Having regard to what  is  known
      about treatment meted out to persons  regarded  as  collaborators  the
      appellant  would  if  his  account  were  true,  have   taken   flight
      immediately after Rashid had left.  He does not say that he did.  What
      he does say is that he fled only after his father  told  him  that  he
      would rather kill him than allow the Fatah movement to do it.


      (e)   The appellant's evidence is that he had a committed relationship
      with the Israeli girl and that  it  seems  it  was  strong  enough  to
      withstand the strained relations between Arabs and  Jews.   He  states
      that he  has  not  maintained  contact  with  his  girlfriend.   I  am
      satisfied that if his evidence were  true  he  would  have  maintained
      contact with her because he has not offered a credible explanation why
      he is no longer in contact with her."


8.    Before us, Mr Tattersall relied on the grounds of  appeal  upon  which
he expanded in oral submissions.  These assert that  because  the  Secretary
of State was not represented before the Adjudicator and  because  there  was
no direct challenge to credibility in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter,  the
Adjudicator erred in law by failing to raise with the Appellant  the  issues
upon which he subsequently found his testimony not to be credible.  We  have
carefully considered all that Mr Tattersall said on behalf of the  Appellant
in this respect but an appeal will lie only if there is a material error  of
law on the part of the  Adjudicator  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
findings.
Mr Tattersall is clearly wrong in submitting that the  Reasons  for  Refusal
Letter does not challenge the credibility of the Appellant.  It does  so  in
clear terms at paragraphs 13 to 17 of the letter.  Paragraph  13  challenges
the likelihood that Fatah would seek to coerce an individual into its  ranks
by threatening them with prosecution for collaboration; paragraph 14  points
out that  collaboration  is  viewed  very  seriously  and  attracts  capital
punishment  from   the   Palestine   National   Authority   and   that   the
fundamentalist groups present in Palestine deal  viciously  with  those  who
have been denounced as collaborators; for those  reasons  the  Secretary  of
State did not believe the sequence of events  given  by  the  Appellant;  at
paragraph 16 he considered  the  claimed  threats  by  his  father  in  late
November to be irrational for someone who had  been  aware  of  the  claimed
relationship, which he  had  persuaded  the  Appellant  to  finish,  several
months before; further he did  not  accept  that  a  refusal  to  fight  for
Rashid's group would represent an  insult  in  the  eyes  of  a  father  who
himself had no connections to politics.  For those reasons the Secretary  of
State said he did not accept those  parts  of  the  Appellant's  account  as
credible and these matters go, of  course,  to  the  core  elements  of  the
Appellant's claim.

9.    Mr Tattersall also made the somewhat surprising  submission  that  the
proper course for the Adjudicator  to  follow  was  first  to  consider  the
Appellant's  case  against  the  objective  evidence  on  an  assumption  of
credibility but that he had wrongly considered  credibility  as  an  end  in
itself, had indulged in speculation in his reasoning and had failed to  give
the Appellant an opportunity to answer the points although it was also  part
of his case  that  those  issues  which  required  a  consideration  of  the
behaviour of Rashid would not have been capable of  being  answered  by  the
Appellant in any event.

10.   In arriving at his  conclusions  there  is  in  our  view  nothing  to
suggest that  this  experienced  Adjudicator  did  not  fully  consider  the
Appellant's claims on the totality of the evidence.  It is  clear  that  the
Adjudicator did consider the objective evidence as is apparent from what  is
said at the end of paragraph 4(b) of  the  Determination.   All  the  points
which the Adjudicator has  taken  are  obvious  ones  on  the  face  of  the
evidence.  We  do  not  consider  that  there  was  any  unfairness  to  the
Appellant and, indeed,
Mr Tattersall made it clear that when he represented  the  Appellant  before
the Adjudicator he had raised in  evidence-in-chief  the  issues  which  had
concerned the  Secretary  of  State  and  that  the  Adjudicator  had  asked
questions  to  clarify  points.   The  Adjudicator  is  entitled   to   draw
inferences from the body of the evidence before him  and  that  is,  in  our
view, what he has done in the present case.  Whilst it may be  that  another
Adjudicator would have come to different conclusions, that is not of  itself
sufficient to  support  the  assertion  that  the  Adjudicator  has  made  a
material error of law in his approach to the evidence.  We do  not  consider
that he has but that,  on  the  contrary,  he  has  reached  fully  reasoned
findings which were properly open to him on the evidence.  We bear  in  mind
the limitation on issues  which  can  now  be  taken  into  account  by  the
Tribunal as explained by the Court of Appeal in CA v SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
1165.  In our view there is no such material error of law as  would  entitle
the Tribunal to reopen the adverse credibility findings of the Adjudicator.

11.   The second issue which was common to all three Appellants was  whether
the Adjudicators had erred in their approach to risk on return at the  point
of entry.

12.   In the case of Massoud there was a letter of  10  December  2003  from
the  Country  Information  Officer  in  the  Immigration   and   Nationality
Directorate before the Adjudicator on the subject of return of  Palestinians
to the Palestinian Authority.  He had been asked  whether  it  was  possible
legitimately to return a resident of the  Palestinian  authority  controlled
areas without the need to cross an Israeli entry point and stated  that  the
Israelis control all access and egress points  for  these  areas  and  as  a
result would have control on all movements.  The writer  was  not  aware  of
any exception to that process.  Although this information was not  available
to Mr Devitte in the case of the first  Appellant,  it  nevertheless  had  a
bearing upon his reasoning in relation to this issue which is  contained  at
paragraph 7 of his Determination in the following terms:

            "I turn now to consider whether the practical difficulty related
      to the route through which he would be returned would  expose  him  to
      persecution.  The contention advanced by appellant's counsel  is  that
      the appellant would risk  persecution  if  he  were  returned  through
      Israel.  My attention was drawn  to  the  objective  evidence  on  the
      severe restrictions  of  movement  of  Palestinians  in  the  Occupied
      Territories.  It is claimed that this appellant would be suspected  of
      subversive activity and would be liable to interrogation were he to be
      returned.  It is a matter of some regret that apart  from  the  rather
      general observations in the US report there has not been placed before
      me any objective evidence that deals in specific terms with  the  risk
      that a person in appellant's position would face in seeking to  return
      through Israel.  My own research has not yielded much results.

            I do not consider it necessary to decide this point  because  it
      is my understanding that as a matter of practice the Home Office would
      not seek to return appellant thought Israel [obviously  an  error  for
      'through'] if that posed serious difficulties.  It would  seem  to  me
      that can return  [sic]  through  Jordan.   In  all  the  circumstances
      therefore I find that this appellant can safely  be  returned  to  the
      West Bank.  I am satisfied too that his return would not expose him to
      conditions that would breach Article three."

13.   In that appeal, as in that of the second  Appellant,  the  Adjudicator
did not have any assistance by way of representation from the  Secretary  of
State, a situation which is regrettably only too common.  Since it  was  the
Secretary  of  State  who  was  proposing  to  remove  the  Appellants   and
presumably knew how he intended to do so,  such  absence  of  representation
was particularly unfortunate.

14.   Nevertheless, we  are  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  did  make  a
material mistake of law in his approach to the question of risk  on  return.
His attention had been directed to the question  of  whether  a  risk  would
ensue  if  the  first  Appellant  were  returned  through  Israel  but   the
Adjudicator concluded it was not necessary to decide that point  because  he
believed that a return could be effected  through  Jordan  directly  to  the
West Bank and, although he did not say so in terms, obviously in the  belief
that there would then be no point at which the  Appellant  would  come  into
contact with the Israeli Authorities.  As we know from the Respondent's  own
evidence in the case of the second Appellant, that  is  an  error  of  fact.
The material error of law on the part of the Adjudicator is that  there  was
no evidential basis before him to which he refers  to  support  the  finding
that he made in relation to return through Jordan and  for  that  reason  we
are satisfied that his findings in  this  respect  are  unsustainable  as  a
matter of law.

15.   As we have noted, a similar issue was raised before  Ms  McLachlan  on
behalf of the second Appellant and she deals  with  it  in  these  terms  at
paragraph 17 of her Determination:

            "I have considered carefully what real  risk  is  faced  by  the
      appellant by his return  to  the  West  Bank.   The  letter  from  the
      Respondent dated 10/12/03 makes it plain that the Israelis control all
      entry and exit points into Palestinian-controlled areas.  Thus, it  is
      argued, the appellant may  be  detained  and  ill-treated  by  Israeli
      security forces when subjecting him to interrogation upon his  return.
      It is argued that he does not have a valid  passport.   In  fact,  the
      appellant has indicated that he does have a Palestinian  passport  but
      he left it at home with his family when he  departed  for  the  United
      Kingdom.  The respondent habitually undertakes to ensure the return of
      failed asylum seekers in a safe manner.  The Israeli Authorities would
      be well aware of the adverse  economic  impact  upon  the  Palestinian
      population and the recent restrictions on their freedom  to  move  and
      work and in any event there are many millions of Palestinian  refugees
      throughout the Middle East.  Economic migration is  common  throughout
      the region and elsewhere.  I have found that this appellant is  of  no
      adverse interest to the Israeli Authorities  and  I  do  not  consider
      there is a real risk of him suffering detention and  ill-treatment  at
      the hands of the Israeli Authorities upon his return.  I conclude that
      the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a  breach  of  the  law  or  the
      obligations of the United Kingdom under the European Convention."

16.   It was Mr Middleton's submission that the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
law in that  reasoning.   A  copy  of  the  Appellant's  passport  had  been
produced to the Secretary of State and on the face of it it expired on
23 November 2002 almost a year prior to the hearing before the  Adjudicator.
 He did not therefore have a current valid  passport  whether  in  the  West
Bank or in the United Kingdom.  There was a  wealth  of  objective  evidence
before the Adjudicator that at checkpoints there was a  real  risk  of  ill-
treatment so that to that extent the  Adjudicator  had  failed  properly  to
assess the objective evidence  before  her  on  the  issue  of  the  general
treatment of Palestinians at checkpoints manned by the Israeli  Authorities.
 Finally, and most importantly, the  Adjudicator  appeared  to  have  relied
upon the fact that the Respondent would not return the Appellant  unless  it
could be done safely and made reference to  habitual  undertakings  in  that
respect.  There was,  however,  no  evidence  before  her  to  support  that
finding and, indeed,  no  Presenting  Officer  before  her  who  could  have
enlightened her as to whether such an undertaking was given in the  case  of
the second Appellant.  Mr Middleton made the submission that  there  was  no
evidential basis upon which the second Appellant  could  show  that  he  had
left the Occupied Territories lawfully and that the  Adjudicator's  approach
was  fundamentally  flawed  by  placing  reliance  on  the  ability  of  the
Secretary of State to ensure a return "in a safe manner."  Her  findings  in
this respect were speculative and not  based  upon  the  objective  evidence
before her.

17.   We are similarly satisfied that the approach  of  the  Adjudicator  in
the  Determination  of  the  second  Appellant's  appeal  was  fundamentally
misconceived  for  all  those  reasons  and  that  her  reliance  upon   her
understanding of undertakings available from the Secretary of  State  as  to
safe return had no evidential basis whatsoever to  support  it.   The  issue
before her was to enquire whether, on the totality of the evidence,  such  a
safe return could be effected and she  had  failed  to  provide  a  properly
reasoned decision on  that  vital  issue.   As  a  matter  of  law  we  were
therefore satisfied also that in  the  case  of  the  second  Appellant  the
Adjudicator's decision on this point was unsustainable.

18.   The first and second Appellants therefore succeeded before us  to  the
extent of raising an arguable issue for the  Tribunal  to  consider  on  the
basis of the current objective  evidence.   For  that  reason  it  would  be
appropriate for us to take into account the report of  Mr  Joffe  now  filed
and served on behalf of the second Appellant and it was incumbent  upon  the
Secretary of State to provide further evidence as to the  method  of  return
to be employed so that consideration could be given to the issue of risk  on
return.  Mr Parker had made  certain  statements  to  us  on  the  basis  of
instructions which he had sought  during  a  short  adjournment  which  were
pertinent to this issue but which could  not,  of  course,  be  received  as
evidence by us on the first day of the hearing.

19.   For these reasons we adjourned the appeals of  the  first  and  second
Appellants part heard to a date to be fixed in order  to  give  all  parties
the opportunity to file and serve relevant evidence upon which  they  relied
as to risk on  return  and  issued  directions  to  enable  the  appeals  to
proceed.

20.   As we heard no evidence or submissions on the  substantive  issue  but
simply on the preliminary issue of whether there was  a  material  error  of
law on the part of the Adjudicators enabling  us  to  consider  the  appeals
further, it was agreed by all parties that if, for operational  reasons,  it
proved impossible to reconvene a panel including Mr  McDonald,  there  would
be no objection to the hearing proceeding before the Chairman and
Mr Waumsley at the adjourned hearing.

21.   As we have noted at  paragraph  1  above,  the  appeal  of  the  third
Appellant had been adjourned to enable it to be listed for  hearing  jointly
with the appeals of  the  first  and  second  Appellants  at  the  adjourned
hearing which was subsequently fixed for 15 November  when  the  hearing  of
all three appeals proceeded before the Chairman and Mr  Waumsley  only.   We
had previously granted leave to the third Appellant to  call  Dr  Tamimi  to
give oral evidence and it was agreed by consent that his evidence should  be
taken into account so  far  as  appropriate  in  our  consideration  of  the
appeals of the first and second Appellants also.  In those  appeals  we  had
issued directions at the end  of  the  first  day's  hearing  requiring  the
Secretary of State to file and serve a statement as to the method of  return
to the West Bank in  the  Occupied  Territories  which  he  adopts  and  any
further evidence relied upon as to the provision  of  travel  documents  for
failed asylum seekers otherwise  without  current  valid  travel  documents.
Without prejudice to the generality  of  that  direction,  we  required  the
Secretary of State also to deal with the following matters so far as  within
his knowledge, namely:

      (a)   the numbers of returns which have been effected whether  by  the
      Respondent or other countries and the result of such returns so far as
      is known with particulars of  any  evidential  sources  for  providing
      information as to post-return events;


      (b)   whether it is accepted (as per the evidence of Mr Joffe) that in
      addition to any documents from  the  Palestine  Authority  an  Israeli
      transit visa  permitting  re-entry  to  the  Occupied  Territories  is
      required and whether routinely available as part of the return  travel
      documents;


      (c)    whether,  and  if  so,  how  many   applications   for   travel
      documentation are granted and how many rejected.


22.   The first and second Appellants were then  given  leave  to  file  and
serve any additional evidence in rebuttal upon  which  they  would  seek  to
rely at the adjourned hearing.

23.   There has been a very limited compliance with those directions on  the
part of the Secretary of State.  He has filed the witness statements of
Clare Heaney and Neil Pole who  are  both  described  as  Chief  Immigration
Officers, the former at  the  Immigration  Service  Document  Unit  and  the
latter at the Immigration Service Removals Strategy and  Coordination  Unit.

Ms Heaney states that  the  first  unit  was  established  in  1998  and  is
responsible for assisting operational  Immigration  Officers  in  organising
and facilitating provision of travel documents to enable  removal  of  those
who have no lawful basis for remaining in the United Kingdom but who do  not
hold valid travel documents.  It  has  the  responsibility  for  negotiating
with foreign embassies and High Commissions in  order  to  establish  agreed
procedures for obtaining travel documents  and  for  liaison  with  consular
officials in order to resolve  individual  documentation  cases.   She  says
this in relation to the position of Palestinians:

            "The re-documentation procedures in respect of Palestinians  are
      as follows.  In the case of persons who  previously  held  Palestinian
      Authority Travel Documents, issued for residents of Gaza and  Jericho,
      the individual is requested to attend the Palestine General  Delegates
      Office in London in person  to  apply  for  a  document  and  for  any
      relevant documents to be verified.  The individual applicant must then
      send these documents to a family member in Palestine for production at
      the Ministry of the Interior, after which an Emergency Travel Document
      may be issued by the  Palestinian  Authority.   The  Emergency  Travel
      Document will then be sent to the authority's office in the  UK.   The
      Palestine General Delegates Office  in  London  is  unable  to  accept
      applications other than those made by the individuals themselves."


      Mr Pole's statement says that the  Central  Booking  Unit  within  the
Immigration Service is  responsible  for  the  procurement  of  tickets  for
public  expense  removals  and  for  liaison  with   the   Immigration   and
Nationality Departments' contracted travel  managers.   He  confirms,  after
checking with those travel managers, that there are no  direct  or  indirect
air routes available into the Gaza or the West Bank territories.

24.   It is immediately apparent that the evidence filed fails  in  any  way
to deal with the specific points to which the attention of the Secretary  of
State was directed by  the  Tribunal.   There  is,  therefore,  no  evidence
before us that anyone has ever been successfully removed to any part of  the
Occupied  Territories  or  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  seek  the
procurement of any Emergency Travel Documents other than such  as  might  be
issued via the Palestine General Delegates Office in London as described  in
the filed statement of Ms Heaney.  The absence of any  reference  to  how  a
return through Israeli checkpoints is effected  is  particularly  surprising
having regard to the contents of the letter of 10  December  2003  from  the
Country Information Officer in the Immigration and  Nationality  Directorate
to which we have referred at paragraph 12 above.

25.   The expert report  on  Palestine  which  had  been  filed  before  the
Adjudicator from a Dr Tamimi in the case of the third  Appellant  says  that
the suggestion that any Palestinian asylum seeker may be returned to  Israel
or to the Occupied Territories is indicative of ignorance of the  nature  of
Israel which does not welcome  any  Palestinian  back.   He  says  that  the
policy of Israel has always been to  endeavour  to  remove  as  many  ethnic
Palestinians as possible rather than to allow any of them to return  and  it
is unthinkable that, even in the case of  an  official  application,  Israel
would agree to allow  the  third  Appellant  to  return.   To  do  so  would
constitute a very dangerous precedent from the point of  view  of  political
Zionism which underpins the entire Jewish State.  He says  that  inhabitants
of the Gaza Strip fall into three categories: firstly, Jewish  settlers  who
live in Jewish settlements built there  since  the  Gaza  Strip  came  under
Israeli control in 1967; secondly,  Palestinians  who  sought  refuge  there
after the establishment of  the  State  of  Israel  in  1948  and  who  were
accommodated in UNRWA-sponsored refugee camps who comprise some 80%  of  the
Gaza Strip's Arab population; and thirdly, Palestinians  who  already  lived
in Gaza when Israel was formed and  who  make  up  the  original  indigenous
population of the Gaza Strip.  It would make no difference  to  the  ability
of  the  third  Appellant  to  be  readmitted  through  Israeli  checkpoints
whichever of the last  two  categories  he  comes  from.   Even  the  United
Nations has no power to  intervene  and  to  force  the  Israelis  to  allow
Palestinians back to the territories which Israel occupied in  1967  and  Dr
Tamimi knows of no case where  this  has  happened.   It  appears  that  the
Adjudicator accepted this part of Dr Tamimi's evidence because  he  says  at
paragraph 16 of his determination that it is clear from that  evidence  that
"there is virtually no risk [to the third  Appellant]  because  Israel  will
not accept him".

26.   At the hearing before us Dr Tamimi gave oral evidence and adopted  his
earlier report.  He said that the Israeli Authorities  would  usually  allow
anyone who could prove that he was a Jew to enter Israel under  the  Law  of
Return but that anyone else would  have  to  have  valid  travel  documents,
including a visa from an Israeli embassy if they were  coming  from  abroad,
in order to pass through the Israeli checkpoints and gain admission  to  the
Occupied Territories.  It remained the case that he  did  not  know  of  any
ethnic  Palestinian  who  had  been  forcibly  returned  to   the   Occupied
Territories.  For those Palestinians who were lawful residents of  any  part
of the  Occupied  Territories  it  was  possible  to  travel  out  of  those
territories  into  Israel  or  other  countries  provided  that  the  person
concerned held an Israeli ID card authorising such travel,  but  even  those
with such Israeli documentation still ran the risk of being detained at  the
border control points.  Palestinian documents of themselves would not  allow
anyone to pass through those checkpoints.  It was, however, highly  unlikely
that anyone being returned via Jordan without the  relevant  Israeli  travel
documentation would  get  as  far  as  the  checkpoints  because  there  was
cooperation in this respect between the Jordanian  and  Israeli  Authorities
and such a person  would  be  turned  back  by  the  Jordanian  Authorities.
Whilst documents issued by the Palestinian  Authority  might  be  valid  for
travel to other parts of the world, they would not of  themselves  permit  a
return to the Occupied Territories or to Israel itself.   The  detention  of
Palestinians by the Israelis at checkpoints could be either formal,  in  the
case of those suspected of  having  committed  anti-Israeli  acts  or  being
associated with those who had done so which would result in prosecution  and
trial, but the majority of detentions  were  administrative  in  nature,  in
respect of which no reason need be given and the person  detained  could  be
held for a period of up to six months renewable  indefinitely.   There  were
at  least  5,000  administrative  detainees  currently   and   the   Israeli
Authorities were suspicious  that  any  Palestinian  might  be  a  potential
terrorist.

27.   The situation had become  more  tense  in  the  course  of  the  year.
Whilst  in  the  past  there  had  been  times  when  passage  through   the
checkpoints followed a more regular  pattern  currently  that  was  not  the
case, and it was unpredictable when and where Palestinians would be  stopped
and searched  by  the  Israeli  Authorities.   Palestinians  returning  from
abroad would be interrogated because in  the  current  tension  the  Israeli
Authorities would wish to have clear information on all returnees and  those
with whom they may have been associated even where they  had  valid  Israeli
documentation.  Dr Tamimi said that he  had  been  involved  in  Palestinian
affairs  since  1992  and  wrote  a  monthly  article  for   a   Palestinian
international publication.  He had been born in Hebron in Palestine in  1955
and had not himself been in the Occupied Territories since 1972.   He  based
his views on information available from  public  sources  including  Amnesty
International and Palestinian human rights organisations.  He was  currently
Director of the Islamic Political Thought in London, a position he had  held
since July 1998, and a senior  lecturer  at  the  Mark  Field  Institute  of
Higher Education in Leicester since September  2000.   He  had  published  a
number of books and papers on Islam and the  Middle  East,  including  those
with specific reference to the situation in the countries  in  which  ethnic
Palestinians had substantial enclaves of refugees.

28.   On behalf of the second Appellant a report by Mr Joffe  of  25  August
2004, and a subsequent letter of 27 October 2004  directed  particularly  to
the issues raised in the directions which we had given, had been filed.   In
his original report he, too, made the same point  as  to  the  necessity  of
proper documentation in order to enter the Occupied Territories.   He  deals
with it in this way:

      "Return to the Territories is possible only if  the  person  concerned
      has a valid travel document from the Palestinian authority and returns
      within three years if he or she left to cross  the  land  boundary  to
      Jordan or Egypt or returns within six months via Ben  Gurion  airport.
      Return can only be effected if the path of return exactly mirrors  the
      path of departure, although a concession in 1996 allowed return by any
      border crossing (Ben Gurion airport, the Allenby Bridge or  Rafah)  if
      the person concerned had left from Ben Gurion  airport.   Even  though
      the normal conditions governing return  were  supposed  to  have  been
      suspended after the Oslo Accords [in 1991] they are still in force and
      the Israeli Authorities will not allow access to anybody who  has  any
      illicit passport or no travel documents.   Of  course,  a  Palestinian
      normally resident in the West Bank or the Gaza Strip but without valid
      travel documents could, in theory, obtain such  documents  -  in  this
      case a  Palestinian  passport  -  from  a  Palestinian  representation
      abroad, provided he could demonstrate his place  of  normal  residence
      was part of the Occupied Territories.  However, he would still need to
      acquire an Israeli Transit Visa and would  therefore  always  run  the
      risk of detention by the Israeli  border  authorities,  if  they  were
      suspicious of him in any way".


28.   A little later in his report he said  this  of  the  position  of  the
second Appellant:

            "Mr Massood, I suspect, will be unable to obtain access  to  the
      Occupied  Territories  and  he  probably  does  not  have   to   [sic]
      appropriate  documentation  -  evidence  of   residency   and   travel
      documents, together with the necessary visas or proof of departure.  I
      do not know if he is here with dependants who would also  return  with
      him.  If he does, then each of them must have  evidence  of  residence
      separately, as well as travel documentation.  Otherwise they  will  be
      treated as a case of family reunion.  The Israeli  Government  has  an
      absolute right over family reunion which it exercises  very  sparingly
      and only in connection with recognised categories of people,  such  as
      members of the Palestinian security force and administration.  It  can
      take up to eight months for an application to  be  processed  and,  in
      recent years,  few  such  permits  have  been  issued  (United  States
      Department of State, Israel and the Occupied Territories Human  Rights
      Report 2002, Washington, March 2003)."

 He concluded on this issue that because of his prolonged absence  from  the
Occupied Territories, the Israel  Authorities  were  likely  to  refuse  the
second Appellant transit rights to the Palestinian territories  were  he  to
be deported.


29.   In his letter of 27 October 2004 he refer to the statements  filed  on
the part of the Respondent which he categorises,  with  some  justification,
as  being  "singularly  uninformative",  making  the  point   that   nothing
contained in them bears on the issue of Israeli Transit Visas where  he  had
already made his view clear.  He points out that there can be no doubt  that
the Home Office would be aware if any Palestinians  had  been  removed  from
Britain to the Occupied Territories since it  reports  on  the  numbers  and
nationalities of removed asylum seekers in the quarterly  asylum  statistics
which it publishes.  He notes that in  the  latest  issue  relating  to  the
second quarter of 2004, a total of 985 "Middle Easterners" were  removed  in
the preceding twelve months broken down into Iranians,  Iraqis  and  "Middle
East other".  In the latter category there were 125 returns only and if  any
of those returns had been to  the  Occupied  Territories  he  could  see  no
reason why such information should not have been provided  as  requested  in
the directions issued by us.  He concluded that "If no  figures  are  cited,
then it is reasonable to assume that no Palestinians had been  deported  for
there would be no interest for the Home Office in concealing such  figures".
 He had considered statistics available from other countries but  there  was
no information as to successful returns to the Occupied Territories so  that
he regarded the question of actual return as remaining shrouded  in  mystery
save for the fact that in September 2004 the Australian  Federal  Court  had
to make a decision on the future of a  Palestinian  asylum  seeker  who  had
been refused asylum.   According  to  a  comment  published  in  the  Sydney
Morning Herald of 16 September 2004  the  Australian  Government  could  not
remove him back to the Occupied Territories from which he had  come  because
of Israeli refusal to collaborate so that the court decided  that  he  would
have to remain in detention indefinitely.  This  reinforced  his  view  that
such a removal was currently simply not possible.

30.   The most detailed country report is  that  of  the  US  Department  of
State and the 2003 Report published on 25 February 2004 was filed on  behalf
of the Respondent.   This  confirm  that  Israel  required  Palestinians  to
obtain Israeli permits for themselves and their vehicles to cross  from  the
West Bank or Gaza into Israel and Jerusalem with  partial  external  closure
or enhanced restrictions on the  movement  of  persons  and  products  being
applied often for lengthy periods on the basis of security  concerns  which,
at times of violent protest, could become total external  closure.   In  the
more detailed section dealing with freedom of movement within  the  Occupied
Territories, foreign travel, immigration and repatriation, the Report  makes
it clear that close monitoring is carried out  by  the  Israeli  Authorities
who control all points of entry, and it is in our view  implicit  from  what
is said  in  this  section  that  movement  without  the  requisite  Israeli
identification documents either into or  out  of  the  Occupied  Territories
whether to Israel or foreign countries is not possible.  In  particular  the
report records that  in  December  2003  three  Palestinians  deported  from
abroad to the West Bank and Gaza were denied entry  at  the  Allenby  Bridge
border crossing and were  returned  to  the  deporting  country  where  they
currently reside as stateless persons.

31.   The objective evidence therefore supports what has been said  both  by
Dr Tamimi and Mr Joffe and there is no evidence before us that  any  of  the
three Appellants are capable of  successful  removal  to  any  part  of  the
Occupied Territories or Israel.  We have no  reason  to  doubt  Dr  Tamimi's
specific evidence that without relevant Israeli issued  documents  any  such
returnee via Jordan would be prevented from onward travel by  the  Jordanian
Authorities.

32.   We have therefore come to  the  conclusion  on  the  totality  of  the
evidence before us that there is no reasonable likelihood that  any  of  the
Appellants would reach the Israeli  checkpoints  through  which  they  would
have to pass in order for the  removal  directions  made  to  be  effective.
This is important in the context of the proposed  removals  because  it  has
been the submission of Counsel for the Appellants that, notwithstanding  the
fact that none  of  the  Appellants  have  any  profile  arising  from  past
activities in the Occupied Territories which would be reasonably  likely  to
make  them  wanted  by  the  Israeli  Authorities  to  whom  they  would  be
effectively presented at such border checkpoints if forcibly  returned,  the
general evidence as to the  treatment  of  Palestinians  from  the  Occupied
Territories was such that there was a real risk that they would  be  subject
to arbitrary detention and ill-treatment by the  Israeli  Authorities.  This
would mean, therefore, that no ethnic Palestinian could be  safely  returned
to the Occupied Territories.  Whilst we accept  that  it  is  arguable  that
someone with a known anti-Israel profile by reason of past actions might  be
at risk of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment at an  Israeli  checkpoint,
the general evidence does not, in our judgment, justify the conclusion  that
all ethnic Palestinians from the Occupied Territories are at  such  a  risk.
There is nothing in the backgrounds of any of the  Appellants  as  found  by
the Adjudicators which would lead to such a real risk so  that,  considering
the hypothetical question of whether any of them are currently  at  risk  in
their former home areas, we are satisfied  that  there  is  no  evidence  to
support such a finding.

33.   We accept that  each  of  the  Appellants  is  stateless  but  on  the
totality of the evidence they do not, as  we  have  said,  satisfy  us  that
there is a real risk to them either should they in the course of any  return
be placed in a position where they are under  the  control  of  the  Israeli
Authorities.  This was, of course, an issue which we were bound to  consider
by reason of the obligations of the United Kingdom under Article 33  of  the
Refugee Convention which provides that no contracting state shall  expel  or
return ('refouler') a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the  frontiers  of
territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of  his
race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social  group,  or
political opinion.  Given that if there were any prospect  of  a  successful
return it would inevitably follow that each Appellant  would  be  placed  in
the control of the  Israeli  Authorities  at  the  point  of  entry  to  the
Occupied Territories, there was a properly  arguably  issue  as  to  whether
this of itself would expose any of them to the real risk of  persecution  or
a breach of their protected human rights. The objective  evidence,  however,
simply does not support such a proposition. The only  relevant  evidence  is
that the Israeli security forces will not allow  ethnic  Palestinians  being
forcibly returned from abroad to re-enter the Occupied Territories.

34.   Our conclusions as to the lack of  real  risk  to  the  generality  of
Palestinians from the Occupied Territories with no profile  likely  to  lead
to their being of current adverse interest to the  Israeli  Authorities  is,
of course, wholly in line with the views of the Tribunal as expressed in  BA
[Perceived bias - Israel - Gaza) Israel [2004] UKIAT 00118.

35.    The  mere  fact  of  being  stateless,  whilst  we  acknowledge   the
difficulties which it poses for each of the  Appellants,  cannot  of  itself
amount to persecution or a breach of their human rights because there is  no
country which is excluding them from a nationality to which  they  would  be
otherwise  entitled.   There  is  no  state  of  Palestine  to  offer   them
citizenship and neither is there any international obligation on  the  State
of Israel,  who  retain  a  large  measure  of  control  over  the  Occupied
Territories, to offer them citizenship.  On the evidence before us there  is
no realistic prospect that any of them can be returned to any  part  of  the
Occupied Territories so that there is no realistic prospect on the basis  of
the current removal directions that they can  be  removed  from  the  United
Kingdom.  It is clearly highly unsatisfactory that  in  those  circumstances
they should be deprived of any status in this country and the  Secretary  of
State will no doubt wish to consider how they  should  now  be  dealt  with,
taking into account our obligations under the European Convention  on  Human
Rights.

36.   For the above reasons it nevertheless follows that the appeal of  each
Appellant must be dismissed because each has failed to discharge the  burden
on him to demonstrate such a real risk.







                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT






