

                          AG (Turkey - CA - fresh evidence) [2005] UKIAT
                                    00014
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  23 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           24th January 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                      Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dutton of O'Keeffe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Ms C  M
     Bell, promulgated on 6 August 2004.  The Appellant was born on 1 March
     1948 and arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2002.   Her  asylum
     claim, based on an alleged fear of persecution by Turkish  authorities
     as an Alevi Kurd, was refused in March 2004.

  2. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was illiterate, had a  bad
     memory, was poor with dates, inarticulate and vague.  She concluded in
     relation to the asylum claim as follows:

           "I accept therefore that the appellant is  an  ethnic  Kurd  who
           faced harassment and threats and intimidation whilst  living  in
           her Kurdish village from 1990 to 2000, form both the PKK and the
           gendarme.  I do not  accept  that  this  treatment  amounted  to
           persecution.  The appellant then moved  to  Istanbul  where  she
           felt  discriminated  against  and  was   briefly   detained   in
           connection with the whereabouts of one of  her  sons.   She  was
           verbally abused and slapped.  Although I accept she was  treated
           badly, I do  not  accept  that  the  treatment  she  experienced
           amounts to persecution.  She was released  as  it  was  accepted
           that she did not know  where  her  son  was.   She  left  Turkey
           because she wanted to be with her children  in  the  UK  and  to
           avoid the harassment and discrimination she was  facing.   I  do
           not accept that  the  appellant  has  experienced  treatment  in
           Turkey which crosses the high threshold required  to  constitute
           persecuted or ill-treatment in breach of Article 3."

  3. The Adjudicator concluded that there was no real risk to the Appellant
     on her return to Turkey and no issue has been raised  in  this  appeal
     about the Adjudicator's treatment of the asylum  claim.   This  appeal
     relates to the Adjudicator's conclusions on Article 8.

  4. The Appellant had said that in 1990 her husband had left her  and  had
     come to the United Kingdom.  He had divorced her  and  remarried.   He
     was now in the process of divorcing that second wife and  intended  to
     remarry the Appellant.  She had three sons in the United Kingdom and a
     daughter in Germany.  The Adjudicator found:

           "42.  The appellant claims to live with her former  husband  and
                 three children.  She is not legally married to her  husband
                 but states that they have reunited and intend  to  remarry.
                 Her children are all adults.  The appellant has been in the
                 UK since December 2002 and had not  previously  lived  with
                 her husband  since  1990.   She  had  not  lived  with  her
                 children since they too left Turkey  at  various  different
                 unspecified times.

           43.   I find it reasonably likely that the appellant  is  living
                 with her former husband and three adult children in the  UK
                 and accept that a form of family life exists.

           44.   When  considering  whether  the  decision  to  remove  the
                 appellant would constitute an interference with this family
                 life I note that  there  is  no  evidence  as  to  why  the
                 appellant's former husband and children  could  not  return
                 with her to Turkey if they so wished.  There is no evidence
                 that any of them have been recognised as refugees  or  even
                 that they have the right to remain in  the  UK.   Therefore
                 the appellant has not demonstrated that the decision  would
                 interfere with her family life."




  4. The Adjudicator considered that the return of the Appellant to Turkey
     would be a reasonably proportionate decision, saying:




           "... It is relevant that the appellant is aware that her  former
           husband's status in the UK is precarious as he  is  said  to  be
           awaiting a 'final determination'.  The appellant's  family  life
           is with her former husband, from whom she lived  separately  for
           many years, and her adult children, and there is no evidence  of
           any exceptional dependence between the appellant and  her  adult
           children over and above the normal ties between  adult  children
           and their parent.  If the family bonds are close enough for them
           to  wish  to  stay  together  there  is  no  evidence   of   any
           insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  family  life   continuing
           overseas."




  5. Removal was not outside the range of reasonable responses.



  6. There was very little in the grounds of appeal  which  related  to  an
     error of law in this determination on the material placed  before  the
     Adjudicator.  Almost all of the grounds related to the effect  of  new
     evidence, which itself almost entirely  related  to  the  position  of
     various  family  members  as  at  the  time   of   the   Adjudicator's
     determination.  The case of CA v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  1165  makes  it
     clear that before any such evidence could  possibly  be  examined  the
     Appellant had first to establish that there was indeed an error of law
     in the Adjudicator's determination.  That case dealt with  the  effect
     of sections 101 and 102 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
     2002 for Adjudicator determinations after 9 June 2003.   It  is  quite
     clear that under this new regime there is a real  change  required  in
     the way in which new evidence is considered.



  7. Even up-to-date evidence of personal or country circumstances  changed
     after the date of the Adjudicator's determination  is  not  admissible
     unless a "material" error of law has been found in  the  Adjudicator's
     determination.  By "material" we take it  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
     means that, at the stage of substantive consideration of  the  appeal,
     the error must be one which would  cause  the  appeal  to  be  allowed
     either to the extent of a remittal or through a complete  reversal  of
     the Adjudicator's decision.  Only once the conclusion has been reached
     that such an error of law has been made can  evidence  which  was  not
     before the Adjudicator, even of up-to-date circumstances, personal  or
     country, be examined to see whether the appeal should still be allowed
     either in whole, or in part to the extent of a remittal.  The grant of
     permission to appeal to the Tribunal does not itself suffice  to  make
     such evidence admissible.



  8. It is important in the light of that  very  clear  decision  that  the
     Tribunal point out that what it said obiter in  MA*  (Fresh  Evidence)
     [2004] UKIAT 00161 in paragraphs 21 to 23  is  wrong  in  relation  to
     evidence of up-to-date circumstances  under  the  2002  Act.   We  had
     wrongly seen the combination of sections 101 and 102(2) as giving rise
     to an issue of construction as to when evidence of  subsequent  events
     could be admitted, to be resolved pragmatically in the context of  the
     well-known approach in Ravichandran v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 97.



  9. Of course the restrictions on fresh evidence referred to in CA do  not
     apply where the fresh evidence itself is necessary  to  establish  the
     error of law.  There may  be  evidence  which  relates  to  procedural
     unfairness or which sets out the material or  argument  which  was  in
     fact placed before the Adjudicator, or which evidences the unusual but
     now recognised class of error of law which is an error of fact; see  E
     v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.



 10. Mr Dutton submitted that there was an error of law in paragraph 45  of
     the determination in the Adjudicator's conclusion that  there  was  no
     evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  of  dependency  between  the
     Appellant  and  her  adult  children.   He  said   there   were   such
     circumstances:  the Appellant's age, which led Mr Dutton  to  describe
     her as "very elderly", her illiteracy and the fact that  one  daughter
     was in Germany and she did not know where one son was.  This all  made
     her the more dependent on the two of her sons who were in  the  United
     Kingdom and unmarried.



 11. We reject this entirely.  The Adjudicator knew well that the Appellant
     was 56 and not "very elderly", illiterate and knew of the location  of
     the children, at least as described by the Appellant in paragraph  43.
     (The Adjudicator there says that the  Appellant  is  living  with  her
     former husband and three adult children in the United Kingdom, as  the
     Appellant had claimed.)  The Adjudicator considered those  factors  in
     the context of family life.  Mr Dutton conceded that it would only  be
     exceptionally that family life could  be  found  to  exist  between  a
     parent and adult  children.   He  also  accepted  that  there  was  no
     evidence before the Adjudicator that  the  adult  children  could  not
     return to Turkey.  The issue of dependency, he accepted, had not  been
     explored "in  significant  detail",  to  use  his  words,  before  the
     Adjudicator.   In  fact  the  determination  did  not  refer  to   any
     submission that some exceptional dependency should be found  to  exist
     because of the factors relied on by Mr Dutton.  There is no suggestion
     that the record or evidence of submissions is inaccurate and there  is
     nothing to suggest that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  deal  with  any
     submission about dependency that had actually been made to her.



 12. We do not consider that the factors relied on could possibly show that
     the Adjudicator had erred in law in her  conclusions  in  relation  to
     family life and the proportionality of return.  This  is  particularly
     so in the light of her correct conclusion in paragraph 44  that  there
     was no evidence that any of them had been recognised  as  refugees  or
     had any right to remain in the United Kingdom.



 13. The only possible error of law in the Adjudicator's determination, and
     it is not one upon which we express any concluded view, is  one  which
     favoured the Appellant.  It may well  be  that  when  considering  the
     factual ingredients  of  family  life  for  Article  8  purposes,  the
     standard of proof is not one of reasonable likelihood but a balance of
     probabilities.



 14. However, even if there had been an error of law, as  contended  by  Mr
     Dutton, it  would  not  follow  that  any  new  evidence  then  became
     admissible.  It would still be necessary to show that that  error  had
     had a material effect on the decision in the  way  in  which  we  have
     described.  However, if that position had been reached,  it  would  be
     still wrong to suppose that new evidence is then automatically  to  be
     admitted  without  regard  to  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles,  as
     summarised in paragraph 23 (ii) of E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.



           "New evidence will normally be admitted only in accordance  with
           'Ladd v Marshall principles' (see Ladd v Marshall [1954]  1  WLR
           1489), applied with some additional flexibility  under  the  CPR
           (see Hertfordshire Investments Ltd v Bubb  [2000]  1  WLR  2318,
           2325; White Book para 52.11.2). The Ladd v  Marshall  principles
           are, in summary: first, that the fresh evidence could  not  have
           been obtained with reasonable diligence for use  at  the  trial;
           secondly, that if given, it probably would have had an important
           influence on the result; and, thirdly,  that  it  is  apparently
           credible although not necessarily incontrovertible. As a general
           rule, the fact that the failure to adduce the evidence was  that
           of the party's legal advisers provides no excuse: see Al-Mehdawi
           v Home Secretary [1990] 1AC 876."



 15. We have not overlooked that E was decided under the 1999 Act  and  not
     under the 2002 Act, but we can see no reason why the  mere  fact  that
     the gateway to the admission of new evidence has  been  passed,  means
     that any new evidence should therefore and on that  account  alone  be
     admitted.  Passing  the  gateway  under  the  1999  Act  ie  obtaining
     permission to appeal, still required the new evidence to  satisfy  the
     Ladd v Marshall tests.  The same approach should apply under the  2002
     Act once the stage  has  been  reached  where  it  is  permissible  to
     consider whether  new  evidence  should  be  admitted.   This  is  the
     approach we adopted in the actual decision in MA*.  The difference  is
     only that under the 2002 Act, the gateway to considering new  evidence
     of any description is the finding that there was a material  error  of
     law in the Adjudicator's determination.



 16. Of course, if the evidence is of changed  or  up-to-date  personal  or
     country circumstances later than the Adjudicator's determination, then
     it would by definition satisfy the first test in Ladd  v  Marshall  ie
     that it could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use
     before the Adjudicator.  Its materiality and  credibility  might  well
     still have to be assessed.  However, in order to do that the  evidence
     would have to be considered.  The admission of up-to-date personal and
     country circumstance evidence may also mean that it  is  necessary  to
     examine other evidence which was  not  before  the  Adjudicator,  even
     though it could and  perhaps  should  have  been,  in  order  for  the
     Tribunal to make a proper assessment of the later  evidence.   We  set
     that out in MA*, paragraph 24.  However, evidence that does not relate
     to up to date personal and country circumstances  may  well  fail  the
     first Ladd v Marshall test and we emphasise that all three tests would
     have to be satisfied.  We also note in this context the last  sentence
     of paragraph 23 of E which  points  out  the  general  rule  that  the
     failure of the parties' legal advisers provides no excuse such  as  to
     enable the evidence to be adduced.



 17. We now consider the evidence which Mr Dutton seeks to rely on  against
     those Ladd v Marshall tests.  We do so even though we  have  concluded
     there is no error of law and the evidence which  he  seeks  to  adduce
     certainly shows no error of law itself.  We do so because  of  certain
     submissions which Mr Dutton made which is useful to  comment  on.   Mr
     Dutton conceded that almost all of the evidence could and should  have
     been before the Adjudicator.   Nothing  of  any  significance  in  our
     judgment could not have been before the Adjudicator.  Accordingly,  it
     failed the first requirement of Ladd v Marshall.  The reason  for  its
     not being placed before the  Adjudicator  was  said  to  be  that  the
     previous advisers, well known immigration solicitors,  had  failed  in
     their duty to obtain it.  We have said before and repeat that if  such
     allegations are to be made the failure to put such allegations to  the
     previous adviser without clear and sound reasons for not doing so,  is
     likely to lead to adverse inferences being drawn as to the true reason
     for the failure of such evidence to be produced.  This is because such
     an allegation is very easy to make and to do so based  on  partial  or
     inaccurate information.  To omit an elementary  and  simple  check  is
     strongly suggestive of real reluctance to have the  assertion  tested.
     Mr Dutton said that the comments of the previous advisers had not been
     sought because he did not expect them to reply.  That position  should
     have been tested.



 18. Second, there is not the slightest evidence that the  allegation  made
     against the previous advisers is true, either by reference to what the
     Appellant said about the family or what she said to  her  advisers  or
     sought advice about.  The allegation should never have  been  made  in
     those circumstances.  There is no evidence from the Appellant that she
     ever told the previous advisers of these  witnesses'  availability  or
     alternatively, that they were unaware that such witnesses existed.  It
     is quite insufficient for Mr  Dutton  to  say  that  he  obtained  the
     statements quickly after the appeal was lost.  There is a danger  that
     these unevidenced allegations could result from a tactical decision by
     the previous adviser to focus on the  asylum  claim  and  to  minimise
     reference to the details of the family in the United Kingdom, so as to
     reduce the risk of a conclusion being arrived at that an asylum  claim
     had been made merely in order to advance the Appellant's true  aim  of
     simply joining her family.  As we say  later,  much  of  the  evidence
     sought to be adduced now about the location of and background  to  the
     presence of the other family members would have  been  problematic  to
     the Appellant's case;  the previous solicitors  might  have  known  or
     suspected that.  Once the asylum appeal has been lost, the  focus  can
     then switch to the position of the other family members  as  there  is
     little to be lost by evidence which, if presented earlier, would  have
     cast doubt on the now failed asylum claim.  The evidence sought to  be
     adduced also fails the requirement that it would probably have had  an
     important influence on the result of the case.  If admitted, it  would
     have been wholly unpersuasive.



 19. We take first what the husband's evidence was  said  to  show  in  his
     statement of 6 August 2004.  He says that he claimed asylum on arrival
     in the United Kingdom in 1990 and that his  appeal  was  dismissed  in
     1997.  He divorced the Appellant in 1993 or 1994,  marrying  an  Irish
     citizen.  In 1996, he applied for a residence permit which was refused
     in May 1998.  His appeal was dismissed in April 1999 and a  subsequent
     application for leave to appeal to the Tribunal was  refused  in  June
     1999.  He also said that he had separated from  that  wife  in  August
     1998, that is three months after the failure of his application for  a
     residence permit based on the marriage.  However, it follows  that  he
     had then continued his appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a  residence
     permit after he had separated from the  wife  upon  whom  that  appeal
     depended.  Mr Dutton was  constrained  to  recognise  that  there  was
     likely to have been some deceit by the husband in the pursuit  of  the
     appeals in April and June 1999.  He was someone apparently willing  to
     lie to advance his immigration status.  In March 2003, he  applied  to
     stay on compassionate grounds  and  for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
     because he had been in the United Kingdom  for  over  fourteen  years;
     since 2001 he had  lived  on  disability  benefits.   He  intended  to
     remarry his first wife as soon as his divorce was finalised.



 20. The husband also produced a letter from the Home Office dated 26  July
     2004 to his MP.  He did not take issue with its contents.  However, it
     reinforces the impression  of  someone  who  regards  the  immigration
     system merely as something to be evaded, rather  than  complied  with.
     He was first removed from the United Kingdom in September 1976 but  he
     returned ten years later and was  removed  again  in  1987,  following
     refusal of his asylum application, as an illegal entrant.  His  asylum
     application was formally refused in October 1993 but while his  appeal
     was outstanding, he had married a British citizen and in February 1994
     submitted an application for leave to remain on that basis.  This  was
     refused in January 1995, a  refusal  maintained  in  April  1996.   In
     September 1996 he made an application for a residence  permit  as  the
     spouse of an EEA National, for his wife was an  Irish  citizen.   That
     residence permit application was refused in 1998.  We have dealt  with
     his subsequent appeal.  His other applications are outstanding.



 21. Mr Dutton said that the significance of this  evidence  was  that  the
     husband was likely now to succeed in  obtaining  Indefinite  Leave  to
     Remain under the fourteen year  rule.   It  was  reasonable  to  infer
     therefore that he would not be removed and  that  the  Appellant,  his
     wife-to-be, would not therefore be removed.  The fact that the husband
     did not yet have settled status, however, meant  that  the  wife-to-be
     could not return to Turkey successfully to  make  an  application  for
     entry clearance and so to return her would be disproportionate.



 22. Mr Dutton prayed in aid two Tribunal  decisions:   K  (Turkey)  [2003]
     UKIAT 00116 and N Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00408.  In the  first  case,  the
     Tribunal rejected an argument that the Adjudicator should have ignored
     the prospect of an asylum applicant's wife with Exceptional  Leave  to
     Remain obtaining Indefinite Leave to Remain because it held  that  the
     Adjudicator  was  simply  drawing  a  reasonable  inference  from  the
     evidence.  It also suggested that it was  disproportionate  to  remove
     someone who could not apply for entry clearance, though  it  would  be
     different if they could.  In the second case, it  was  said  that  the
     Adjudicator  and  the  Tribunal  should  give  weight  in  considering
     proportionality  to  Government  policy  concessions  and  the  policy
     presumption in some concessions that enforcement action would  not  be
     taken against certain categories of person.



 23. These  submissions  call  for  some  comments.   As  to  policies  and
     concessions, first, it is not for the Tribunal or the  Adjudicator  to
     apply such policies or concessions.  Their application  in  any  given
     case is a matter for the Secretary  of  State.   It  is  not  for  the
     Adjudicator or Tribunal to second-guess the application of the  policy
     to any individual by the Secretary of State.  A decision may not be in
     accordance with the law if a relevant policy or  concession  has  been
     ignored or misinterpreted.  Second, policy will, however, be  relevant
     to the circumstances in which  the  public  interests  of  immigration
     control yield  to  Article  8  (1),  that  is  in  the  assessment  of
     proportionality;  see M* (Croatia).  It is a statement as  to  general
     circumstances in which those responsible for immigration policy  would
     regard return as disproportionate.  It may also be relevant where  the
     position of someone other than the Appellant is  relevant  because  it
     may affect the position of the  Appellant.   But  that  is  a  remoter
     question, involving two assessments:  that  of  the  individual  whose
     position is relied on, and then of any  implications  which  that  may
     have for the Appellant.  It  may  not  be  possible  to  resolve  both
     uncertainties.  Third, in order to take the policy  into  account,  it
     needs to be understood in full, including any exclusionary  provisions
     embodied by the policy.  It needs to be recognised that there  may  be
     additional unstated exceptions properly applied by  the  Secretary  of
     State.  The facts also need to  be  clear  before  any  conclusion  is
     reached as to the way in which an applicant might  or  might  not  fit
     with  a  concession.   This  is  even  more   problematic   when   the
     requirements of the concession are not yet, but may in the future,  be
     fulfilled.  Therefore, the weight  given  to  any  concession  in  the
     proportionality judgment must  vary  with  the  certainty  as  to  the
     position which the Tribunal has.



 24. Here, Mr Dutton did not provide us with any material relating  to  the
     policy or exceptions and there is real scope for doubt as to the  true
     facts in relation to the husband's position.  The material in the Home
     Office letter shows that if in other respects the concession was  met,
     there is clear scope for an exception to be made, having regard to the
     whole of  the  immigration  history  of  this  family,  including  the
     husband's remaining after  a  series  of  refusals,  (and  asylum  was
     refused in 1997), and the possible deceit involved in the  pursuit  of
     some of his subsequent applications.   It  may  well  be  that  formal
     enforcement  action  has  been  taken.   We  do  not  think  that  any
     conclusions could be drawn as to the prospect of the  success  of  the
     husband under any concessions, and none as to the  position  therefore
     of the Appellant.



 25. Even if it could be said that  the  husband  was  very  likely  to  be
     granted Indefinite Leave to Remain, or even if in fact he were granted
     Indefinite Leave to Remain, it is a fallacy then to suppose that  that
     could make any necessary difference to the Article 8 conclusion  here.
     He would not be granted Indefinite Leave to Remain as  a  refugee  but
     only because he had been able to stay for fourteen years  despite  the
     failures of his successive claims.  There is no reason  why  any  such
     concessionary grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain  should  present  an
     obstacle to his return to Turkey with his ex-wife, if the relationship
     is genuinely rekindled.



 26. If it is possible for a spouse to seek  entry  clearance  upon  return
     because of the status of the husband or wife in the United Kingdom, it
     would normally be proportionate to return an applicant in order for an
     entry  clearance  application  to  be  made.   Of  course  there   are
     exceptional circumstances in which that would not arise, such  as  the
     extensive and particular delay in the case of Shala  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
     233, or if there were serious logistical difficulties because  of  the
     absence  of  diplomatic  arrangements  in  someone  making   such   an
     application from the country to which he would be returned.  But it is
     quite illogical to say  that  a  person  should  not  normally  return
     because he would be unable to obtain entry clearance, where the reason
     for that is that he falls outside the Immigration Rules anyway.   That
     would put those with the weaker  case  for  staying  in  the  stronger
     position to stay.



 27. The Immigration Rules  are  to  be  taken  as  generally  embodying  a
     proportionate procedural system and substantive basis for entry to and
     removal from the United Kingdom, and in particular for those who  rely
     on  family  relationships  for  their  immigration   prospects.    The
     inability of someone to apply for entry clearance on return because he
     or she would not meet the Rules is a factor which  tells  strongly  in
     favour of the  conclusion  that  their  return  is  necessary  in  the
     interests  of  immigration  control  (subject   to   the   degree   of
     interference with family life under Article 8).  It is not a  positive
     factor for an applicant to rely on.   Any  Tribunal  decision  to  the
     contrary has either been misunderstood or is wrong, and should not  be
     followed.



 28. We turn to the  adult  children.   The  Adjudicator  was  prepared  to
     conclude that the mother was living with the three adult children  and
     her ex-husband in this country.  The  three  adult  children  produced
     witness   statements   dated   shortly   after    the    Adjudicator's
     determination.  All three are living at different addresses from  each
     other and different from their father and mother's address in  London.
     The two upon whom Mr Dutton placed greatest reliance live at  separate
     addresses in outer  East  Anglia.   We  drew  these  addresses  to  Mr
     Dutton's attention when he was making  submissions  about  exceptional
     dependency, but he was unable to assist in  how  the  Adjudicator  had
     been told what she had been.  There  is  no  suggestion  of  a  recent
     change of address.  The children simply did not live with  the  mother
     and cannot readily have been in face to face contact.



 29. The two sons most relied on were said to have a claim to stay,  albeit
     as failed asylum seekers, under the Ankara Agreement.  They  are  said
     to be running a fast food  business.   It  is  not  possible  for  the
     Tribunal to assess on that exiguous material whether the sons have any
     prospects at all under that agreement.  Accordingly, the Adjudicator's
     conclusion that the father and those two sons have no  status  remains
     correct, as does her conclusion that they could still go back with her
     to offer support, resuming such family life as they had in Turkey.



 30. Even if the father and sons had some sort of entitlement to remain  in
     the United Kingdom, it is quite wrong to  say  that  such  entitlement
     necessarily  represents  an  obstacle,  let  alone  a  significant  or
     insurmountable obstacle, to someone returning voluntarily to  be  with
     the family member in the country  of  origin.   Such  entitlement  may
     never  have  originated  in  an  accepted  claim   for   international
     protection, and might no longer justify such a claim, even if it  had.
     It is not necessary for any cessation clause to be invoked for such  a
     family member to be  shown  to  have  no  insurmountable  obstacle  to
     return.  Still less can a status based on mere length of  stay  be  an
     obstacle to return.  It simply puts in question the genuineness of the
     family feeling relied on.



 31. Another son, then aged twenty-five, married a United  Kingdom  citizen
     (forty-five, divorced and severely disabled) after he had been refused
     asylum. His marriage application was successful in July 2003,  but  he
     was only granted leave to remain till July  2005.   Again,  that  very
     limited status is no necessary bar to his going, even if married to  a
     disabled United Kingdom citizen.  She might be able to go with him.



 32. This evidence is wholly inadequate to show that  there  would  be  any
     significant interference with any family life with adult  children  or
     that the return of the Appellant would be disproportionate in view  of
     their lack of status and ability to return to Turkey.



 33. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say  about  CA,
     MA*, fresh evidence and assertions as to prospective status.








                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


