
CC
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 4 November 2004         |PW (Tibetan - Failed asylum seeker -  |
|                           |risk) China [2005] UKIAT 00051        |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|13/01/2005                                                        |
|.................................................                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|Miss K Eshun - Vice President                                     |
|Mr B D Yates                                                      |
|Mr P S Auija                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Braid, of counsel  instructed  by  Gillman-
                       Smith Lee Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a Tibetan from the People's Republic of  China  appeals
      with leave of the Tribunal against the Determination of an Adjudicator
      (Mr D W Mayell) dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent taken on 31 December 2003 to refuse  his  asylum  and  give
      directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal
      entrant.


   2. The facts upon which the appellant based his asylum claim  were  found
      not to be credible by the Adjudicator.


   3. The issue before the Tribunal was whether the appellant, as a  Tibetan
      failed asylum seeker, would face persecution on his return to China.


   4. In dealing with the risk on return as  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  the
      Adjudicator said the following at paragraph 71:

           "It is claimed,  on  his  behalf,  that,  in  any  event,  as  a
           returning  failed  asylum  seeker  he  would  be  at   risk   of
           persecution. It was acknowledged on his behalf that there was no
           direct evidence that asylum seekers returning from the west,  as
           opposed to from Nepal or surrounding countries, would be at risk
           of persecution. I was, however, referred to the Tribunal case of
           Sherpa. In that the Tribunal said, at paragraph  14  "Whilst  we
           would normally agree with the Adjudicator that if the  appellant
           has acted or been involved as she claimed, then there is a  real
           risk of persecution and a risk of a breach of human  rights,  we
           do not, in this particular case, however, agree  with  his  view
           that a finding to the contrary means that there is no  risk  for
           the  appellant  upon  return.  The  overwhelming  tenor  of  the
           objective  evidence,  from  which  we  have  quoted  some  small
           extracts, leads us to the view that as a  person  who  has  gone
           into self-imposed exile, whatever her activities may or may  not
           have been  before  she  left  Tibet,  there  is  nevertheless  a
           reasonable likelihood that she would be questioned and  detained
           upon  return.  This  questioning   and   detention   would   not
           necessarily arise  out  of  her  possible  activities  prior  to
           departure but arise out of the fact that she is  returning  from
           the west. The evidence would  also  indicate  to  us  that  such
           questioning and detention could lead to a reasonable  likelihood
           of punishment, torture and inhuman and degrading  treatment."  I
           do not, unfortunately, know what background material was  placed
           before the Tribunal. The US State Department Report, to which  I
           was referred, does refer to reports of  arbitrary  detention  of
           persons, particularly monks, returning to China  from  Nepal.  I
           have not been able to find, nor has my attention been drawn,  to
           any particular documentary evidence which suggests a  likelihood
           of questioning and detention arising out  of  the  fact  that  a
           person is returning from the west."

   5. The Adjudicator did go on to say that the respondent will  not  return
      this appellant to Tibet unless proper documentation is  available.  In
      the circumstances he did not find that the appellant would be at  real
      risk giving his findings as to his lack of activity in the past,  that
      he would be subjected to a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
      contrary to Article 3, simply because he is a failed returning  asylum
      seeker.


   6. Counsel said that the objective information which the Tribunal  relied
      on in Sherpa was a report from the Amnesty International website of 27
      June 2003. Amnesty International said this:


           "It is  extremely  difficult  to  consider  the  fate  of  those
           returned to Tibet, due to  the  tight  controls  on  information
           imposed by the  Chinese  authorities.  However,  Tibetan  asylum
           seekers and refugees who are returned to China face at the least
           detention for interrogation where they are at  serious  risk  of
           torture and ill-treatment."

      Counsel said that that  view  reflects  information  in  most  of  the
      reports contained in the appellant's bundle of documents. Counsel then
      took us through these reports.

   7. According to the 2000 Annual report of the Tibetan  Centre  for  Human
      Rights and Democracy (TCHRD) prison malpractice in the form of torture
      was a recurring element in all the testimonies provided to  monitoring
      agencies by former  prisoners.  Increased  restrictions  were  imposed
      during 2000 on Tibetan returnees from exile  leading  to  the  alleged
      detention of approximately 50 students and the expulsion of 29 Tibetan
      tour guides. The movements of exile returnees - who  are  viewed  with
      suspicion of being involved in political disturbances - are  monitored
      closely through China's evasive espionage  network  and  interrogation
      procedures. The possibility of securing any government related job  is
      non existent for Tibetans returning to their home land from  a  period
      in exile. Tibetans in their home land with a history of visiting India
      are treated with suspicion; it is assumed  that  they  have  political
      involvement and association with "splittists". Tibetan returnees  from
      India are invariably detained at the Nepal/Tibet border  although  the
      duration of the detentions may differ. At the time of  detention,  the
      detainee  undergoes  harrowing   interrogation   sessions   concerning
      motivation for the visit and future objectives.  Life  back  in  Tibet
      thereafter becomes one of captivity  without  actual  imprisonment.  A
      further venue of discrimination awaiting the exile  returnees  is  the
      fear of job  opportunities.  They  are  discriminated  against  simply
      because they are exile returnees. The  report  goes  on  to  say  that
      almost all of the prisoners arrested  have  at  some  stage  undergone
      serious physical abuse at the hands of either public  security  bureau
      officers or prison guards - or often by both. Torture is  a  prevalent
      occurrence in detention centres and prisons  in  Tibet,  resulting  in
      many deaths.


   8. According to the 2001 annual report  of  TCHRD,  Tibetans  seeking  to
      travel  outside  their  place  of  abode  even  to  another   country,
      experience bureaucratic obstruction. They  have  to  acquire  specific
      documents. Tibetans are required to procure a  travel  pass  to  enter
      restricted border areas and this pass must cite the purpose of travel.
      To leave Tibet legally citizens have to apply for a PRC passport. Such
      a passport is  often  difficult  to  obtain  and  the  procedures  are
      lengthy.


   9. Counsel said that the appellant left  China  illegally.  According  to
      paragraph 6.181 of the  October  2004  CIPU  report  on  China,  under
      Article 3.22 of the Criminal  Code,  anyone  who  leaves  the  country
      illegally will be sentenced to not more than one year  of  fixed  term
      imprisonment and criminal  detention  or  control.  Counsel  therefore
      argued that on his return to  China  the  appellant  will  immediately
      become exposed to the authorities. He will then immediately face  some
      form of persecution highlighted by TCHRD in  their  annual  report  of
      2001. In that report the TCHRD states that the standard punishment for
      those caught attempting to lave Tibet ranges from ten  days  detention
      in a police station to one to three months imprisonment in a detention
      centre or prison. Detainees reported  that  Chinese  police  routinely
      tortured and beat their  captives.  According  to  testimonies  it  is
      common for those arrested to be moved between several police stations,
      detention centres and prisons during detention. The report goes on  to
      say that the fact torture  is  a  regular  feature  of  detentions  is
      evidenced by Amnesty International's Report of  12  February  2001  on
      torture. According to Amnesty, reports  from  China  in  recent  years
      include a high proportion of victims who are killed or fatally wounded
      by  torture  during  interrogation  within  the  first  24  hours   of
      detention.


  10. In the light of the objective information, counsel argued  that  as  a
      Tibetan returning to China after having left illegally, the  appellant
      would face harsher punishment amounting to persecution. He  said  that
      the system of household registration (Hukou) and  identity  cards,  is
      extremely important in China as noted at paragraph 1.61 of  the  CIPU.
      Each urban administrative entity issues its own Hukou, which  entitles
      only registered inhabitants of that entity  formal  access  to  social
      services like education. However, counsel argued that  the  real  risk
      the appellant faces is persecution  at the point of entry in China.

  11. Miss Pal on the contrary argued the appellant is not  likely  to  face
      persecution or ill-treatment at any point  of  entry  were  he  to  be
      returned to China. She said that the objective information we have  on
      returns to China is based on information of  returns  from  Nepal  and
      India. Returnees from India come  to  the  attention  of  the  Chinese
      authorities because India is the home of  the  Tibetan  government  in
      exile, as evidenced by the CIPU report at paragraph  6.211.  Similarly
      Nepal is also home to an estimated 20,000 or  more  Tibetans  many  of
      whom arrived in 1959 - 60 around the time the Dalai  Lama  fled  there
      from Tibet (paragraph 6.212). Therefore as Nepal is also viewed  as  a
      home land for Tibetan dissidents, returnees from  Nepal  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities. Miss Pal said that her  submissions  are
      confirmed by the TCHRD who state that Tibetans in their home land with
      a history of visiting India are treated with suspicion. It is  assumed
      that  they   have   political   involvement   and   association   with
      "splittists". Tibetan returnees from India are invariably detained  at
      the Nepal-Tibet border although the duration of their  detentions  may
      differ. She therefore argued that as there was no information  on  how
      Tibetan returnees from the  west  are  treated,  and  given  that  the
      appellant was not found credible as to his asylum claim  and  did  not
      have a political history in Tibet or in the UK, it was  unlikely  that
      he would be at risk on return.


  12. Miss Pal referred us to paragraph 6.163, which states that there is  a
      floating population of between 100 and 150 million  economic  migrants
      who lacked official residence status in  cities.  She  said  that  the
      appellant could assimilate into the floating population  although  she
      accepted that without household registration it would be difficult for
      him to get access to social services.


  13. Miss Pal also referred us to the CIPU bulletin of 5/2003, which states
      at paragraph 6.1 that the Chinese government accepts the  repatriation
      of citizens who have entered other countries or territories illegally.
      Returnees are generally fined.  Those  who  have  been  repatriated  a
      second time typically are sent to labour camps in  addition  to  being
      fined. According to paragraphs  6.2  in  January  2000  the  political
      councillor of the Canadian  embassy  visited  Fuzhou  City  in  Fijian
      province on  a  fact  finding  mission,  to  ascertain  conditions  of
      returnees, and allied general conditions of life in  Fijian  province.
      The main conclusion  of  their  political  councillor's  fact  finding
      report with regards to returnees was this:


           "There is evidence of wilful deception of foreign governments as
           to sanctions against  returned  illegal  migrants.  Much  touted
           policies  of  prison  sentences   and   extensive   re-education
           programmes are apparently mostly not implemented. Rather we have
           become aware of  preferential  economic  policies  and  business
           loans made available to returnees by local governments.  We  are
           assured that children under sixteen returned to China would  not
           be subject to incarceration under any circumstances."


  14. As already stated above, the issue before us is whether as  a  Tibetan
      failed asylum seeker, there is a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
      the appellant will be persecuted on his return to China.


  15. The background information which counsel relied on and which  he  said
      was before the Tribunal in Sherpa  was  the  report  from  an  Amnesty
      International website of 27 June 2003. This states as follows:


           "It is  extremely  difficult  to  discover  the  fate  of  those
           returned to Tibet, due to  the  tight  controls  on  information
           imposed by the  Chinese  authorities.  However,  Tibetan  asylum
           seekers and refugees who are returned to China face at the  very
           least detention for interrogation, where  they  are  at  serious
           risk of torture and ill-treatment."


      We would question how Amnesty  International  is  able  to  draw  this
      conclusion if they have had extreme difficulty discovering the fate of
      those returned to Tibet. The Secretary of State proposes to remove the
      appellant to China. We know that Tibet is a part China and that  there
      are no direct flights to Tibet. The information contained in the  Home
      Office China extended bulletin 5/2003 indicates that the Canadian fact
      finding mission to the Fijian province in January 2000  referred  only
      to returnees  from Japan and  the  US.  The  Japanese  returnees  were
      interviewed. Admittedly there was no information in that  report  that
      any of the returnees were Tibetan.

  16. The information on returnees contained at paragraph 6.181 of the  CIPU
      report October 2004 states that under Article 322 of the Criminal Code
      any one who violates  the  laws  and  regulations  controlling  secret
      crossing of the national  boundary  and  when  the  circumstances  are
      serious shall be sentenced to not more than one  year  of  fixed  term
      imprisonment and  criminal  detentions  or  control.  Paragraph  6.182
      highlights Articles 52 and 53, which  cover  financial  penalties  for
      returnees. Article 52 imposes a fine, the  amount  of  which  will  be
      determined according to the circumstances of  the  crime.  Article  53
      states that a fine is paid in a lump sum or in instalments within  the
      period specified in the judgment. Upon expiry of the  period  where  a
      person is unable to pay the fine  in  full,  the  people's  court  may
      collect whenever that person is  found  in  possession  of  executable
      property. If the person truly has difficulties in  paying  because  he
      has  suffered  irresistible  calamity,  consideration  may  be   given
      according  to  the  circumstances  to  granting  him  a  reduction  or
      exemption.


  17. We do not know what would constitute serious circumstances in  Article
      322, nor do we know whether the appellant  might  suffer  imprisonment
      for leaving China illegally or even a fine. There is no evidence  that
      a Tibetan who left China illegally is likely to suffer imprisonment or
      fine. In the absence of very clear evidence as to what  is  likely  to
      happen to the appellant on return to China, we are unable to find that
      there is a real risk that he would suffer persecution or ill-treatment
      on return to China. There is no reason why the  appellant  should  not
      become part of the floating population of between 100 and 150  million
      economic migrants who lack official residence status in cities.


  18. On the totality of the evidence before us we find that the appellant's
      appeal cannot succeed. It is therefore dismissed.




                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
