
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

      LL (Falun Gong - Convention Reason - Risk) China CG [2005] UKAIT 00122



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                    Determination Promulgated
On 29 July 2005                         On 9th August 2005



                                   Before

                  Mr S L Batiste, Senior Immigration Judge
                               Mr M E A Innes
                                Mr D C Walker



                                   Between

                               (             )

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


This determination is reported for its consideration of the availability  of
"imputed political opinion" as a 1951  Convention  reason  as  described  in
paragraphs 26-33, and of the risk to Falun  Gong  practitioners  at  various
levels as described in paragraphs 34-38.


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms M Phelan, instructed by Messrs Thompson & Co
For the Respondent:   Mr J Gulvin, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, born on 16 October 1973,  is  a  citizen  of  China  who
     appeals against a decision of the Respondent made on 20 August 2002  to
     refuse leave to enter after refusal of asylum, for the reasons set  out
     in his refusal letter dated 20 August 2002



                                  The Claim

  2. The Appellant's claim as set out in her statement  to  the  Adjudicator
     can be summarised as follows.

  3. She was born and lived in Fujian Province. She was introduced to  Falun
     Gong by a friend in 1998. She began by watching others doing the  Falun
     Gong exercises but later began to practice in a group of more  than  10
     people in a rented house. She attended every meeting and  demonstration
     since July 1999. However, because Falun Gong was a banned organisation,
     the police came every time to break them up. As there were hundreds  at
     the meetings and demonstrations,  the  Appellant  was  always  able  to
     escape.

  4. In July 2001, she became more active  within  Falun  Gong.  She  joined
     demonstrations and  practiced  in  public  places;  she  recruited  new
     members; and she helped to organise the meetings and demonstrations.

  5. In January 2002, whilst practicing with many  others  in  a  park,  the
     Appellant and some other  members  were  arrested.  Some  escaped.  The
     Appellant was held in a "re-education"  centre  for  3  days.  She  was
     forced to repeat over and over again  that  Falun  Gong  was  evil  and
     should be stopped. She was beaten and received  no  medical  treatment.
     She was kept with 8 people in a small crowded room  and  received  only
     minimal food and water. Then she was released with  a  serious  warning
     and fined 3000 RMB.

  6. The Appellant decided in the light of her treatment that she would  not
     quit the movement but would instead become more involved. She recruited
     more  new  members,  distributed  leaflets  and  joined   in   peaceful
     demonstrations. In June 2002, whilst the Appellant was at a Falun  Gong
     gathering in a park, she and others were arrested. She was taken  to  a
     police station and held there for a week. She  was  badly  ill-treated.
     She was charged for participating in Falun Gong despite the restriction
     set by the Chinese Government. She was temporarily released on bail.

  7. The Appellant knew that as she had a record she would  receive  a  long
     prison sentence and face serious ill-treatment if  detained  again,  so
     she decided to leave China, as she could not register  to  live  safely
     elsewhere in the country. She travelled to Shanghai on 10 July 2002.  A
     friend arranged an agent, with whose help  she  flew  to  the  UK.  She
     arrived here on 17 July 2002 and claimed asylum on arrival.  As  stated
     above this was refused on 20 August 2002.

  8. That was the evidence in her written statement.  However  in  her  oral
     evidence to the Adjudicator, the Appellant  said  as  recorded  in  the
     determination at paragraph 14(f), as follows.
           "(f) In June of 2002 at a Falun Gong gathering in her home  city
           she was again  arrested.  During  detention  she  has  given  an
           account in her evidence of being detained for nearly one  month.
           The statement says she was detained for  one  week.  ......  The
           Appellant has said in her evidence having had bail explained  to
           her within the meaning of the UK that she was  not  released  on
           bail. She was told  that  if  she  was  arrested  she  would  be
           detained and treated much more severely. She has  no  obligation
           to go back to the police station and is not wanted."

                             Procedural History

  9. The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision and her appeal
     was, as indicated above, heard on 3 January 2003 by an Adjudicator,  Mr
     T Jones. In his  determination  promulgated  on  27  January  2003,  he
     allowed the appeal both on asylum and human  rights  grounds.  He  held
     that the Appellant was a credible witness and  that  as  a  Falun  Gong
     organiser with a record, she would face persecution as a  member  of  a
     "social group" and would face a breach of her rights under Articles  2,
     3 and 5. As she faced persecution by the state, which would be able  to
     trace her wherever she went, she  had  no  viable  internal  relocation
     option.

 10. The Respondent  appealed  to  the  IAT  challenging  the  Adjudicator's
     credibility findings and his conclusion  that  there  was  no  internal
     relocation option.  On 2 March 2003, he was granted permission to argue
     the matters raised in the grounds of appeal dated 11 February 2003.

 11. On 1 October 2003, the IAT heard her appeal.  At  the  commencement  of
     that hearing, the IAT raised two further issues on its own motion.  The
     first was whether on her claim at its strongest she would be at risk on
     return, bearing in mind that in her oral evidence  to  the  Adjudicator
     she appeared to have indicated that she was not wanted  in  China.  The
     second was that membership of a "social group" did not comprise a  1951
     Convention reason and the Adjudicator had erred in not identifying  any
     particular social group to which the Appellant belonged. It found  both
     issues against the Appellant. It also concluded that the  Adjudicator's
     positive credibility findings were unsound as was his assessment of the
     internal relocation option. However,  the IAT did not  remit  the  case
     for any further oral hearing on credibility, but  instead  allowed  the
     Respondent's  appeal  outright  because  it  concluded  that   on   the
     Appellant's own evidence she was not wanted in China and would  not  be
     at any real risk on return of persecution or a breach of material human
     rights, given that she had  not  given  any  evidence  that  she  would
     continue to practice Falun Gong in China

 12. The Appellant appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  against  the  IAT's
     decision on the basis of whether  Falun  Gong  could  be  a  particular
     social group; that the Adjudicator's positive credibility findings were
     sound and should not have been overturned  by  the  IAT;  that  if  the
     Adjudicator's positive credibility finding was wrong, the appeal should
     have been remitted for re-hearing; and that the IAT was wrong  to  hold
     that the Appellant's claim to the Adjudicator was on the basis that she
     would continue to practice Falun Gong if returned to China, and so  the
     IAT had proceeded on a mistaken basis of fact.

 13. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal on  3  November
     2004 and was allowed. The neutral citation is  L China v The  Secretary
     of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ  1441.  Its  material
     conclusions are as follows.
        25. The question the IAT asked itself was whether membership of the
        Falun Gong could be equated with membership of a particular social
        group within the meaning of Article 1A of the Refugee Convention.
        The IAT considered that it could not, because members of the Falun
        Gong possessed no immutable characteristics. Membership is a matter
        of choice, and a person can become a member and then cease to be a
        member at any time. The fact that members of the Falun Gong were
        persecuted could not itself qualify them for this purpose as
        members of "a particular social group", because it has been
        repeatedly stated that the particular social group must exist
        independently of the persecution. The adjudicator's finding that L
        would not be persecuted on the grounds of religion had not been
        challenged on appeal, and L could not therefore show that as a
        member of Falun Gong she shared characteristics with other members
        "which it is beyond her power to change or is so fundamental to her
        identity or conscience that she ought not to be required to change
        it"............
        33 Mr Fordham, who appeared for the Secretary of State, accepted
        that on appropriate facts a member of the Falun Gong might properly
        be held to have a well-founded fear of persecution in China on the
        grounds of imputed political opinion. In our judgment this would be
        the better approach to such a case, at any rate on the evidence
        relating to the Falun Gong which is before us. We are not prepared
        to accept that authoritarian pressure to cease the practice of
        Falun Gong in public would involve the renunciation of core human
        rights entitlements. As the IAT observed, the Falun Gong has no
        membership lists. Anyone can become a member or cease to be a
        member at any time and practise Falun Gong exercises by him/herself
        in the privacy of his/her home without significant risk of being
        ill-treated. We were unwilling to entertain argument on this appeal
        about the possibility of Falun Gong qualifying as a religion. A
        court would have to understand a great deal more about it than is
        contained in the papers at present before us before it could be
        ready to go down that route.
        34 A problem has arisen on the facts of this case, however, which
        requires us to remit it to the IAT. We were told that it was L's
        case before the adjudicator that if she were to be returned to
        China she would continue with her Falun Gong activities which
        we described in paragraph 5 above, and that the IAT failed to
        appreciate this. As we have said (see para 1), the Secretary of
        State was not represented before the adjudicator, and both L and
        her solicitor have filed witness statements since the hearing
        before the IAT attesting to this fact.
        35  Since the IAT decided the "internal flight option" part of the
        appeal on a different factual basis (see para 14 above) we must
        remit this case to a differently constituted panel to reconsider
        the matter. At the new hearing the IAT will be at liberty to
        revisit the Secretary of State's original grounds of appeal, if it
        considers it fair to do so, and the appellant will be at liberty to
        advance arguments based on "imputed political opinion" if she
        believes that the evidence before the adjudicator would sustain
        such arguments. We have already expressed our view that a great
        deal more material would have to be placed before a court before it
        could seriously entertain the idea that Falun Gung might be a
        religion within the meaning of the Refugee Convention, and L has
        expressly disavowed any such suggestion in her own case.
        36 We therefore direct that the appeal be allowed and the case be
        remitted to the IAT for the purposes set out in paragraphs 34-35
        above.
 14. By virtue of the transitional arrangements following the  abolition  of
     the IAT from 4 April 2005, the appeal now comes  to  the  Tribunal  for
     reconsideration. As the Adjudicator's original  determination  predated
     the restriction of the IAT's jurisdiction to an error of  law,  we  are
     not so restricted either,  as  paragraph  8(4)(b)  of  the  Asylum  and
     Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004  (Commencement  No  5
     and Transitional Provisions) Order 2005 provides that
           If, under the old appeals provisions, the appeal or  application
           was not restricted to the ground that the  Adjudicator  made  an
           error of law, then it  shall  not  be  so  restricted  following
           commencement."

 15. We are limited in the issues we can consider by paragraph 62(7) of  the
     Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which provides
           Where
            a) a  party  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
               Immigration  Appeal   Tribunal   against   an   Adjudicator's
               determination before 4th April 2005, but the appeal  has  not
               been determined by that date; and
            b) by virtue of a transitional provisions  order  the  grant  of
               permission to appeal is treated as an order for the  Tribunal
               to reconsider the Adjudicator's determination,
           the reconsideration shall be limited to the grounds  upon  which
           the IAT granted permission to appeal.

 16. We conclude however that the terms on which the IAT granted  permission
     to appeal were varied prior to 4 April 2005 by  the  judgement  of  the
     Court of Appeal and we should therefore proceed on  the  basis  of  the
     Respondent's grounds of  appeal  of  11  February  2003  as  varied  by
     paragraphs 34-36 of the Court of Appeal's judgment set out above.

 17. A further factor arising from the transition from the IAT to the AIT is
     that it is now our  normal  practice  that  our  first  reconsideration
     hearing  deals  with  whether  the   Adjudicator's   determination   is
     sustainable or not. If it is not, and the re-hearing of extensive  oral
     evidence   is   required,   then   we   would   adjourn   for   further
     reconsideration.

 18. The appeal to the AIT first came for hearing on 2  June  2005.  However
     the Appellant neither attended nor was represented. This was surprising
     given the Appellant's past diligence in  pursuing  her  claim.  Further
     enquiries were made which suggested that the  Notices  of  Hearing  may
     have been sent to the wrong addresses, though this  was  not  at  first
     clear from the case file.   Accordingly the hearing was  adjourned  and
     re-listed  for  today.   Ms  Evans,  who  was  then  representing   the
     Respondent, gave some indications as to how she intended to  argue  the
     appeal and the Tribunal made some directions to facilitate the  hearing
     of the relevant issues when the new hearing took place.  Matters  could
     not be taken any further at that hearing and of course  no  conclusions
     were  reached,  given  the   absence   of   the   Appellant   and   her
     Representative. The hearing was therefore adjourned to a  new  date  to
     enable the Appellant and her Representative to attend and, in case some
     oral evidence was needed from either of them on matters relating to the
     sustainability of the determination,  given  the  contents  of  written
     statements made by  them  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  which  Ms  Evans
     indicated she wished to challenge.

 19. Prior to the renewed hearing, Ms Phelan served a document described  as
     a "Respondent's Reply" dated 24 July  2005  to  the  effect  that  "The
     Respondent will argue that the Immigration Judge could have  or  should
     have found the Convention  reason  was  political  opinion,  actual  or
     implied."  Given that the present practice of the AIT  is  to  describe
     from the commencement of any proceedings all claimants  as  Appellants,
     irrespective of who is actually appealing against  a  decision  at  any
     particular stage, we shall refer to Ms Phelan's Reply as being from the
     Appellant.

 20. We have before us the following documents.
           1. The Court bundle.
           2. The Appellant's bundle.
           3. The Appellant's Reply
           4. The previous papers
           5. The  Appellant's  written  statements  of  9  August  and  13
              November 2002.
           6. The full judgement in L China v The Secretary  of  State  for
              the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1441.
           7. The grounds under the HRA that were before the Adjudicator.
           8. The judgment in Chiver.

 21.  All  the  proceedings  before  us  are  recorded  in  our  record   of
     proceedings.

                             Preliminary Matters

 22. At the outset of the proceedings before us, evidence  was  produced  to
     show that the Appellant, who is heavily pregnant with twins, could  not
     on medical advice travel to London  for  the  hearing.  This  had  been
     foreshadowed in an earlier letter to the AIT, and we fully  accept  her
     absence  for  this  reason.  It  did  not  in  the  event  affect   our
     proceedings.

 23. Ms Phelan then withdrew the updated written statement by the  Appellant
     enclosed with her bundle for the hearing. She said she intended to rely
     in this  hearing  on  the  written  statements  that  were  before  the
     Adjudicator.

 24. After some discussion, both Representatives agreed that  the  scope  of
     this  hearing  would  be  to  establish   whether   the   Adjudicator's
     determination was sustainable in the light of the Respondent's original
     grounds of appeal as varied by the Court of Appeal. Its  sustainability
     must be assessed in terms of the guidance of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Subesh and Others [2004] EWCA Civ 56, the  Adjudicator's  determination
     having been promulgated prior to the restriction of our jurisdiction to
     errors of law.  In that case, the Court of Appeal gave guidance to  the
     IAT concerning the proper approach to be taken by it (and by us when we
     are not restricted to our error  of  law  jurisdiction)  to  challenges
     against an Adjudicator's findings. In paragraph 43, Laws LJ  stated  it
     as follows.
           "In every case the Appellant assumes the burden of showing  that
           the judgment appealed from is wrong. The burden  so  assumed  is
           not the burden of proof normally carried by a claimant in  first
           instance proceedings  where  there  are  factual  disputes.   An
           Appellant, if he is to succeed, must persuade the  appeal  court
           or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts  from
           that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there  are
           objective grounds upon which the court ought to conclude that  a
           different view is  the  right  one.  The  divide  between  these
           positions is not caught by the  supposed  difference  between  a
           perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case  the  appeal
           court disagrees with the court below,  and  indeed  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the court of appeal might prefer different  view  (perhaps
           on marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process
           of reasoning and the application of the relevant law, require it
           to adopt a  different  view.   The  burden  which  an  Appellant
           assumes is to show  that  the  case  falls  within  this  latter
           category."

                       Issues of General Significance

 25. It was accepted at the beginning of the hearing by both Representatives
     that the Adjudicator's conclusion that membership of Falun  Gong  could
     constitute membership of a "social group" was an error by  him.  If  by
     that he meant a particular social group that was  in  error  also.   Ms
     Phelan made no attempt to sustain the Adjudicator's conclusion in  this
     respect.  We hold, for the reasons given by the IAT  and  described  in
     paragraph 25 of the Court of Appeal's judgement, that this  constituted
     an error of  law,  in  that  the  Adjudicator  misinterpreted  the  law
     relating to particular social groups, though, as we have said above, we
     do not need in this appeal to find that such an error amounts an  error
     of law in order to give us jurisdiction.

 26. Thus we moved on to the first  disputed  issue  before  us,  which  was
     whether this error was material or not, in  the  sense  of  whether  it
     would have made any difference to the outcome of the appeal,  given  Mr
     Fordham's statement to the Court of Appeal  recorded  in  paragraph  33
     that  the Respondent accepted
            "On appropriate facts a member of the Falun Gong might properly
           be held to have a well-founded fear of persecution in  China  on
           the grounds of imputed political opinion".

 27. We heard submissions  by  Mr  Gulvin  as  to  what  was  meant  by  "on
     appropriate facts". He said that if a person were established to be  at
     real risk by reason of Falun Gong activity, it  could  be  for  imputed
     political opinion but it depended on how it is practiced.  For  example
     it could depend on whether it was practiced in public or in private. It
     could depend on whether the level of activity and the  consequent  risk
     of that activity coming to the attention of the Chinese authorities.

 28. We consider however that this formulation by  Mr  Gulvin  confuses  the
     separate issues of "Convention reason" and "real risk". Of  course  how
     and where Falun Gong is practiced by an individual, and whether what he
     does would be reasonably likely to come to the attention of the Chinese
     authorities, are factors to be  taken  into  account  when  considering
     whether on the established facts in any particular case a person is  at
     any real risk by reason of his Falun Gong activities. However as far as
     the Convention reason issue is concerned, we conclude that  if  on  the
     established facts it is held that there is a real risk  of  persecutory
     ill-treatment by reason of Falun Gong activities, then in line with  Mr
     Fordham's statement, it is by reason of imputed political  opinion  and
     thus engages a 1951 Convention reason as well as Article 3.

 29. There is no relevant country guidance on the Convention  reason  issue.
     The nearest is MH (Risk - Return - Falun Gong) China  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
     04134 but this was concerned with whether there was risk on return  for
     a person who had come under suspicion of involvement of Falun Gong  due
     to his parents' activities, but had no wish  to  practice  it  himself.
     However Mr Fordham's statement to the  Court  of  Appeal  reflects  the
     clear overall thrust of the objective evidence  before  us.  Ms  Phelan
     identified  a  number  of  passages  in  that  objective  evidence   to
     demonstrate why the Chinese  Government  impute  political  opinion  to
     practitioners of Falun Gong  and  the  extent  of  its  hostility.  For
     example a US State Department report in 2004 records the  evolution  of
     the Chinese government's attitude towards Falun Gong in these terms.
           "The Chinese government has stated in recent months  that  there
           are  around  2  million  Falun  Gong  practitioners  in   China.
           According to FH sources, previous government estimates  put  the
           figure at between 70 and 100 million. The Falun Gong was founded
           in 1992 by Li Hongzhi, who now resides in the United States.  It
           is described by its adherents as a spiritual practice  of  body,
           spirit and mind,  based  on  various  schools  of  Buddhism  and
           traditional forms of self  cultivation  which  centre  around  a
           practice of meditation and Qi Gong exercises.   These  exercises
           sessions are often held by groups in public places.   Before  it
           was banned, the Falun Gong had training stations, practice sites
           and contact persons across China, with practitioners coming from
           all sectors of Chinese society and almost all provinces.   Among
           the thousands detained over the past few  months,  the  majority
           were  ordinary  workers  or  farmers,  but  they  also  included
           teachers  and  academics,   university   students,   publishers,
           accountants,  police  officers,  engineers  and  people  from  a
           variety  of  other  professions.  Those  detained  also  include
           officials,  notably  a  Railways  Ministry  official,  a  former
           official at the Ministry of Public Security (police), a recently
           retired major from the People's Armed Police, and a 74 -year-old
           retired in force Lieutenant-General.
           The government's final crackdown on the Falun  Gong  appears  to
           have been triggered by a large-scale demonstration in Beijing on
           25 April 1999,  when  an  estimated  10,000  practitioners  from
           various places in China stood quietly from dawn until late  into
           the night outside the compound of the Communist Party leadership
           in Beijing. According to Falun Gong sources,  the  demonstration
           was organised in reaction to incidents  in  which  practitioners
           had been harassed  or  detained  by  police  over  the  previous
           months.  The  demonstrators'  purpose  was  to  demand  official
           status  for  Falun  Gong  and  to  request  dialogue  with   the
           government.  The authorities however are reported to  have  been
           mainly concerned by the capacity of the group to mobilise  large
           numbers of followers, unnoticed,  for  a  public  demonstration.
           Subsequently, after some conflicting signals, they  branded  the
           Falun Gong a "threat to social and political stability".
           The government banned Falun Gong on 22 July 1999 and launched  a
           massive propaganda campaign to denounce  its  practice  and  the
           motivation of its leaders, in particular Li Hongzhi. Since then,
           the  government's  accusations  against  the  group  have   been
           repeatedly  publicised  by  the  state  media   and   government
           officials.  At a news conference on 4 November 1999 for  example
           the Director of the Bureau of Religious  Affairs  of  the  State
           Council  said  that  Falun  Gong  had  brainwashed  and   bilked
           followers, causing more than 1400  deaths  and  threatened  both
           social and political stability.  Further emphasising that  Falun
           Gong was a political threat he added "any threat to  the  people
           and to society is a  threat  to  the  Communist  Party  and  the
           government".

 30. Another illustration as to why the Chinese government imputes political
     motives to Falun Gong is in a CNN report of 2002 which states
           "More recently the group has taken  to  interrupting  television
           broadcasts and beaming their  own  message  into  the  homes  of
           Chinese viewers.  In the present  year,  Falun  Gong  supporters
           have interrupted cable broadcasts in at least six cities,  often
           simply showing banners reading "Falun Dafa is good".

 31. There are a number  of  other  relevant  references  in  the  objective
     material but the only other we shall quote specifically  comes  from  a
     joint report of  Human  Rights  Watch  and  the  Geneva  Initiative  on
     Psychiatry. It states
           "The Chinese authorities have  frequently  asserted  that  Falun
           Gong is an "evil cult" displaying the  same  abusive  and  life-
           threatening organisational characteristics as the Aum Shrinrikyo
           cult in Japan, which released sarin  poison  gas  in  the  Tokyo
           subway in 1995, the  Branch  Davidians  cult,  dozens  of  whose
           members were killed when  the  US  law  enforcement  authorities
           stormed its headquarters in Waco, Texas, in 1993,  and  the  the
           Temple Cult many of whose Members committed  collective  suicide
           in Switzerland in 1994.  On this and other implicitly  political
           grounds, the Government  has  further  branded  the  Falun  Gong
           Movement as posing a serious "threat to state security".

 32. This illustrates why Mr Fordham accepted on behalf  of  the  Respondent
     before the Court of Appeal that on appropriate facts a member of  Falun
     Gong might properly be held to have a well founded fear of  persecution
     in China on the grounds imputed political opinion, and  we  agree  with
     him. It may be that members of Falun Gong  do  not  see  themselves  as
     expressing  a  political  opinion,  and  would  certainly  reject   the
     proposition that they were a violent  cult.  Many  practitioners  would
     ascribe a spiritual dimension to their activity. Indeed  the  Appellant
     originally presented her claim  in  religious  terms.  Nevertheless  it
     seems clear to us on the objective evidence that the Chinese government
     imputes political opinion to them because of concern for their  ability
     to mobilise public opinion on a  very  substantial  scale  outside  the
     established structure of the Communist party, and they see  this  as  a
     threat to the Communist Party and hence the  state.  Even  the  state's
     efforts to blacken the reputation of Falun Gong by linking it to  "evil
     cults", derives from essentially this imputation of  political  opinion
     and activity

 33. We should add at this point that Ms Phelan did not seek to argue before
     us that Falun Gong was a religion, which was  another  issue  canvassed
     before the  Court  of  Appeal  and  about  which  they  expressed  some
     scepticism. Accordingly we have not pursued this question any further.

 34. We then turn to the issue of risk arising from Falun Gong activities in
     the light of the objective evidence to which we have  already  referred
     and the  further  passages  set  out  below  which  comprise  objective
     material from different cited from the current CIPU report.
           6.122 As reported by the Falun Gong  web  site  accessed  on  23
           January 2005 "there are at least 6,000 Falun Gong  practitioners
           who have been  illegally  sentenced  to  prison.   Over  100,000
           practitioners have been sent to labour camps.... Large groups of
           the Falun Gong practitioners have been forcibly  sent  to  local
           brainwashing classes, where they have  been  subjected  both  to
           physical and mental torture."
           6.124 On 29 December 2004, Reporters Without  Borders  condemned
           the arrest of 11 Falun Gong practitioners for using the Internet
           to publish photographs of the torture some of them had undergone
           in prison. They calculated that at least 30 people are currently
           detained for posting or viewing documents on the  Internet  that
           support Falun Gong  or  criticise  the  systematic  torture  its
           followers undergo in Chinese prisons.
           6.126 According to Amnesty International in their  January  2004
           reports, controls tighten as Internet activism grows.  Of the 54
           people detained and sentenced for  Internet  activism,  29  were
           Falun Gong practitioners/sympathisers.
           6.127 as reported by the Canadian  IRB  in  a  report  dated  25
           October 2001,  the  Chinese  authorities  had  confiscated  1.55
           million copies of Falun Gong material by the end of  July  1999.
           The IRB also reported the arrest  of  a  number  of  people  for
           illegally printing, selling and publishing Falun Gong  material.
           Sentences ranged from six to ten years imprisonment.

 35. We view with caution the respective  assertions  by  both  the  Chinese
     authorities and Falun  Gong  sources,  both  of  whom  have  their  own
     agendas. However our first conclusion as to risk,  from  the  objective
     evidence as a whole, is that, absent special factors,  there  will  not
     normally be any risk sufficient to  amount  to  "real  risk"  from  the
     Chinese authorities for a person who practices Falun  Gong  in  private
     and with discretion.  On  any  assessment  the  number  of  Falun  Gong
     practitioners in China is very large indeed. The figures  quoted  range
     from 2 million to some 100 million. So far as can be gathered from  the
     evidence before us, the number of people who have faced detention or re-
     education by the Chinese authorities as a  consequence  of  Falun  Gong
     activity, whilst  large  in  absolute  terms,  is  a  relatively  small
     proportion of the overall number of practitioners. This indicates  that
     the large majority of those who practice Falun Gong in China in privacy
     and with discretion, do  not  experience  material  problems  with  the
     authorities.

 36. Our second conclusion is that the essential benefit of Falun Gong to an
     individual comes from the practice of meditation and Qi Gong exercises,
     which can be carried out alone or with a few  friends  in  private.  It
     appears to have some spiritual dimension. There does not appear however
     to be any duty or pressure on a Falun Gong practitioner to proselytise,
     even though some plainly do. We therefore endorse the view expressed by
     the Court of Appeal in paragraph 33 of their judgment in this case that


          "We are not prepared to accept that  authoritarian  pressure  to
          cease the practice of Falun Gong  in  public  would  involve  the
          renunciation of core human rights entitlements."

 37. Our third conclusion is that risk of material  ill-treatment  escalates
     significantly when a practitioner does engage in  activities  that  are
     reasonably likely to bring him to the notice of the  authorities.  Such
     activities  include  the  public  practice  of  Falun  Gong  exercises,
     recruitment  of  new  members,  and   dissemination   of   Falun   Gong
     information. The risk of escalating ill-treatment also increases when a
     person who  has  previously  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
     authorities  and  has  been  detained/re-educated  and  warned  against
     continuing Falun Gong activity, ignores that warning.

 38. Our fourth conclusion, which follows from the  previous  paragraph,  is
     that,  absent  special  factors  and  credible  motivation,  a   person
     displaying limited knowledge of Falun Gong or limited involvement  with
     it, is unlikely to be committed to undertaking activities on return  to
     China that would bring him to the adverse attention of the  authorities
     and materially increase his risk.

                            Case Specific Issues

 39. We come then to the case specific issues argued before us.

 40. First we conclude, by reason of our general findings  above  that  even
     though the Adjudicator's conclusion, that membership of the Falun  Gong
     comprised within the terms of the 1951 Convention a  particular  social
     group, or as the Adjudicator actually put it a "social  group",  is  an
     error, and indeed an error of law, it is not a material error,  because
     activity for Falun Gong can on appropriate facts engage the alternative
     1951 Convention reason of imputed political opinion.

 41. Next is whether the Adjudicator's findings of fact are  sustainable  on
     the evidence before him. The IAT concluded they were not because of the
     discrepancy between the Appellant's written statement and oral evidence
     about the length of her second detention, but did not remit the  appeal
     for fresh findings of fact, because, as can be seen from the  terms  of
     the referral by the Court of Appeal, the IAT decided the  appeal  on  a
     different basis, on what was alleged by the Appellant to be a  mistaken
     understanding of her evidence  concerning  her  intention  to  practise
     Falun Gong if returned to China and the nature of her activities.

 42. As to the general challenge to the Adjudicator's  positive  credibility
     findings, we first note the reasons given by him to support them.  They
     are as follows.
                 1. The claim is in line with the objective evidence of  the
                    crack-down on Falun Gong practitioners in China.
                 2. The Appellant has been entirely consistent  save  except
                    in one or two minor discrepancies.
                 3. There was no challenge to the Appellant's  knowledge  of
                    Falun Gong or her claim to be a practitioner.
                 4. She was nervous when giving evidence and had to  correct
                    herself on two occasions but that was to her credit.
                 5. The only discrepancy between the  papers  and  the  oral
                    evidence was the length of the second detention,  as  to
                    whether it was one week as per the written statement  or
                    one month as in her oral evidence. The Adjudicator  gave
                    her the benefit of the doubt on  this.  The  discrepancy
                    could be a simple  typographical  or  translation  error
                    when the statement was read back.

 43. Mr Gulvin challenged the Adjudicator's findings, relying  initially  on
     the two matters raised in the Respondent's original grounds of  appeal.
     First he submitted that the Adjudicator erred in  not  giving  material
     adverse weight to  the  discrepancy  between  the  Appellant's  written
     statement and her  oral  evidence  as  to  the  length  of  her  second
     detention. There was a significant difference between one week and  one
     month.  Second the Adjudicator erred in concluding that there was  only
     one discrepancy between the written statement and  the  oral  evidence,
     because there was also a discrepancy as to whether  the  Appellant  had
     been released from the second detention on bail or not.

 44.  We  conclude  that  there  is  no  material  substance  in  these  two
     challenges.

 45. First, the Adjudicator was entitled in the context of the evidence as a
     whole to take the view he did of the contradiction between the  written
     statement  and  the  oral  evidence  over  the  length  of  the  second
     detention, and to accept what was said by the  Appellant  in  her  oral
     evidence as being true. The discrepancy could be explained by an  error
     in the written statement that was not read back to  the  Appellant,  as
     the Adjudicator accepted. Mr Gulvin essentially offers  an  alternative
     opinion to the view that was reached by the  Adjudicator,  but  if  the
     Respondent had wanted to further  challenge  the  Appellant  in  cross-
     examination, he should  have  been  represented  at  the  Adjudicator's
     hearing, but he was not. In terms of Subesh we do not consider that the
     process of reasoning and the application of the relevant law require us
     to adopt a different view.

 46. With regard to the  second  challenge,  Mr  Gulvin  accepted  that  the
     difference between the written statement and the oral evidence  on  the
     question of bail, was not an inconsistency but a clarification  of  the
     distinction between what bail meant in the Chinese context and  in  the
     UK.  Thus  the  Adjudicator  was  correct  in  referring  to  only  one
     inconsistency

 47.  Thus  we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact   are
     sustainable.

 48. The final issue in contention is the challenge is to the  Adjudicator's
     conclusion as to internal relocation.   He  held  in  paragraph  16  as
     follows.
           "The objective material before me does  point  to  an  increased
           crackdown on the Falun Gong movement by the Chinese  authorities
           and as to the option of internal flight I accept the Appellant's
           account, given it is the state that is persecuting her and  that
           the machinery of the state  is  available  there  to  trace  her
           wherever she were to move in China. In looking at  the  decision
           in Zheng, I note that in looking at the case  here  on  its  own
           facts and merits, that the Appellant here too  is  more  than  a
           mere practitioner. She has supported the movement in some if not
           significant measure on a day to day basis. I have to in  looking
           at paragraph 18 of that decision look at the two questions posed
           when applying the appropriate burden and standard  of  proof.  :
           (1) would this Appellant as an arranger and leader  of  practice
           sessions be the subject of the ill-treatment,  and  (2)  if  the
           answer to that  was  yes,  would  the  ill-treatment  amount  to
           persecution? In looking at the Appellant's case, as  I  stressed
           on a case-by-case basis on its own merits, my answer to both  of
           those questions on the basis of the evidence before me  and  the
           objective material cited must be yes."

 49. Mr Gulvin challenged this on the basis that the  Appellant's  own  oral
     evidence was that she had been released after her second detention  and
     was not subject  to  any  outstanding  charge.   There  was  no  reason
     therefore why the authorities would seek to pursue  her  in  any  other
     part of China. Nor would she be at any  real  risk,  as  there  was  no
     evidence before the Adjudicator to support the contention argued on the
     Appellant's behalf in the Court of Appeal that she would continue  with
     similar activities on behalf of Falun Gong if returned, as she  had  in
     the past.

 50. We accept, as the Appellant  clarified  before  the  Adjudicator,  that
     there are no outstanding charges against the Appellant  in  China.  She
     will not therefore be at risk of arrest on an  outstanding  charge  and
     will not be pursued by the authorities in  China  on  that  basis.  The
     relevant issue is whether the Appellant had indicated in  the  evidence
     before the Adjudicator that she would continue with her activities  for
     Falun Gong  as before, and would therefore be at real risk, if she were
     re-arrested for her future activities, of being identified as a  person
     who  had  already  been  arrested,  detained  and  warned  twice  as  a
     consequence of her support for Falun Gong.

 51. Ms Phelan argued that there was ample evidence before  the  Adjudicator
     to support to the Appellant's contention that she  would  continue  her
     activities for Falun Gong if returned and it was clear in  the  context
     of the determination as a whole that  the  Adjudicator  accepted  this,
     given the absence of any cross-examination, and that this was the basis
     for his concluding that there was no viable internal relocation option.



 52. Having considered the submissions made to  us,  we  conclude  that  the
     Appellant had made clear up to and at the time of  the  hearing  before
     the Adjudicator and that she would continue  with  her  activities  for
     Falun Gong if returned to China.  This  was  stated  in  terms  in  the
     additional grounds  submitted  with  her  appeal  to  the  Adjudicator.
     Paragraph 6 states
           "The Appellant's attempts to practise her religion have met with
           such extreme opposition as to endanger her safety and force  her
           to  seek  international  protection.    She   is   a   committed
           practitioner of  Falun  Gong  and  would  wish  to  continue  to
           practise her religion if returned to China.....

 53. The reference to continuing to practise (without any qualification)  if
     returned to China implies continuing  with  the  activities  which  she
     carried out previously, which  included  recruitment,  organisation  of
     meetings and events, and public practice as well has private  practice.
     If the Respondent had wished to test this assertion further, he  should
     have done so at the hearing before the Adjudicator but chose not to  be
     represented. Given the lack of  challenge,  and  his  general  positive
     credibility findings, the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to  accept  this
     evidence. As Ms Phelan observed, if the Appellant had intended to  give
     up her past activities for Falun Gong, there would have  been  no  need
     for her to leave China at all, as she would no longer have been at risk
     there. She had already demonstrated her commitment by her  response  to
     pressure by  extending  her  Falun  Gong  activities  after  her  first
     detention and ill-treatment. This showed determination and motivation.

 54. Reading the determination as a whole, we conclude that the  Adjudicator
     did take into account,  when  considering  the  viability  of  internal
     relocation, the  Appellant's  expressed  and  effectively  unchallenged
     intention to continue with her activities on behalf of  Falun  Gong  if
     returned to China. He was entitled  on  the  evidence  to  do  so.  The
     objective evidence we have described above shows increasing  risk  from
     the activities which the Appellant  had  undertaken  in  the  past  and
     intended to continue doing. We can see no error in his conclusion  that
     there would be real risk in  her  home  area  and  no  viable  internal
     relocation option for such a person.  Her activities were significantly
     more than that simply those of a private practitioner.  She had already
     come to the adverse attention of the authorities twice  before.   There
     was a real risk she would be detained again, in respect of  her  future
     activities, and  then  inquiry  would  be  made  where  she  had  lived
     previously and her record would come to light.  In the context  of  the
     objective evidence this would place her at real risk of persecution and
     a breach of Article 3.

 55. In summary therefore we can see no material error in the  Adjudicator's
     findings of fact and conclusions, all of which, apart from the question
     of particular social group, were open to him. That sole  error  is  not
     material because on the established facts imputed political opinion  is
     a  viable  alternative  1951  Convention  reason.   The   Adjudicator's
     determination is accordingly sustainable.

                            Summary of Decisions

      There is no material error. The Adjudicator's determination shall
      stand.




      Signed
         Dated    4 August  2005



            S L Batiste, Senior Immigration Judge


            Approved for electronic transmission
APPENDIX OF OBJECTIVE EVIDENCE CONSIDERED

   1. CIPU report of April 2005
   2. US State Department Country Report of human rights practices - 2004
   3. US State Department China Report  -  International  Religious  Freedom
      Report 2004.
   4. Amnesty International "Crackdown of Falun  Gong  and  other  so-called
      heretical organisations - 2000.
   5. Amnesty International Report on China - 2004
   6. CNN - China - Falun Gong a global threat - August 2002
   7. CNN - Falun Gong: a brief but turbulent history - July 2002
   8. Human Rights Watch and Geneva Initiative on Psychiatry - August 2002.
   9. BBC - Falun Gong: living in fear - April 2000
  10. Christian Century - Falun Gong  supporters  denounce  China  -  August
      2000.
  11. BBC - The complex web of Falun Gong - July 1999
  12. BBC - Text of notice banning Falun Gong - July 1999
  13. Amnesty International - UA 97/05 - 22 April 2005-08-01
  14. BBC - Falun Gong hacker died in jail - December 2003
