


|IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                          |
|                  |                                                         |
|                  |                                                         |
|                  |SK (Roma in Kosovo - update) Serbia and Montenegro [2005]|
|                  |UKIAT 00023                                              |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |                |                  |
|Heard on:         |10 December 2004      |Appeal number:  |                  |
|Date typed:       |12 December 2004                                         |
|Date promulgated: |28 January 2005                                          |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (VICE PRESIDENT)                                             |
|MRS. M. L. ROE                                                              |
|MRS. G. GREENWOOD                                                           |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |




|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E.  Fripp,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Douglas
                        Simon Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.



1.    The Appellant (a national  of  Serbia  and  Montenegro,  who  is  from
     Kosovo and who arrived in the United Kingdom on 11  October  2002)  has
     appealed, with permission, against the determination of Mr. K. O. Adio,
     an Adjudicator, who (in a Determination promulgated on  19  April  2004
     following a hearing on 13 April 2004 at  Hatton  Cross)  dismissed  his
     appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  against  the  Respondent's
     decision of 14 January 2004 to give directions for his removal from the
     United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    In this case, the Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited  by  Section  101
     of the 2002 Act. This confers  jurisdiction  to  entertain  appeals  on
     points of law only. The Tribunal cannot allow an appeal unless it holds
     that the Adjudicator had perpetrated a material error or mistake of law
     (see CA v. SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165).

3.    The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he would be  persecuted  in
     Kosovo on account of his Roma ethnic origin.  The Adjudicator  did  not
     find him credible as to the problems he alleged to have experienced  in
     Kosovo on account of his Roma ethnic  origin.  The  Adjudicator  stated
     that he did not accept  the Appellant's account of "the core aspects of
     his claim". He said that there were "significant discrepancies" in  the
     Appellant's evidence. He did  not  find  the  Appellant  credible  with
     regard  to  his  reasons  for  leaving  Kosovo  (paragraph  21  of  the
     Determination). At paragraph 23 of the Determination,  the  Adjudicator
     stated that, in view of these findings, he  did  not  accept  that  the
     Appellant had discharged  the  burden  of  proof  to  show  that  "she"
     (presumably meaning "he") has a well-founded fear of persecution for  a
     Convention reason.  At paragraph 24, the Adjudicator  referred  to  the
     UNHCR paper on Kosovo dated 30 March 2004 in the following terms:

            I am aware of the latest UNHCR paper on Kosovo  dated  30  March
           2004  and  the  recommendations  that  minority  groups   should
           continue to benefit from international  protection  particularly
           in view of the recent inter ethnic clashes. None of the  parties
           addressed me in court on this issue, however,  in  view  of  the
           contents of that  paper  which  I  have  partly  summarised  the
           respondent might want to consider providing the  appellant  with
           some sort of temporary leave in the UK.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted because the Vice  President  granting
     permission considered that it was arguable  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     not given proper consideration to the UNHCR paper of 30 March 2004.

5.     At  the  hearing  before  us,  Mr.  Avery  submitted  that,  as   the
     Adjudicator had not found the Appellant credible  with  regard  to  his
     alleged problems, it was open to him to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  that
     ground,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had  not  rejected   the
     Appellant's claim to be a Roma. For this reason,  the  Adjudicator  had
     not erred in law by suggesting to the Secretary of State that he  might
     want to consider granting the Appellant some form of leave, as  opposed
     to assessing the risk on return himself on account of  the  Appellant's
     Roma ethnic origin.  We  do  not  hesitate  in  rejecting  Mr.  Avery's
     submissions in this regard. The fact that the Adjudicator did not  find
     the Appellant credible with regard to his alleged problems as a Roma in
     Kosovo does not absolve him from assessing the risk on  return  on  the
     basis of such facts as, to the low standard of proof, he  is  satisfied
     about. Despite the fact that the Adjudicator did not find the Appellant
     credible with regard to his evidence about his alleged  past  problems,
     it is abundantly clear from the Determination that  he  did  not  doubt
     that the  Appellant  was  of  Roma  ethnic  origin.  It  was  therefore
     incumbent upon him to assess whether the Appellant  would  be  at  real
     risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on account of  his  Roma
     ethnic origin, regardless of his credibility  as  to  past  events.  It
     would, of course, have been open  to  the  Adjudicator  to  reject  the
     Appellant's claim as to his Roma ethnic origin  on  the  basis  of  his
     concerns about the credibility of the Appellant's claims concerning his
     alleged problems in the past, but he did to do so. It was not  open  to
     the Adjudicator to leave it to the Secretary of State to decide whether
     to grant the Appellant leave on the basis of  the  UNHCR  Paper  of  30
     March 2004.

6.    Accordingly, we are satisfied that the Adjudicator  did  err  in  law,
     for the reasons we have given above.

7.    The Tribunal delivered to the parties at the  hearing  copies  of  the
     Tribunal's Determination in the following cases:

      (a)   FD (Kosovo - Roma) Serbia and Montenegro CG [2004] UKIAT  00214.



      (b)   KK (risk - Return  -  Suicide  -  Roma)  Serbia  and  Montenegro
           [2004] UKIAT 00228.

      We invited the parties to address us  on  any  fresh  evidence  relied
     upon by the Appellant which would persuade us to depart from the  views
     of the Tribunal above.

8.    Fresh evidence: We have  been  served  with  the  following  documents
     which were not before the Tribunal in the FD case:

            Served on the Appellant's behalf:

      (a)   The UNHCR Position Paper  dated  August  2004  entitled:  "UNHCR
           Position on the  Continued  International  Protection  Needs  of
           Individuals from Kosovo" (document H of the  Appellant's  Bundle
           B).
            (the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 Paper)

      (b)   Appendix 1 (entitled: "Non-exhaustive list of selected  security
           incidents involving minorities January 2003 -  April  2004")  to
           the UNHCR's paper dated August 2004 entitled:  "The  possibility
           of applying the internal flight or relocation alternative within
           Serbia and Montenegro to certain persons originating from Kosovo
           and belonging to ethnic minorities there"  (document  I  in  the
           Appellant's Bundle B) (the UNHCR Serbia  and  Montenegro  August
           2004 Paper). We were only referred to Appendix 1;  we  were  not
           referred to the main body of the report, because (presumably) we
           confirmed to Mr. Fripp that he did not need to address us on any
           internal flight alternative outside of Kosovo.

      (c)   A bulletin from CIPU (Country Information  and  Policy  Unit  of
           the Immigration and Nationality  Directorate)  entitled  "Serbia
           and Montenegro (Kosovo) 5/2004" (document B in  the  Appellant's
           Bundle B). It is clear  from  the  date  immediately  below  the
           heading on the first page and from the last page of the document
           that this document is in fact dated July 2004.

            Served on the Respondent's behalf:

      (d)   The CIPU report on  Serbia  and  Montenegro  (which  includes  a
           section on Kosovo) dated October 2004.

      Submissions

9.1   Mr. Fripp informed us that the Appellant's home area is in  the  north
     west of Kosovo; his home village is on  a  road  between  Pristina  and
     Peje. In Mr. Fripp's submission, the Appellant would not be safe  in  a
     Roma enclave. Furthermore, he would not be able to travel safely to any
     Roma enclave. In Mr. Fripp's submission, much of the objective evidence
     which was before the Tribunal in the FD case was old, as paragraphs 33,
     38 and 39 of the Determination indicate. Paragraph  58  indicates  that
     the Tribunal did consider the  incidents  in  mid-March  2004  and  the
     UNHCR's position paper of 30 March 2004. In that paper, the  UNHCR  had
     stated that a report would be published in  April  2004,  although  the
     Tribunal in the FD case noted that, as at mid to late  May  2004,  none
     had been published. We now have the detailed report of  the  UNHCR,  in
     the form of the report dated August 2004.

9.2   Whilst the whole of the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 Paper was  important,
     paragraphs 25, 26 and 27 were particularly important.  Paragraph  2  of
     this report states  that  many  less  serious  inter-ethnic  crimes  go
     unreported. Appendix 1 of the UNHCR Serbia and Montenegro  August  2004
     Paper is a non-exhaustive list of selected security incidents involving
     minorities between January 2003 and April 2004. Mr. Fripp asked  us  to
     bear in mind the fact that there  is  under-reporting  of  inter-ethnic
     crimes.

9.3   Mr. Fripp also referred us to paragraphs 3.3,  3.9  and  3.10  of  the
     CIPU Bulletin of July 2004. In Mr. Fripp's submission, all the evidence
     indicates that protection levels for Roma in Kosovo  are  insufficient.
     We noted that paragraph 2 of the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 Paper  refers
     to the environment in Kosovo being one in which inter-ethnic  crime  is
     not "systematically investigated and rarely solved". We  asked  whether
     "systematic investigation" is what  is  entailed  in  deciding  whether
     protection is sufficient. Mr. Fripp accepted that it was clear from the
     judgement  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Horvath  that   international
     protection is not available if sufficient protection is available and a
     guarantee of protection is not necessary. It is  not  necessary  for  a
     state to eliminate all risk or to exclude random attacks. However,  the
     situation for Roma in Kosovo is that there is a systematic  pattern  of
     violence and repercussions.  Minority  groups  are  entirely  isolated.
     Freedom of movement has essentially ceased. In these circumstances,  in
     Mr. Fripp's submission, protection for Roma in Kosovo is insufficient.

10.   Mr. Avery referred us to  paragraph  K.6.53  of  the  CIPU  Report  of
     October 2004 which shows that, up until the riots  in  mid-march  2004,
     the situation for Roma in Kosovo was improving. Paragraph K.6.87 of the
     report supports the view of the Tribunal in the FD case that  the  mid-
     March 2004 riots were a blip. The overall position of the UNHCR has not
     changed much since mid-March  2004.  Paragraph  K.6.59  of  the  report
     refers to the steps taken by UNMIK and OSCE since March 2004.

11.   Mr. Fripp reminded us that we do not have  before  us  the  June  2004
     UNHCR report which would have enabled us to assess more fully the UNHCR
     Kosovo August 2004 paper, which refers to  the  June  2004  Paper.  The
     UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 Paper was before the  CIPU  when  the  October
     2004 CIPU Report was prepared; yet the only reference made in the  CIPU
     October 2004 report to the UNHCR paper is at  paragraph  K.6.86,  which
     quotes a paragraph from the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 report.

12.   We reserved our determination.


      Determination

13.   The limitation on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to  points  of  law
     means that the Tribunal cannot allow an appeal unless it holds that the
     Adjudicator had perpetrated a material error or mistake  of  law.   For
     the reasons given in paragraph 5  above,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
     Adjudicator had erred in law in failing to properly consider the  UNHCR
     position paper of 30 March 2004.  However, this error is not  material,
     in that, this report was considered by the Tribunal in the FD case (see
     paragraph 57). Having regard to the reasoning and  conclusions  of  the
     Tribunal in the FD case, the Adjudicator would have  reached  the  same
     conclusions even if he had considered the 30 March 2004 report.

14.   However, we have  taken  the  opportunity  of  considering  the  fresh
     evidence which has been adduced, in order to provide  guidance  on  the
     more-up-to-date material. It is a matter of regret that the  June  2004
     UNHCR Update Paper has not been placed before us, despite the fact that
     it was clearly referred to at paragraph 5 of the  UNHCR  Kosovo  August
     2004 Paper as being more detailed. We proceed to determine  the  appeal
     on such evidence as is before us.

     15.    Mr. Fripp asked us to note that the KK case was  not  designated
     as a country guidance  case  and  that  the  focus  of  the  Tribunal's
     attention in that case  was  directed  towards  the  risk  of  suicide.
     Accordingly, he submitted that we should not place any reliance on  the
     observations of the Tribunal  in  the  KK  case  as  to  the  objective
     evidence relating to Roma. We agree that we should not  place  reliance
     on the KK case, but not for the reasons Mr. Fripp gave. The KK case  in
     fact concerned a Roma from the Presevo Valley (see paragraph 3  of  the
     Determination in the KK case) and  the  objective  evidence  which  the
     Tribunal considered on the question  of  risk  as  a  Roma  related  to
     Serbia. The Appellant in the instant appeal is from Kosovo and would be
     returned to Kosovo. Accordingly, the KK case is not relevant.

16.   The FD case was heard on  13  February  2004.  The  Determination  was
     promulgated on 14 July 2004. Paragraphs 1 to 56  of  the  Determination
     were written before the outbreak of violence  in  mid-March  2004.  The
     Tribunal's conclusions, in summary, were:

      (a)   that Roma do not all live in Roma enclaves or in camps and  that
         those who live outside do not all face persecution; the picture is
         somewhat variable, depending on time and place (paragraph 51);

      (b)   Roma who are concerned about the security situation  can  go  to
         an enclave  where  there  is  a  greater  prospect  of  collective
         protection than outside (paragraph 51);

      (c)   conditions  in  camps  are  overcrowded  and  poor;  freedom  of
         movement and discrimination (which, for many Roma, involve routine
         and quite severe discrimination in assessing public services)  are
         a long way from what is aimed for. However, they do not reach  the
         Article 3 threshold (paragraphs 52 and 53);

      (d)   there is some evidence that ethnic  Albanians  take  violent  or
         destructive action to prevent those returning from doing so to the
         multi-ethnic areas where they once lived and that there  has  been
         some secondary displacement. However, there is  no  evidence  that
         those who returned have been persecuted or unable  to  find  state
         protection or alternate areas in which to live (paragraph 55).

      Following the outbreak of inter-ethnic  violence  in  Kosovo  in  mid-
     March  2004,  the  Tribunal  invited  submissions  from  both  parties.
     Following the publication of the UNHCR position paper of 30 March 2004,
     the Tribunal invited further  submissions  explicitly  addressing  that
     paper (see paragraph 57 of the Determination in the FD  case).  Neither
     party made any submission. After considering the UNHCR paper:

      (e)   the Tribunal saw no reason to revise the  view  it  had  earlier
         reached that the claimant in that case  would  return  to  a  Roma
         enclave or camp, neither  of  which  would  involve  a  breach  of
         Article 3 (paragraphs 59 and 64);

      (f)   that Serbs were the primary targets  of  the  violence  in  mid-
         March, although Roma and Ashkaelia were also  attacked  (paragraph
         60); that the violence of mid-March 2004  represented  an  extreme
         but temporary  expression  of  those  inter-ethnic  hatreds  which
         simmer below the surface of  daily  life,  with  sporadic  violent
         eruptions against which the UN  authorities  and  KPS  provided  a
         sufficient degree of protection. The violence was not  of  such  a
         scale that it  prevented  an  effective,  controlling,  protecting
         response from the authorities (paragraphs 64, 65 and 66).  It  was
         of the order of  a  week  before  NATO  forces  were  sufficiently
         reinforced  to  quell  the  violence  though  the   prospects   of
         identification and prosecution  of  its  instigators  are  limited
         (paragraph  60).  The  events  of  mid-march  2004  are  a   clear
         demonstration  of  the  promptitude  and  effectiveness   of   the
         protecting response (paragraph 65);

      (g)   that there was nothing of substance before the Tribunal to  show
         that the political or inter-ethnic landscape has changed such that
         there was a real risk of treatment in breach of Article  3  or  of
         persecution under the Geneva Convention for reasons of  ethnicity.
         Rather,  the  Tribunal  found   that   the   mid-March   incidents
         demonstrated that the tensions lead  to  sporadic  and  unpleasant
         violence which the  authorities  have  the  will  and  ability  to
         suppress (paragraph 67).

17.   Whilst we note the UNHCR's view in its Kosovo August 2004 Paper as  to
     the security concerns for minority groups in Kosovo, we also note  that
     there is no mention in this report of any security incidents  involving
     Roma following the events of mid-March 2004.  Appendix 1 to  the  UNHCR
     Serbia and Montenegro August 2004 Paper gives a  "non-exhaustive  list"
     of security incidents in Kosovo. Whilst we bear  in  mind  the  UNHCR's
     caution that security incidents are under-reported, we noted  that  not
     only is it the case that  the  majority  of  the  incidents  listed  in
     Appendix 1 pre-date the mid-March 2004 violence,  they  mostly  involve
     Serbs. In total, Appendix 1 lists about  140  separate  entries,  which
     date from approximately December 2002. Of this total number,  about  10
     entries involve incidents against Roma. This is the total  number  over
     the period covered by he Appendix. There are in total only  5  security
     incidents listed in Appendix 1 since the violence of mid-March  2004  -
     they involve Serbs in the main; none of them involve Roma.

18.   Paragraph 2 of the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 states:

             "In  an   environment   where   inter-ethnic   crime   is   not
         systematically investigated and  rarely  solved,  a  strong  sense
         prevails  that  there  is  impunity  and  the  rule  of   law   is
         inefficient."

19.   We were concerned at the reference to "systematic investigation" -  in
     particular, whether this means  that  protection  is  insufficient.  At
     paragraph 4, the UNHCR states that the law enforcement authorities  and
     political leadership did not manage to stop the  violence  "early  on".
     This has to be considered in the context of  paragraph  60  of  the  FD
     case, from which it is clear that it took a week for NATO forces to  be
     reinforced sufficiently to quell the violence. We do not agree with the
     view of the UNHCR that the response of the law enforcement  authorities
     was "inadequate" (paragraph 26 of the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 report).
      On the whole of  the  evidence  which  is  before  us  (including  the
     evidence referred to below), we affirm the view of the Tribunal in  the
     FD case that the response of the UN and NATO  forces  was  prompt,  and
     clearly  demonstrated  the  promptitude  and   effectiveness   of   the
     protecting response. The conclusions of the UNHCR at  paragraph  27  of
     the report indicate that the UNHCR's position reflects the fact that it
     is concerned with more than just refugee status. This was  referred  to
     by the Tribunal in paragraph 54 of the FD  case,  and  we  see  further
     evidence of  this  (see  the  references  to  "dignified"  returns)  at
     paragraph 27 of the Kosovo Paper of August 2004.

20.   We noted, in particular, the final bullet point  at  paragraph  27  of
     the UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 report, which we quote in full:

             UNHCR  supports  the  full  and  inclusive  implementation   of
         Security Council Resolution 1244 of June 1999, which  states  that
         "the main responsibilities of  the  international  civil  presence
         will include ..... assuring the safe and unimpeded return  of  all
         refugee and displaced persons to their homes in  Kosovo  (emphasis
         added). In UNHCR's view, where States forcibly  return  minorities
         to situations where they are displaced  into  communities  outside
         their  place  of  origin,  they  undermine  the  spirit   of   the
         Resolution".

21.   The Security Council Resolution 1244 of  June  1999  cannot  have  the
     effect of informing our evaluation as to whether people of Roma  ethnic
     origin are reasonably likely to face  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
     treatment in Kosovo, the assessment of which we must make in line  with
     our jurisprudence. The inclusion of the paragraph we have quoted  above
     in the UNHCR's report  is  a  further  indication  that  the  UNHCR  is
     concerned with matters which go beyond refugee status determination.

22.   At paragraph 3.3 of the CIPU Bulletin  dated  July  2004,  the  Kosovo
     Ombudsman is quoted  as  saying  (in  his  letter  dated  1  June  2004
     addressed to the governments  of  Belgium,  the  Netherlands,  Germany,
     Norway and Sweden, telling them to  reconsider  their  deportations  of
     Ashkaelia and Roma) that "the situation has  deteriorated  to  such  an
     extent that neither UNMIK nor the local police are in  a   position  to
     guarantee the safety of members of these national minorities". However,
     we are not concerned with guarantees of protection, but  a  sufficiency
     of protection.  We note the view of  the  ERRC  (European  Roma  Rights
     Centre) quoted at paragraph 3.3 to the effect that "the events of March
     2004 should more properly be  regarded  as  an  intensification  of  an
     ethnic cleansing campaign ongoing since June 1999". We acknowledge that
     there is some evidence, as the FD  case  states  (paragraph  55),  that
     ethnic  Albanians  take  violent  or  destructive  action  to   prevent
     returnees from  returning  to  their  former  multi-ethnic  areas.  The
     Tribunal in the FD case was already aware of this; there is nothing  in
     the brief quote from the ERRC at paragraph 3.3  of  the  CIPU  Bulletin
     which can properly cause us to  depart  from  the  conclusions  of  the
     Tribunal in the FD case.

23.   There are two main points which emerge from the CIPU Bulletin of  July
     2004 concerns freedom of movement. Paragraph 3.9 of the Bulletin states
     that freedom of movement for ethnic minorities has  practically  ceased
     in Kosovo.  However,  this  relates  in  particular  to  Kosovo  Serbs,
     although Roma and Ashkaelia  are  also  mentioned  as  being  adversely
     affected in their movement in Kosovo, reducing their capacity  to  work
     as day labourers. Whilst this may affect those who need to travel on  a
     daily basis to work, it is clear from paragraphs K.6.63  to  K.6.65  of
     the  CIPU  Report  of  October  2004  that  returns  (both  forced  and
     voluntary) are managed. We do  not  therefore  consider  it  reasonably
     likely that a returnee would not be able to travel  safely  to  a  Roma
     enclave or camp.

24.   Paragraph 4.8 of  the  CIPU  Bulletin  of  July  2004  refers  to  the
     possibility of further violence in the future. This  is  attributed  to
     the April 2004 report to the UN Security  Council  of  the  then  SRSG,
     Harri Holkeri. However, we also note that he also referred to the  fact
     that, in view of this, the KFOR and UNMIK police are maintaining a high
     level of visibility and presence particularly in minority areas.

25.   We note, furthermore, that paragraph K.6.87 of the CIPU  October  2004
     report states that, according to the UNHCR Update paper  of  June  2004
     (which has not been placed before us), the overall  situation  for  the
     Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptian communities since March 2004 in  the  main
     has been one of gradual resumption of the relative levels  of  minority
     rights held before the violence of mid-March 2004.

26.   Mr. Fripp drew our attention to the problems in Vushtrri/Vucitrn  (see
     paragraph K.6.86 of the CIPU October 2004 report and paragraph 3 of the
     UNHCR Kosovo August 2004 Paper). The Ashkaelia community in this  place
     suffered  disproportionately  when   compared   with   other   minority
     communities elsewhere in Kosovo. We do not see that the experiences  of
     the Ashkaelia community in Vushtrri/Vucitrn in March 2004 has any  real
     bearing on the issue in the instant appeal.

27.   On the whole of the evidence before us, we  have  concluded  that  the
     conclusions of the Tribunal in the  FD  case  remain  valid.  There  is
     reference to freedom of movement  for  Roma  being  adversely  affected
     (which shows some deterioration in their situation) but, on  the  other
     hand, there is reference to KFOR and UNMIK police  maintaining  a  high
     level of visibility and presence particularly in minority areas  (which
     indicates an improvement in terms of protection).  On  the  whole,  the
     situation remains much the same as it was on the  evidence  before  the
     Tribunal in the FD case.

28.   We now turn to consider the specific circumstances of  the  Appellant.
     The Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's claims as to the  problems  he
     alleged he had experienced in Kosovo. This means that  the  Appellant's
     Roma ethnicity has not led to his being persecuted in the past. This is
     in line with the Tribunal's conclusion at paragraph 51 of the  FD  case
     that even those Roma who live outside Roma enclaves or in camps do  not
     all face persecution. Paragraph K.6.83 of the CIPU October 2004  report
     states that the security position for  Roma  varies  according  to  the
     perceptions of the majority population, locality and  language  issues.
     The UNHCR and the OSCE (both in the January 2003  reports)  state  that
     the ability to speak Albanian is likely to b a factor in the degree  to
     which  the  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities  are  able  to
     integrate with the majority community, although it will  not  safeguard
     against  committed  assailants.   This   Appellant   speaks   Albanian.
     Accordingly, given the lack of any credible evidence of  past  problems
     and the fact that the Appellant speaks Albanian, there is no reason for
     supposing that he would not be safe in his home village. In any  event,
     he would be able to go to a Roma enclave or camp. For  the  reasons  we
     have already given above, it is not reasonably likely that he would  be
     persecuted or subjected to Article 3 ill-treatment in a Roma enclave or
     camp. Our attention has not been drawn to any factors which would  make
     it unduly harsh for him to relocate to a Roma camp or  enclave.  Whilst
     we note that freedom of movement for Roma has been adversely  affected,
     there is nothing before us which suggests that  the  Appellant  is  not
     reasonably likely to be able to reach a Roma enclave or camp safely.

29.   It follows that we must dismiss this appeal.

30.   This Determination  is  being  reported  because  we  have  taken  the
     opportunity of considering material published after the promulgation of
     the  Determination  in  the  FD  case.  We  have  concluded  that   the
     conclusions of the Tribunal in the  FD  case  remain  valid.  There  is
     nothing of substance before us to show that  the  political  or  inter-
     ethnic landscape has changed to such an extent that it can now be  said
     that a Kosovan Roma is at real  risk  of  treatment  which  amounts  to
     persecution on grounds of ethnicity or which is in breach of Article 3.



      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.



Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 18 January 2005

Approved for electronic distribution
