
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |TM (Views of ECO-Weight     |
|                           |        |Attached) Paskistan [2005]  |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00044                 |
|On:  23 December 2004      |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|27/01/2005                                                       |
|Given orally in court                                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                     |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                    |
|Ms S Singer                                                      |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|Entry Clearance Officer - Kiev                                   |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The appellant was represented before us today  by  Mr  C  Delaney,  a
      Home Office Presenting Officer.  The respondent was represented by  Mr
      P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co Solicitors.

2     The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 January 1978 who  on
      8 July 2003 applied to the Entry Clearance Officer in Kiev  for  entry
      clearance to come to the United Kingdom as a  student.  On  20  August
      2003 that application was refused for the following reasons,

           "I am not satisfied  that  you  will  be  able  to  follow  your
           proposed course of study, I am not satisfied that you intend  to
           follow your proposed course of study, I am  not  satisfied  that
           you intend to leave the United Kingdom  on  completion  of  your
           studies."


3.    When that decision was subsequently appealed by the  respondent  there
      was a substantial explanatory statement setting  out  the  appellant's
      reasons for decision.  The appeal was heard on 13 April 2004 by Mr P R
      Boardman an Adjudicator, when both parties  were  represented  and  he
      concluded after considering the  totality  of  the  evidence  and  the
      submissions made to him that he accepted  that  at  the  date  of  the
      appellant's decision the respondent was able and  intended  to  follow
      the stated course of study and that he intended to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom on completion of his studies.   He then sets out in  paragraph
      17 of his determination at some considerable length  the  reasons  for
      those views by reference to the appellant's  reasons  for  refusal  as
      explained in the explanatory statement and a review  of  the  evidence
      before him.  At the time this appeal came before us the only matter in
      issue was the ability of the respondent in terms  of  his  command  of
      English to follow the intended course.  This  is  dealt  with  in  the
      grounds of appeal as follows:

           "At 17c, the Adjudicator has said how the e mails showed a level
           of proficiency with the English language, however, he had failed
           to consider the Tribunals conclusions in the case of  Ahmad  IAT
           AR 254 that 'it might as a rule  be  a  commendable  course  for
           adjudicators  to  follow  in  considering  findings   by   entry
           clearance officers when they  have  seen  and  heard  applicants
           which the Adjudicator has  not'.   The  ECO  contends  that  the
           adjudicator has placed little weight to the findings of the  ECO
           who witnessed first hand the appellant at interview, and as such
           his findings are perverse and flawed."


4.     This  is  an  appeal  to  which  Section  101  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies and an appeal will lie to  the
      Tribunal only on a point of law. Only if we conclude  that  there  has
      been a material error of law on the part of  the  Adjudicator  are  we
      entitled to revisit the claim on a merits basis.   This  follows  from
      the judgment in CA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]
      EWCA Civ 1165.

5.    The relevant part of the Adjudicator's reasoning at paragraph  17c  is
      as follows:

           "The respondent was not satisfied that the  respondent  had  the
           ability to follow the course of study [the second  reference  to
           the respondent is clearly a mistake for an intended reference to
           the then appellant who is now the current respondent before  us]
           because the English language proficiency  certificates  produced
           showed a decline in his overall English ability between May 2001
           and June 2002, and the respondent had  difficulty  communicating
           with the appellant at interview.  However, Ms Maciel  [who  then
           appeared for the respondent] submitted at the hearing before  me
           that the appellant's English Test Report Forms at Annex G of the
           respondent's bundle showed a decline in only  one  of  the  four
           test areas, namely writing, and that the appellant's evidence in
           his letter at Annex H of the respondent's  bundle  was  that  he
           could not perform well because his uncle had died the day before
           the test; that although the appellant's proposed  course  was  a
           technical course, it was not a degree course; that his course at
           Gujrat Institute of  Technology  from  1997  to  2000  had  been
           conducted in English, and that his English  had  been  good,  as
           confirmed by the letter dated 26 July 2002 at Annex  F  of   the
           respondent's bundle; that so far as the interview was  concerned
           the appellant had given relatively long answers to many  of  the
           questions, rather than merely giving one-word answers, and  that
           showed a level of proficiency with the  language,  even  if  the
           interviewing officer had had to repeat some  of  the  questions;
           and that the appellant's e-mails with Bromley College themselves
           showed a level of proficiency with the  English  language  which
           indicated that he would have the ability to follow  the  course.
           I accept those submissions, which, again, I find persuasive on a
           balance of probabilities."


6.    Before us it was Mr  Delaney's  submission  for  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer that the  Adjudicator  had  effectively  overruled  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer and in so doing had failed to give proper account to
      the note made by him at the end of the interview record  which  is  in
      the following terms:

           "Applicant asked to be interviewed today in English, however  it
           should be noted that each question required rephrasing in  three
           or four different ways and very slow enunciation before he could
           understand. I am quite certain that would not be able to  follow
           lectures in the UK of a specialised nature."


      Given that clear and strong reference from the Entry Clearance Officer
      it was his submission that the Adjudicator had  not  properly  applied
      the case law by giving adequate weight to  what  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer had said.  He pointed out that in an earlier application  when
      he was interviewed in Urdu on 11 September 2001 the appellant himself
      accepted that his English was weak.  Although  there  was  an  English
      language course available as a pre-course to the technical  course  he
      intended to study, the date of the application made by the  respondent
      for entry clearance was such that he had effectively prevented himself
      from being able to undertake that course and would have to go straight
      into the main course which he sought to  follow.   All  those  factors
      should have been reflected by the Adjudicator in  his  submission  and
      those factors would lead properly to the view that the Adjudicator had
      erred in law in failing to provide adequate weight to the  comment  of
      the Entry Clearance Officer.


7.    Mr Richardson submitted that there was no apparent  error  of  law  at
      all on the part of the Adjudicator in reaching his  findings  when  he
      has clearly taken into account the reasoning of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer from the way in which he dealt with the three issues  at  sub-
      paragraph 17a, b and c of  his  determination.   We,  of  course,  are
      concerned now only with the issue in relation to  paragraph  17c.   It
      was his submission that one had to look at  the  e-mails  additionally
      because they showed a certain level of  imperfection  of  English  but
      nevertheless a clear  understanding  and  ability  to  communicate  in
      writing.  Additionally, the appellant's own previous English  language
      courses could  be  given  appropriate  weight.  He  had  produced  two
      certificates under the International English Language  Testing  system
      which was  an  internationally  recognised  standard  adopted  by  the
      Secretary of State for immigration purposes; in the first  certificate
      of 21 May 2001 he had reached an overall  band of 5; and in the second
      of 15 April 2002 an overall band of 4.5, which happened to be the band
      level which the Secretary of State in his published material  regarded
      as  being  adequate  for  immigration  purposes  for   knowledge   and
      understanding of the English language.  It  was  his  submission  that
      when one looked carefully at the nature and contents of the series  of
      e-mails with the college the respondent was adequately demonstrating a
      real interest and concern in the nature of his life during the courses
      that he intended to follow by enquiring about accommodation, diet  and
      similar matters. All these matters reflected an  overall  capacity  to
      communicate  in  English.   He  pointed  out  that  included  in   the
      international standards was the ability to listen in respect of  which
      the respondent had achieved band  4.5  in  each  certificate,  and  in
      respect of reading band 5 in each certificate.   He  had  also  scored
      similarly on his ability to speak and  thus  to  communicate  directly
      orally which would be necessary for the purposes of his course.

8.    We  take  into  account  also  that  it  is  plain  from  the  general
      qualifications of this respondent that the course which he intended to
      follow was an extension of levels of  understanding  of  matters  with
      which he was in general terms familiar and,  simply  as  a  matter  of
      comment on our part, that may be contrasted with the situation where a
      nervous interviewee is unable to dictate the course of questioning  to
      which he will be subjected during an interview and is likely to be  on
      somewhat less familiar territory.  Nevertheless, we say that simply by
      way of comment because, looking at paragraph 17c in this Adjudicator's
      careful and cogent determination, it is in our view apparent  that  he
      has taken into account the totality of the evidence which  was  before
      him and has properly balanced it in a way which enabled him to reach a
      conclusion applying the correct standard of proof, namely the  balance
      of probabilities.

9.    Whilst we do not in any way  quarrel  with  the  concept  that  it  is
      appropriate for an Adjudicator to give proper weight to the  views  of
      an Entry Clearance Officer who has had the opportunity of  seeing  and
      hearing an applicant  for  entry  clearance,  albeit  under  interview
      conditions which may not be the most ideal, it would  nevertheless  be
      wrong in our view to suggest as a matter of law that those views  have
      to be regarded as binding on the Adjudicator. There would otherwise be
      no  purpose  whatever  in  the  judicial  review  process  which   the
      Adjudicator is bound to undertake and there would not be that  balance
      of fairness between  the  parties  which  is  essential  for  judicial
      purposes in our system.  Where an Adjudicator  shows  he  has  clearly
      considered and weighed all that has been put into the evidence  before
      him, including the views expressed by the Entry Clearance Officer,  we
      do not consider that it will be easy for anyone then to  suggest  that
      he is not entitled to reach his own independent conclusion based on  a
      review of the totality of the evidence before him as this  Adjudicator
      has done.  We do not see that there has been any material error of law
      on the part of the Adjudicator  in  his  approach  to  his  task  and,
      applying the ratio in CA,  we  are  not  entitled  to  go  behind  his
      findings and to revisit them on a merits basis.  It is always the case
      that in any adversarial system one party may take  the  view  that  an
      Adjudicator should have reached a different conclusion from that which
      he did but that is not to say that the conclusion arrived  at  is  one
      that is to be regarded  as  being  perverse  unless  there  are  clear
      grounds for showing  that  the  Adjudicator  has  failed  properly  to
      consider all the evidence in arriving at his conclusions.

10.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
