
ar

HM (SomaliWomen-Particular Social Group) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00040



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing: 10 September 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  26/01/2005

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)
                            Mr H G Jones, MBE, JP



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representatives: Ms L Hooper of Counsel, instructed by South  West  Law  Ltd
for the appellant;  Mr J Morris, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  for  the
respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is  a  national  of  Somalia.   She  appeals  against  a
      determination of Adjudicator, Mrs  S.M. Walker, dismissing  on  asylum
      grounds her appeal against a decision giving  directions  for  removal
      following refusal to grant asylum. The Secretary of State also  lodged
      an appeal against the Adjudicator's decision to allow  the  appeal  on
      Article 3 grounds. The latter appeal was  limited  to  the  contention
      that the Adjudicator wrongly equated the position  of  the  appellant,
      who was a married woman, with that of a single woman.

2.    On 22 January 2004 a Tribunal chaired by His  Honour  Judge  Huskinson
      dismissed the appeal of the Secretary of State.  However,  in  respect
      of the asylum grounds of appeal, the Tribunal  chaired  by  the  Judge
      could not agree and, accordingly,  an  order  was  made  for  a  fresh
      hearing before a differently constituted Tribunal.

3.    It is arguable that it was not open to that  Tribunal to have made  an
      order in such terms. However, that matters not now,  since  Mr  Morris
      stated that the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  ruling  of  that
      Tribunal on the Article 3 issue. The only appeal before us, therefore,
      concerns the appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  refusing
      asylum.

4.     It  is  important  that  we  spell  out  precisely   what   was   the
      Adjudicator's finding which has been accepted  by   the  Secretary  of
      State in this case.  It was that the appellant would face a real  risk
      of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 by virtue of having  to  return
      to Mogadishu as a lone woman.  Had we been considering  this  case  at
      first instance, we would not have agreed with this finding. But in the
      context of this appellant's appeal we are required to accept  it.   Mr
      Morris for his  part  emphasised  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
      conceding his appeal for technical reasons only, to do with  the  fact
      that  the  grounds  as  drafted  had  only   taken  issue   with   the
      Adjudicator's treatment of  the appellant as  single  albeit  she  was
      married. The Secretary of State, therefore, did not accept  that  lone
      women were generally at Article 3 risk.

5.    Given that the Adjudicator accepted a real risk of treatment  contrary
      to Article 3, it must also  be accepted that he found a real  risk  of
      persecution under the Refugee Convention. Thus, artificial though   it
      is, the only issue in  this  appeal  is  whether   the  real  risk  of
      persecution facing the appellant would be by reason of  ("for  reasons
      of") a Refugee Convention ground.   This  issue  subdivides  into  the
      question of whether there  exists  a  Refugee  Convention  ground  and
      whether there is a sufficient causal nexus between this ground and the
      persecution feared.

The Refugee Convention Ground Issue
6.    The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator
      should have found a Refugee Convention ground of  (1)  race  or  other
      ethnic origin;  and/or (2) membership of a particular social group.

7.    In relation to (1), we see no merit in the  grounds.  The  Adjudicator
      gave sound reasons for concluding that the  appellant  had  failed  to
      give a credible account of membership of the  Tunni Brava clan.

8.    It is true that one point she stated that "I cannot conclude that  she
      is not [of the  Tunni Brava clan]".  However, this was merely to  make
      clear to the reader that she had considered the issue in the light  of
      the approach set out in Karanakaran [2000] 2 All  ER  of  taking  into
      account even  mere possibilities  in  deciding  whether  there  was  a
      reasonable degree of likelihood of what was claimed  having  occurred.
      The Adjudicator made very  plain  in  the  same  sentence  that,  even
      bearing this  possibility  in  mind,  she  did  not  consider  it  was
      reasonably likely the appellant was of the  Tunni Brava clan.

9.    We have examined the report of Dr Luling  and  consider  that  it  was
      open to the Adjudicator to find that it gave no  positive  support  to
      the appellant's claim to be a Tunni Brava. We also think it  was  open
      to the Adjudicator to find the appellant showed  a  lack  of  relevant
      knowledge of her clan and of its language. She was quite  entitled  to
      treat as a relevant factor, in assessing clan identity, the fact  that
      the appellant and her mother had been able to survive  for  a  lengthy
      period in  Mogadishu: this was properly seen by the Adjudicator  as  a
      factor which did not suggest that they had been targeted as a minority
      clan.

10.   We see no proper basis of challenge, therefore, to  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion that there was no  Refugee  Convention  ground  related  to
      race.

      The Issue of Women as a Particular Social Group
11.   The thrust of Ms Hooper's submission was that the  Adjudicator  should
      have concluded that the appellant in this case faced a  real  risk  of
      persecution on account of her membership of a particular social  group
      (PSG), namely, women in Somalia. Whilst  she  considered  it  arguable
      that more narrowly defined  groups  might  also  qualify  for  Refugee
      Convention purposes e.g. young, single  (or  unprotected)  women,  she
      accepted that these would be more  susceptible  to  the  criticism  of
      circularity  i.e.  being  groups  defined  by  the   fact   of   their
      persecution.

12.   We are bound to say that the  Adjudicator   did  not  give  any  clear
      reasons why she rejected submissions put to her based on the existence
      of a PSG composed of women (or some women) in Somalia.

13.    However,  it  remains  to  consider  whether  she  erred  in  law  in
      concluding there was no PSG in existence  in  this  case.  The  appeal
      arose under s.69(5) of the  1999 Act and not under s.82  of  the  2002
      Act.  Nevertheless the Court of Appeal in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165  has
      established that  the critical date is not when the decision was made,
      but whether the promulgation of the  Adjudicator's  determination  was
      before or after 9 June 2003. Since the determination in this case  was
      notified on 12 June 2003, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is confined
       to considering  whether  there was a material  error  of  law.  As  a
      result, unless we are satisfied there is a material error of  law,  we
      are prevented from admitting evidence  dealing with  events  after  12
      June 2003 even though adduced in accordance with Tribunal  directions.
      This  restriction does not, however, exclude  anything  of  particular
      significance in this case, since the evidence relevant to the issue of
      women as a  PSG is substantially the same whether one refers  to  pre-
      or post-12 June 2003 sources.

14.   We should perhaps mention  at  this  stage  that  we  did  look  at  a
      judgment of the  Australian  Federal Court, in which it  was  accepted
      that young women in Somalia were a PSG:  Minister for Immigration  and
      Multicultural Affairs v Cali [2000] FCA 1026 (3 August 2000). This was
      submitted by the appellant's representatives after  we  had  completed
      our hearing.   However, even aside from procedural  difficulties  with
      accepting it into evidence late, we did not find it of any  particular
      assistance, since the principal concern of the  Court was not  whether
      (young) women in Somalia were a PSG, but simply  whether  the  Refugee
      Review Tribunal (RRT)  had  based  its  decision  to  this  effect  on
      evidence.

15.   Ms Hooper urged us to find that in the light  of  the  principles  set
      out by their lordships in the  Shah and Islam  judgment,  as  recently
      clarified by the President of the Tribunal, Mr Justice Ouseley  in  ZH
      (Women as a Particular Social  Group)  Iran  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00207,
      women in Somalia did constitute a particular social group.   The  main
      grounds  on  which   she  advanced  this  argument  were  as  follows.
      Firstly, they faced significant legal  discriminations  in  that  they
      typically  live under a system of law comprising three levels, Sharia,
      (regional)   governmental and tribal, in respect of each of which  the
      are treated unequally.

16.   Secondly, they suffer from widespread societal discrimination.

17.   Thirdly in a country in which there was no effective  national  system
      of protection, they are frequently left in an  unprotected  situation.
      Domestic abuse is prevalent.

18.   Based on this combination of factors, argued Ms Hooper,  women  should
      be seen to constitute a  PSG.

19.   Mr Morris chose not to make a submission on the   PSG  issue,  stating
      that he was   content to leave it up to the Tribunal.  In our view  it
      was unfortunate that Mr Morris saw fit to make no submissions.  Whilst
      it is true that the parties had not been notified in advance  (as  now
      happens) that the case is considered to raise  an issue or  issues  of
      general application, it should have been obvious to him that  the  PSG
      issue loomed large. As it has turned out we did not find  it  possible
      to resolve this case without reaching a view on the general  issue  of
      women as a PSG in Somalia.


The relevant legal Principles on PSG
20.   The start point for any post-Shah &  Islam  analysis  of  PSG  is  the
      Court of Appeal judgment in Montoya [2002] EWCA Civ 620;  [2002]  INLR
      399. The Court noted at paragraph 15 that it  had  been  addressed  by
      both sides on the basis that  the  Tribunal's  summary  of  the  basic
      principles as set out in their paragraph 55B  was  a  broadly  correct
      summary of the existing law binding on  the  Court  and  that  it  was
      content  to  proceed  on  that  basis.   The   Tribunal   in   Montoya
      (01/TH/00161) stated:

            "55. Summary of Conclusions


           A. The Adjudicator was correct to conclude that  the  respondent
           could not show a Convention  ground  of  political  opinion  but
           incorrect to conclude  that  he  had  made  out  the  ground  of
           membership of a particular social group (PSG). In deciding  that
           private landowners  were  a  PSG  in  current-day  Colombia  the
           Adjudicator overlooked the judgment of the  House  of  Lords  in
           Shah and Islam [1999] 2 A.C. 629 and in consequence applied  the
           wrong criteria for evaluating the PSG category. She  also  erred
           in failing to consider whether there was a causal nexus  between
           the respondent's  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  and  this
           alleged PSG.


           B. Taking stock of post-Shah  and  Islam  cases  both  here  and
           abroad, the Tribunal considers that the  basic  principles  that
           should govern assessment of a claim based on  the  PSG  category
           are as follows:


           (i)  in order to succeed under the Refugee Convention a claimant
           who has a well-founded fear of persecution must  show  not  only
           the existence of a PSG (the "PSG question"), but also  a  causal
           nexus between his membership of  the  PSG  and  that  fear  (the
           "causal nexus question");


           The PSG Question


           (ii)  the PSG ground should be viewed  as  a  category  of  last
           resort;


           iii)  persecution may be on account of more than one ground   If
           the principal ground is membership of a PSG, then  focus  should
           be on that;


           (iv)  the PSG ground must be interpreted in  the  light  of  the
           basic principles and purposes of the Refugee Convention;


           (v) if the PSG ground had  been  intended  as  an  all-embracing
           category,  the  five  enumerated   grounds   would   have   been
           superfluous;


           (vi) the PSG ground  is  further  limited  by  the  Convention's
           integral reliance on anti-discrimination notions inherent in the
           basic norms of International Human Rights Law;


           (vii) applying the eiusdem generis  principle  to  the  other  4
           grounds, the PSG category must be concerned with  discrimination
           directed against members  of  the  group  because  of  a  common
           immutable characteristic;


           (viii) a broad range of groups can potentially qualify as a PSG,
           including private landowners;


           (ix) but whether any particular group is  a  PSG  in  fact  must
           always be evaluated in the context of historical time and place;


           (x) in order to avoid tautology, to qualify as a PSG it must  be
           possible to identify the group independently of the persecution;


           (xi) however the discrimination which lies at the heart of every
           persecutory  act  can  assist  in  defining  the  PSG.  Previous
           arguments excluding any  identification  by  reference  to  such
           discrimination were misconceived;


           (xii) a PSG cannot normally consist in a disparate collection of
           individuals;


           (xiii)  for a PSG to exist it is a necessary condition that  its
           members  share  a  common  immutable  characteristic.   Such   a
           characteristic may be innate or non-innate. However,  if  it  is
           the latter, then the non-innate characteristic will only qualify
           if it is one which is beyond the  power  of  the  individual  to
           change except at the cost of renunciation of core  human  rights
           entitlements;


           (xiv) it is not necessary, on the other hand, for such  a  group
           to possess  the  attributes  of  cohesiveness,  interdependence,
           organisation or homogeneity;


           (xv) there is nothing in principle to prevent the  size  of  the
           PSG being large (e.g. women), but if the claim  relies  on  some
           refinement or sub-category of a larger group, care must be taken
           over  whether   the   resultant   group   is   still   definably
           independently of their persecution;


           (xvi) a PSG can be established by  reference  to  discrimination
           from state agents or non-state agents (actors) of persecution;


           (xvii) it is not necessary in order to qualify as a PSG  that  a
           person  actually  has  the  characteristics  of  the  group   in
           question.  It is enough that he will be perceived to be a member
           of the group.




           The Causal Nexus Question


           C. The words "for reasons of" require  a  causal  nexus  between
           actual or perceived membership of the PSG and well-founded  fear
           of persecution.  Caution should be exercised against applying  a
           set theory of causation.  In Shah and Islam and  the  Australian
           High Court case of Chen no final choice was  made  between  "but
           for" and "effective cause" tests, but the  "but  for"  test  was
           said to require a taking into account of the  context  in  which
           the causal question was raised and of the broad  policy  of  the
           Convention."


21.   We next turn to consider the further elaboration of  Shah  and  Islam
      (and the Court of Appeal judgment in Skenderaj [2002] All ER  (d)  267
      (which pre-dated Montoya) as given in ZH  in  which  at  paras  63-67,
      Ouseley, J stated:

         "63. In our judgment, the following conclusions ought to be  drawn.
         First, women in Pakistan formed a social  group  not  just  because
         they were women, but because they were also discriminated  against.
         This appears in the speeches of all  three  in  the  majority,  and
         indeed from the rejection of  that  proposition  by  Lord  Millett.
         Second,  it  appears  inescapably  from  the  way  in   which   the
         discrimination has been described  that  it  includes  legislative,
         judicial and police discrimination in the way in which women  could
         obtain, and indeed suffer from seeking, state protection.  The lack
         of state protection is inherent in the discrimination relied on.


         64.  Third, the women were not persecuted  "for  reason  of"  their
         membership of their group by the husbands against  whom  the  state
         was unwilling  or  the  women  were  afraid  to  seek  the  state's
         protection.  Whilst that would have been a possible  analysis,  the
         majority, confirmed by the rejection of  their  reasoning  by  Lord
         Millet, clearly rejected as unrealistic the view that the  husbands
         were persecuting their wives for a Convention reason.  It  was  the
         serious harm done by the husbands in combination  with  the  states
         inaction in providing protection or reinforcing of  the  harm  when
         protection was sought, which gave rise to the  persecution  and  to
         the persecution for a Convention reason.


         65.  Fourth, whether such circumstances give rise to or evidence  a
         particular social group depends  very  much  on  the  circumstances
         within any country at the relevant time, and the extent, nature and
         intensity of the social and state discrimination including the real
         risk that seeking protection would result in further  serious  ill-
         treatment.  The same is true of whether there  is  persecution,  or
         persecution for a Convention reason or a lack of state protection.


         66.  Thus, this is a case, on the particular  evidence  as  to  the
         circumstances in Pakistan, of state persecution  for  a  Convention
         reason. Discriminatory lack of state protection was a component  of
         persecution,  and  of  the  reason  for  the  persecution  and  the
         availability of state protection, but  it  was  also  part  of  the
         definition  of  the  social  group   through   its   relevance   to
         discrimination.


         67.  The crucial issue which is relevant to the definition  of  the
         group, though not necessarily  determinative  of  it,  relevant  to
         persecution, to the ascertainment of  the  Convention  reason,  and
         indeed to the final component of the overall refugee definition  is
         the nature of the state's protection."


22.   It is clear from the above that for the PSG requirement  to be met  in
      respect of women in  a particular country, there must not  only  be  a
      combination of measures of legal and  societal  discrimination;  these
      must also reach a certain level and intensity: see paragraphs  65  and
      79: 'What is striking about evidence in Pakistan  was  the  widespread
      and intense nature of the discrimination'.

23.   We turn to consider the  issue  of  women  as  a  PSG  in  current-day
      Somalia in the light of the criteria identified previously.

24.   In assessing the issue of how legal frameworks  impact  on   women  in
      Somalia it is first necessary to recall that  since  the  collapse  of
      central government in 1991 and the period of civil war between warring
      clans, no national framework of government  has   been  re-established
      despite over fourteen  major peace initiatives and  the  establishment
      of  a  Transitional  National  Charter  (TNC)  and  selection   of   a
      Transitional  National  Assembly  (TNA)  in  2000   and   a   national
      reconciliation conference process begun in Nairobi  in  2002.    These
      existing and emergent structures  co-exist  with  the  "South  Western
      State of Somalia" (Bay & Bakool) regional administration,  the  (self-
      proclaimed  state  of)  "Puntland  State  of  Somalia"  (north-eastern
      Somalia) regional body established under the Puntland Charter and  the
      self-declared "Republic of Somaliland" (north-western  Somalia)  which
      has its own Constitution. The April 2003 CIPU  at  paragraphs  5.6-5.7
      summarised matters as follows:

             '5.6 Since the  fall  of  Siad  Barre  in  1991,  Somalia  has
             remained without a  central,  functioning  or  internationally
             recognised  government.   Clan-based   factions,   traditional
             leaders and militia in different areas  of  the  country  have
             established    various     local     administrations,     some
             unrealistically claiming national authority. No  single  group
             controls more than a fraction of the country's  territory.  In
             some   areas,   notably   Puntland   and   Somaliland,   local
             administrations function effectively in  lieu  of  a   central
             government.  In   these   areas   the   existence   of   local
             administrations, as well as more traditional forms of conflict
             resolution such as councils of clan Elders, helps  to  prevent
             disputes degenerating rapidly into armed conflict.


             5.7   However,   this   process   of   rebuilding   state-like
             institutions or local  administrations  in  various  parts  of
             Somalia has been  slow and heterogeneous, and according to the
             UNDP Somalia 2001 report the  political  decentralisation  and
             the political  entities in   Somalia  are  still  fragile  and
             evolving.   The  report  states  that  "the   development   of
             governmental  forms  of  political   authority   in   regional
             administrations and  the  growth  of  urban  centres  such  as
             Hargeisa, Garowe, Bossaso, and  Baidoa, point to a process  of
             consolidation".'

25.   In some cases local   Sharia  courts  operate   (e.g.  in  Hiran:  see
      5.19], in others civil administration, such as it is, is  carried  out
      by  Councils of Elders. The CIPU April 2003 section dealing  with  the
      Judiciary states:


             '5.31   Until  1991  the  Constitution    provided   for   the
             independence of the judiciary  from  the   executive  and  the
             legislative powers. Laws and acts having the force of law were
             required to conform to the provisions of the  Constitution and
             general  Islamic  principles.   There  has  been  no  national
             judicial system since the fall of Siad Barre's  government  in
             1991.   The  judiciary  in  most  regions   relied   on   some
             combination of traditional and customary law, Shari'a law, the
             Penal  Code  the  pre-1991  Siad  Barre  Government,  or  some
             elements of the three.  Some regions  have  established  local
             courts  that  depend  on  the  predominant  local  clans   and
             associated factions for their authority.  Under the system  of
             customary justice, clans often held entire opposing  clans  or
             subclans responsible for alleged violations by individuals. In
             Bossaso (Puntland) and   Afmadow  (Lower  Juba)  during  2002,
             criminals were reportedly turned over to the families of their
             victims, who then exacted blood compensation in  keeping  with
             local tradition.


             5.32  The  legal   framework   throughout   the   country   is
             inconsistent and weak, however in   Somaliland,  Puntland  and
             areas  controlled  by   TNG    the  court  system   has   been
             regularised to some extent. The UN independent expert  on  the
             situation of human  rights  noted  in  his  2002  report  that
             challenges include under-qualified staff, low salaries, a lack
             of training and reference materials, gender  inequalities  and
             incoherence insofar as secular, customary and Islamic laws are
             all   applied   in   conflicting   and   overlapping    areas.
             Consequently, he concluded that this environment lends  itself
             to significant degrees of corruption and inefficiency.  It  is
             reported that the Islamic group, Al-Iltihaad, has brought  the
             influence with judges in some areas of Somalia.


             5.33 Information obtained by a Nordic fact-finding  delegation
             to Mogadishu in 1997 suggested that  Shari'a court is  divided
             into civil and criminal court. However, the   judicial  system
             is not man made but based  on  rules  handed  down  by  Allah.
             Shari'a courts also have a "Court of Appeal" though one appeal
             court may serve a number of courts, a final appeal may be made
             to a "Revision Court" whose ruling is final.


             Southern Somalia
             5.34 The Transitional  Charter  provides  for  an  independent
             judiciary and for a High  Commission  of  Justice,  a  Supreme
             Court a Court  of  Appeal,  and  courts  of  first  reference;
             however, the Charter still had not been implemented by the end
             of 2002.  In Mogadishu, businessmen  withdrew  much  of  their
             funding for the Shari'a courts that had   previously  operated
             in Mogadishu under the influence of Al-Iltihaad in  favour  of
             funding the  TNG;  the  Shari'a courts  soon  collapsed  as  a
             consequence. The TNG announced  in  June  2001  that   Shari'a
             courts would come under the jurisdiction of  its  Ministry  of
             Justice and cease to function independently. The move  was  an
             attempt by the  TNG to set up a  functioning  judicial  system
             for Mogadishu. However, as of mid 2002 a  few  Shari'a  courts
             are still reported to be operating outside the TNG's  control,
             especially in northern Mogadishu. However, it is reported that
             some of the leaders of Al-Iltihaad are members  of  the  TNG's
             judiciary system.


             5.35  In  its  report  covering  events  during  2001  Amnesty
             International  (AI) referred to the process to gradually bring
             Islamic courts,  established  by  faction  leaders,  into  the
             national judicial system  began  in  Mogadishu.  However,  the
             human rights organisation expressed concern that these  courts
             did not meet recognised standards of fair trial  and  judicial
             competence. The  Mogadishu based NGO, Dr Ismail  Jumale  Human
             Rights  Centre   (DIJHRC)  protested  at  the   treatment   of
             prisoners before Shari'a courts during 2000.


             5.36 In Belet Weyne a Shari'a court was established in January
             2002 on the eastern side of the  town though its functions are
             primarily administrative (see the section: Political System  -
             Hiran).  The court has achieved certain things,  such  as  the
             removal of roadblocks but cannot  do  anything.  In  terms  of
             controlling  and  dealing  with  criminal  actions  and   clan
             disputes much still depends on the clan Elders.


             5.37 There were reportedly   no  Shari'a  courts  in  Bay  and
             Bakool as of mid 2002.  Here, Elders  still  play  a  role  in
             local disputes on a sub-clan  level,  but  when  it  comes  to
             serious crimes such as murder a code of conduct supervised  by
             RRA panels effectively constitutes the court.


             Puntland
             5.38  The  Charter  provides  for  an  independent  judiciary;
             however, the judiciary was not independent  in  practice.  The
             Puntland Charter provided  for  a  Supreme  Court,  courts  of
             appeal, and courts of first reference.  In practice  the  clan
             Elders  resolved  the  majority  of  cases  using  traditional
             methods.  However,  those  with  no  clan  representation   in
             Puntland  were  subject  to  the   Administration's   judicial
             system.


             Somaliland
             5.39 The Constitution provides for an  independent  judiciary;
             however,  the  judiciary  was  not  independent  in  practice.
             There was a serious  lack  of  trained  judges  and  of  legal
             documentation in Somaliland,  which  caused  problems  in  the
             administration of justice. Untrained police and other  persons
             reportedly served as judges.  Within Somaliland secular law is
             generally applied with   Shari'a  being  retracted  to  family
             cases.


             Legal Rights/Detention
             5.40 The Transitional Charter provides for  the  right  to  be
             represented by an attorney while the authorities  in  Puntland
             and Somaliland continued  to  apply  the  former  government's
             Penal Code which contains a similar provision. It was in those
             areas applying  the  former  Penal  Code  that  the  right  to
             representation  was  more  often  respected.  The   right   to
             representation by an attorney and the right to appeal does not
             exist in several areas that apply  traditional  and  customary
             judicial practices or Shari'a law.  In Somaliland the  accused
             can generally be assisted by a lawyer and there is  some  form
             of appeal, even in the  Shari'a courts. Amnesty  International
             referred in their annual report covering  events  in  2001  to
             reports by human rights defenders in Somaliland  of  arbitrary
             detentions and  unfair  trials.  Amnesty  International   also
             expressed concern that during  2001  judicial  administrations
             and police forces in both  Somaliland and  Puntland  displayed
             inconsistent respect for human rights.


             5.41 Throughout the country juveniles, who have been  detained
             at the request of families in order  to  be  disciplined,  are
             held without  charge. In  mid  2002  officials  of  the  human
             rights  organisation, ISHA, informed  a  British/Danish  fact-
             finding delegation that lengthy detention of criminal suspects
             was the main problem in the RRA  controlled   Bay  and  Bakool
             region.   They explained  that  the  court  system  was  weak,
             mainly because of a lack of funds  and  capacity.  During  his
             2002 visit to Puntland UN independent expert for human  rights
             successfully  requested  the  release  of  prisoners  detained
             without charge.


             Death Penalty
             5.42 The death penalty is retained in Somalia.  In their  2001
             report  Amnesty  International   report  that  Islamic  courts
             established by faction leaders imposed death sentences;  these
             sentences  were  reportedly  immediately  carried   out.    In
             September 2002, a court in Hargeisa, Somaliland, sentenced two
             children, aged 16 years, to death  for  murdering  a  16-year-
             old. As of the end of 2002 the death  sentence  had  not  been
             carried out and the government had asked the court  of  review
             the case.


             Internal Security
             5.43 Clan and factional militias, in some  cases  supplemented
             by local  police  forces  function  with  varying  degrees  of
             effectiveness in the country.'

26.   As regards measures of legal discrimination, it is  true  that  in  an
      unimplemented TNG charter and in the  Somaliland   Constitution  there
      are provisions prohibiting discrimination on the grounds  of  sex.  In
      the  unimplemented TNG  charter  and  the   Puntland  and   Somaliland
      legislation there is also provision for universal suffrage.   However,
      these provisions only cover parts of Somalia.  Furthermore and in  any
      event, the objective  country materials do not consider that  anywhere
      in Somalia such provisions properly reflect  the  general situation of
      women in terms of their legal status.  We agree with  Ms  Hooper  that
      for most women in Somalia, there  are  very  significant  measures  of
      legal discrimination. As stated in CIPU October 2003 (and the  earlier
      April 2003 CIPU Report before  the  Adjudicator  is  to  very  similar
      effect):

         '6.105  [6.99  of  2003  Report]  Women   and   children   suffered
              disproportionately heavily in the fighting following the fall
              of Barre's administration. There were large numbers of rapes,
              abductions and forced  marriages  of  women  by  the  warring
              militia, especially in 1991-92, which   has  stigmatised  the
              victims. Many women, who would  traditionally  have  had  the
              protection of men in their parents' and husbands' clans, have
              been left to head their families with the breakdown of normal
              structures. Most vulnerable have been  women  who  have  been
              internally displaced within  Somalia,  who  have  lacked  the
              protection  of  powerful  clan  structures,  and  those  from
              minority clans and ethnic minorities.


         6.106  In the June 2003 report of  the   Secretary-General  on  the
              security situation in Somalia, reference is made to  a  rapid
              assessment of women's justice. According to this,  women  are
              generally disadvantaged under all three systems of  law  that
              operate in  Somalia. It is noted that whilst each provides  a
              measure of protection, all systems (namely  civil,  customary
              and  Shari'a)  remain  inadequate  and  contradictory  to  an
              extent,   leaving   women   vulnerable   and   insufficiently
              protected.  The  report  notes  that  there  are  an  "almost
              negligible number of women in  service  within  the  judicial
              process".


         6.107 [6.100 of 2003  Report]  Laws  made  by  the  former  central
              government allowed female children to inherit  property   but
              only half the amount to which male siblings were entitled. In
              the traditional practice  of  blood  compensation  and  under
              Shari'a law, those found guilty of killing a woman  must  pay
              only half as much to the victim's family as they would if the
              victim was male. While polygamy is allowed  polyandry is not.
              The  TNG  charter,  not  implemented  at  the  end  of  2002,
              contains provisions that prohibit discrimination on the basis
              of sex or national origin. The  Somaliland  Constitution also
              contains  provisions  that  prohibit  discrimination  on  the
              basis of sex or national origin. The   TNG  charter  provides
              for  universal  suffrage  as  do  both  the    Puntland   and
              Somaliland administrations.


            ...


         6.113 [6.105 April 2003 Report] Violence against women  in  Somalia
              is widespread; robbery and rape are particularly common.  The
              UNDP Human Development Report  of  2001   noted  that  sexual
              violence against women during the civil war did not end  with
              the war. According to the report there is some evidence  that
              sexual violence is  a  persistent  crime  even  in  areas  of
              stability. The  US  State  Department  report  that  rape  is
              common in inter-clan  disputes;  in  April  2002  there  were
              allegations that militia members  loyal  to  warlord  Hussein
              Aideed had been responsible for the rape of numerous women in
              15 villages in the  southern  Qoroley  district.  There  were
              also reports of numerous rapes of Somali women and  girls  in
              refugee camps in Kenya during  the 2002.   Although  laws  do
              exist prohibiting rape they are not enforced.   A  few  rapes
              were  prosecuted  during  2002.   Many  women  consider   the
              traditional punishment of forcing the offender to marry their
              victim and to pay compensation to the family  of  the  victim
              for "their" loss to represent a further degradation  for  the
              victim herself.


         6.114 [6.106 April 2003 Report]  Domestic  violence  against  women
              exists, although there are  no  reliable  statistics  on  its
              prevalence. There  are  no  laws  that  specifically  address
              although both customary law  and   Shari'a  law  address  the
              resolution of family disputes.  There  are  no  laws  against
              spousal rape.'

27.   These passages identify a number of measures of legal  discrimination:
      disadvantages and inadequate protection under all three systems of law
      specifically  in  respect   of:   inheritance   of   property;   blood
      compensation;  plural  marriage;   frequent  non-enforcement  of  laws
      against rape; abusive application of  the system of  compensation  for
      victims of rape; an absence of laws specifically  addressing  domestic
      violence; and discriminatory lack of state protection.

28.    As  regards  societal  measures  of  discrimination,  these  passages
      together with others also identify  that  women  are  in  an  inferior
      position. The October 2003 CIPU Report states (largely replicating the
      earlier CIPU Report that was before the Adjudicator) that:

            '6.110 [6.103 April 2003 Report] The position of  women  in  the
              patriarchal  Somali  society  is  largely   subordinate   and
              societal discrimination is widespread. Several women's groups
              in Mogadishu, Hargeisa (Somaliland), Bossaso (Puntland),  and
              Merka (Lower Shabelle) are  actively  involved  in  promoting
              equal rights for  women.  Such  organisations  advocated  the
              inclusion of women in responsible  government  positions  and
              participate in peace building programmes.  UN  agencies  work
              with women's groups in  Somalia and are actively involved  in
              initiatives aiming to promote the elimination of all forms of
              discrimination against women.'


29.   Societal discrimination thus consists in women being subjected  to  a
      strongly patriarchal value system  and is widespread.

30.   As to whether there is a general  lack  of  protection  for  women  in
      Somalia, however, we do not agree  with Ms Hooper's submissions in all
      respects.

31.   Firstly, we do not accept that the lack  of  any  national  system  of
      government in Somalia means  that  women,  or  indeed  the  population
      generally, are wholly unprotected. As the Tribunal held in the starred
      determination, Dyli (00/TH/02186), and in the reported case  of  Farah
      [2002] UKIAT 07376 the question of whether protection can be  afforded
      within a country of nationality is essentially  a  question  of  fact:
      there is no requirement that it can only be afforded by de jure  state
      entities. This is particularly relevant in the case of Somalia,  since
      although there is  an  absence  of  any  national  government,  it  is
      perfectly clear that in large parts of the territory of Somalia  there
      are some areas under the control  of  regional  administrations  which
      perform the essential functions of government within their  respective
      territories, albeit there remain significant levels of armed  conflict
      and inter-clan fighting.

32.   Secondly, it is clear that whilst inadequate viewed as a whole,  there
      are ways in which the clan structure of Somali  society  ensures  some
      degree of protection for some women. For example the  CIPU  Report  at
      6.111 states:


         '6.111 [6.103 April  2003  CIPU]  A  widowed  woman  would  usually
              receive protection from her husband's clan. A widow  and  her
              children may be taken in by the direct family of her husband,
              whose brother, under the "dumal" principle,  would  have  the
              opportunity  of  marrying  her.  This  traditional   approach
              ensures that a widowed woman would only rarely  find  herself
              without protection.  Although marriage is usually within  the
              same sub-clan, intermarriage across clan  lines  does  occur.
              Only in exceptional cases does this present a difficulty  for
              a widow.'

33.   Thirdly, whilst the objective country materials do highlight  lack  of
      protection  as a problem for women, (particularly in  the  context  of
      rape and domestic violence (see 6.113 and 6.114)), it is primarily  in
      respect of three (admittedly significant) sub-categories:

         '6.105   [6.99   April   2003]   Women   and   children    suffered
              disproportionately heavily in the fighting following the fall
              of Barre's administration. There were large numbers of rapes,
              abductions and forced  marriages  of  women  by  the  warring
              militia, especially in 1991-92,  which  has  stigmatised  the
              victims. Many women, who would  traditionally  have  had  the
              protection of men in their parents' and husband' clans,  have
              been left to head their families with the breakdown of normal
              structures. Most vulnerable have been  women  who  have  been
              internally displaced within  Somalia,  who  have  lacked  the
              protection  of  powerful  clan  structures,  and  those  from
              minority clans and ethnic minorities.'

34.   Even  so,  we  do  accept  as  an  important  consideration  that  the
      existence of a partial lack of effective protection  does add  to  the
      cumulative picture.  Additionally, we think  it  is  very  clear  that
      there is legislative, police and  clan militia discrimination  in  the
      way in which women have to seek or obtain state protection.

35.   What then is the cumulative picture?  Women in Somalia form a PSG  not
      just because  they  are  women,  but  because  they  are   extensively
      discriminated against.  Second the measures of discrimination to which
      women in  Somalia are exposed include legislative, judicial and police
      or militia discrimination in the way in which  women  can  obtain  and
      suffer from seeking protection from the (regionalised or local)  clan-
      based authorities. Thirdly, the serious  harms  they  face  from  male
      sources arise  in  the  context  of  very  limited  ability  by  these
      authorities to protect them.   Finally, the measures of discrimination
      they face are extensive, intense and sustained.

The Causal Nexus Issue
36.   We must now place our finding on the  PSG issue side-by-side with  the
       Adjudicator's accepted finding that the appellant would face risk  on
      return in the  light of her "vulnerability as a young, single  woman".
      In view of this finding  we cannot see any basis for doubting that the
      appellant  has  established  in  this  case  that  the  real  risk  of
      persecution she faces  is by reason of her membership of a  particular
      social group, namely women.

37.   Insofar as  this  case  purports  to  give  country  guidance,  it  is
      confined to the finding that women in Somalia do currently  constitute
      a PSG.

38.   Although we have found that  the  appellant  succeeds  in  her  asylum
      appeal in this case, we would emphasise  that  Adjudicators  must  not
      equate a finding that  there exists a PSG with a  finding  that  there
      exists persecution or with a  further  finding  that  there  exists  a
      causal nexus between  such  persecution  and  the  PSG.   For  unusual
      reasons this appeal  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  an  acceptance  of
      persecution, and hence,  PSG was the only  real  issue,  but  in  most
      cases each of these  issues,  albeit  overlapping,  will  have  to  be
      decided in discrete fashion on the basis of the  overall  evidence  at
      large.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


