

                  MM (Certificate & remittal, jurisdiction) Lebanon [2005]
                                             UKIAT 00027                 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  19 January 2005
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           ....31/012005....

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)

Between:



                                                         APPELLANT

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Dubicka, instructed by Soloman Reed Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This case is something of a procedural muddle.  It is an  appeal  from
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr G Jamieson, promulgated on  23
     December 2003.  The background  to  how  it  came  before  him  is  of
     significance.

  2. The Appellant is a Lebanese citizen who claimed asylum in 2000 and was
     refused asylum in May 2001.  When refusing asylum,  the  Secretary  of
     State certified the asylum claim under paragraph 9(4)(b),  Schedule  4
     to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  Those  provisions  relate  to
     the asylum claim.  There are other provisions within paragraph 9 which
     relate to human rights claims but which were not referred  to  in  the
     Secretary of State's letter.

  3. The Adjudicator, Ms M B Lynch, heard the appeal in November  2001  and
     dismissed it.  She considered the opinion expressed in the certificate
     and upheld it.   She  was  clearly  aware  from  paragraph  3  of  her
     determination that the certificate related to the asylum subparagraphs
     of paragraph 9.  In paragraph 60 of her  determination,  she  said  in
     relation to the certificate:

           "I agree that the Respondent was  right  to  certify  this  case
           under paragraph 9(4)(b) and paragraph 9(7).  It  is  clear  from
           the facts before me that there is no reason to fear  persecution
           if the Appellant was returned to Lebanon today,  and  there  has
           been no evidence relating to torture."

  4. She dismissed the appeal and concluded that the decision did not  give
     rise to a breach of the Human Rights Act.

  5. The effect of the upholding of  the  certificate  was,  by  virtue  of
     paragraph 9(2) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act, that there was no  right
     of appeal to the Tribunal.

           "9(1) This paragraph applies to an appeal under Part IV of  this
                 Act by a person who claims that it would be contrary to the
                 Convention for him to be removed from, or to be required to
                 leave, the United Kingdom, if the Secretary  of  State  has
                 certified that, in his opinion, that claim is one to which-
                 (a)   sub-paragraph (3), (4), (5) or (6) applies;  and
                 (b)   sub-paragraph (7) does not apply.


           (2)   If, on an appeal to  which  this  paragraph  applies,  the
                 adjudicator agrees  [with  the  opinion  expressed  in  the
                 Secretary of State's certificate], paragraph  22  does  not
                 confer  on  the  appellant  any  right  to  appeal  to  the
                 Immigration Appeal Tribunal."


  6. At that time, the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Zenovics  [2002]
     EWCA Civ 273 had not been decided.  The effect of  that  case  was  to
     hold that where one of two claims had been certified,  paragraph  9(2)
     should be read so as to prevent a right of appeal to the Tribunal  "in
     respect of that  claim".   Paragraph  20  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
     decision shows that there was, however, only one appeal,  although  it
     could be made on two grounds against one decision.

  7. The certificate  in  the  state  of  the  law  as  it  was  after  the
     promulgation of the first Adjudicator's determination, however,  meant
     that it could only be  challenged  by  way  of  Judicial  Review.   An
     application for Judicial Review was made and  dealt  with  by  Consent
     Order on 8 August 2002.  The Consent Order referred in the recital  to
     the Secretary of State "withdrawing his certificate in  this  case  in
     relation to the Claimant's human rights claims" and the Consent  Order
     stated in the operative part:

           "(1)  that part of the determination of the Special  Adjudicator
                 dated 28 December 2001 relating to the Secretary of State's
                 certificate in relation  to  the  Claimant's  human  rights
                 claim be quashed;
           (2)   the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  Immigration  Appellate
                 Authority and that the determination  be  repromulgated  by
                 the Special Adjudicator as an uncertified case, in relation
                 to the Claimant's human rights claim".

  8. The determination was indeed repromulgated and, so far as one can see,
     there were no textual differences.  It was merely repromulgated with a
     change to the front page saying "Repromulgate as non-certified appeal"
     with various other semi-legible scribblings.   Although  there  was  a
     certain amount of debate as to whether the Secretary of  State  could,
     in the light of the subsequent authority of Dube [2003] EWCA Civ  114,
     13  February  2003,  agree  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  certificate,
     nonetheless it is clear that the  upholding  of  the  certificate  was
     quashed in relation to human rights claims.

  9. This whole Consent Order is now something of a red herring because  it
     did not purport to quash the  certificate  or  the  upholding  of  the
     certificate by the Adjudicator in relation to the  asylum  claim;   it
     purported only to do so in relation to the human rights claim.  It  is
     perfectly clear the human rights claim was never certificated and  the
     Adjudicator did not think that it was either.

 10. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  from  the  repromulgated
     determination of the first Adjudicator and the terms of the  grant  of
     permission to appeal referred to no limits on the grounds  of  appeal.
     The particular basis for the appeal were allegations of unfairness  by
     the  Adjudicator  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  the  appeal   or
     difficulties which had arisen which required different handling.   The
     Tribunal heard the appeal and, in a determination  promulgated  on  17
     October 2003, allowed the  appeal  and  remitted  it  because  of  the
     problems which had arisen.  In remitting it, it made no  reference  to
     the scope of the appeal before it and placed no  restrictions  on  the
     scope of the remittal hearing by the fresh Adjudicator.

 11. There was debate before the second Adjudicator as to the powers  which
     the Tribunal had or which it purported to  exercise  when  it  granted
     permission to appeal and dealt with the appeal.  The position  to  our
     mind is quite clear.  Because the  asylum  certificate  had  not  been
     quashed on Judicial Review, there was no appeal  to  the  Tribunal  on
     asylum grounds.  The Tribunal could not,  by  granting  permission  to
     appeal, grant greater rights  than  the  Appellant  had,  nor  in  its
     decision could it reach a view  on  asylum  matters  or  remit  asylum
     matters to the Adjudicator.  The Tribunal's permission and substantive
     decisions were concerned only with human rights matters.

 12. There was next a debate before Mr Jamieson as to whether  or  not  the
     effect of the Tribunal's decision had been to enable  the  Adjudicator
     to consider both the human rights and the closely inter-related asylum
     grounds.  The Adjudicator, with the encouragement, it appears, of  the
     parties, took the view that it would be sensible for there to be  only
     one hearing of the substantive merits of the asylum and  human  rights
     claim if he had jurisdiction to hear the asylum  claim.   However,  he
     took the view that  the  effect  of  the  proceedings  which  we  have
     referred to, was to mean that there was  before  him  only  the  human
     rights  claim.   He  therefore  decided   that,   in   view   of   the
     jurisdictional issue, he would dismiss the human rights claim  without
     hearing evidence so that if he were  wrong  in  his  approach  to  the
     jurisdictional issue, he could be put  right  and  the  whole  of  the
     asylum and human rights  claims  could  be  considered  together  with
     evidence being given on them only once.

 13. Although the scope for argument is wide, it has  become  clear  to  us
     that the question of the Adjudicator's jurisdiction  upon  a  remittal
     falls within a fairly small compass.  It is accepted  by  Mr  Blundell
     correctly that except where statute imposes a particular limitation or
     where the Tribunal exercises any of its particular powers to limit the
     scope of remittal, the appeal before a second Adjudicator on  remittal
     is as broad as the  appeal  before  the  first  Adjudicator  was.   In
     effect, the appeal is there for re-determination.  It is also accepted
     and clear, following Zenovics, that there is  only  one  appeal,  even
     though it may be brought on the  basis  of  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds.

 14. Ms Dubicka submits that the position is that  matters  are  wholly  at
     large, notwithstanding that the Tribunal itself had no jurisdiction in
     relation to the asylum claim.  The effect of the remittal is to  place
     the second Adjudicator in  the  position  of  the  first  Adjudicator.
     Turning to paragraphs 9(1) and (2) of Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act, that
     Adjudicator is hearing an appeal under Part IV of the 1999  Act.   She
     submits that this is, in view of the certificate, an appeal  to  which
     paragraph 9 applies and the question of the Adjudicator's agreement is
     a matter for the Adjudicator who hears the appeal.

 15. Mr Blundell submits that  that  is  not  the  position  at  all.   The
     Tribunal  cannot,  by  remitting  the   matter,   create   a   greater
     jurisdiction in the Adjudicator than it itself had.  The limitation on
     the appeal to the Tribunal limits the effect of the  remittal  to  the
     Adjudicator.  He submits that paragraph 9(2) does not arise because an
     Adjudicator has already agreed  with  the  opinion  expressed  in  the
     certificate and that that power to agree or disagree, having once been
     exercised to agree, does not arise for reconsideration.

 16. The Tribunal drew the parties' attention to the decision of the  Court
     of Appeal in Vairavanathan [2002] EWCA Civ 1310.  That case  concerned
     the converse situation to the one  which  we  face  here.   The  first
     Adjudicator  disagreed  with  the  appeal  but  did  not  uphold   the
     certificate.  The matter went  on  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  and  was
     remitted.   The  second  Adjudicator,   however,   agreed   with   the
     certificate.  The Court of Appeal concluded that he  had  jurisdiction
     to do so.  It said, in paragraph 18, recording submissions  on  behalf
     of the Secretary of State which it accepted, as follows:

           "18.  On remittal the adjudicator does not effectively hear  the
                 appeal that would otherwise have been  heard  by  the  IAT,
                 that is he  is  not  subject  to  the  same  jurisdictional
                 limitations as the IAT.  On the contrary, on  remittal  the
                 adjudicator hears afresh the  'appeal  to  an  adjudicator'
                 against the decision on 'the claim'.  I think it is at this
                 point, or round about this part of the  argument,  that  Mr
                 O'Callaghan parts company from Mr Eicke."

 17. The submissions continued in paragraph 21 and 23, as follows:

           "21.   Mr  Eicke  submits  that  this  essentially  fact-finding
                 jurisdiction is most appropriately exercised by  the  first
                 instance tribunal charged primarily with  the  fact-finding
                 jurisdiction.  Whether it is the first adjudicator  or  the
                 second  adjudicator,  especially  where  the   appeal   was
                 remitted to the second adjudicator for hearing de  novo  on
                 the basis that 'it would be  impossible  to  say  that  the
                 determination is  soundly  based  on  the  evidence'.   So,
                 submits Mr Eicke, the second adjudicator  was  entitled  to
                 exercise his jurisdiction under paragraph 5(7) of  Schedule
                 2 of the 1993 Act to agree with  the  certificate.   By  so
                 doing,  the  second  adjudicator  barred  the  respondent's
                 second appeal to the IAT.  So  it  is  submitted  that  the
                 judge was wrong in finding that the second adjudicator  did
                 not have such power.


           23.   He submits, and it is not  in  despite,  that  before  the
                 Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  there  was  only  an  appeal
                 against the determination of the first adjudicator  and  he
                 submits that that determination having  been  quashed,  all
                 that was left for the second adjudicator to do was to carry
                 on, as it were, from where the first adjudicator  had  left
                 off, once he had disagreed with the certification given  by
                 the Secretary of State."

 18. Schiemann LJ concluded, in paragraph 24 as follows:

           "24.  For my part, I do not regard the statutory  provisions  as
                 giving  rise  to  that  possibility,  nor  do  I  think  it
                 desirable  that  they  should  do  so.   The  present  case
                 illustrates precisely how things can go wrong.   The  first
                 adjudicator quite possibly applied her mind  to  the  wrong
                 case when she was dealing with this  case;   that  was  the
                 basis on which the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  sent  the
                 matter back.  It would be unfortunate, to  say  the  least,
                 that if that was indeed the case that a  disagreement  with
                 the certificate which had been  procured  in  circumstances
                 where the adjudicator was thinking of the wrong certificate
                 should somehow or other have effect  in  a  case  which  is
                 eventually sent to another adjudicator who  can  apply  his
                 mind to the right certificate."

 19. Mr Blundell contended that  that  case  is  distinguishable  from  the
     present case, precisely because the certificate had  not  been  upheld
     first time and therefore its effect was different  from  the  position
     here where it had been upheld.

 20. We simply observe, at this stage, that it is curious and not desirable
     that the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  a  second  bite  at  the
     certificate cherry if he loses first time, whereas  the  appellant  on
     his submissions would not have a second bite at the cherry if he  were
     unsuccessful first time.  This one way ratchet is not appealing as  Mr
     Blundell recognised.

 21. Mr Blundell then submitted that the solution to the problem was to  be
     found in what the Court of Appeal had said in  Dube  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
     114.  This concerned the power of the Secretary of State  to  withdraw
     certificates.  It reflected problems created  by  the  first  instance
     decision in Zenovics and a policy which the  Secretary  of  State  had
     devised of trying to deal with the practical problems.  The  Court  of
     Appeal was concerned with the problems that  arose  for  the  Tribunal
     hearing an appeal where one claim had been certified and the other had
     not.  The Court of Appeal held that the certificate could be withdrawn
     by the Secretary of State at any time before  the  Adjudicator  agreed
     with it, but he could not do so thereafter.  Recognising the practical
     problems that the Tribunal would face with  one  claim  certified  and
     another, perhaps closely related, not  certified,  it  concluded  that
     there were practical solutions to be adopted.  Simon Brown LJ said  at
     the end of paragraph 25:

           "Were the logical consequence of that to be that the  respondent
           was also entitled on the IAT's findings to  refugee  status,  it
           seems to me that the Secretary of  State  would  then  be  bound
           either to recognise that fact and grant asylum, or at  the  very
           least to accept that there were grounds for a fresh asylum claim
           which would then have to be determined and,  if  refused,  would
           open up fresh appeal rights."

 22. Mr Blundell's suggestion that Dube  prescribed  the  solution  to  the
     problem which arose in this case is,  in  our  judgment,  wrong.   The
     Court of Appeal was there dealing with withdrawal by the Secretary  of
     State before  agreement,  and  the  power  of  the  Tribunal  where  a
     certificate was in force for one aspect or ground of appeal.   It  was
     not purporting to deal with the position that arises where  an  appeal
     is remitted, nor was it saying that remittals should  not  take  place
     and that the only solution to the dilemmas that  sometimes  arise  was
     for the human rights claim to be considered and the Secretary of State
     to rectify an anomalous outcome on the asylum claim by  administrative
     action later.

 23. Part of the problem, to our mind, stems from a misapprehension  as  to
     what a certificate is and what the effect of an Adjudicator's decision
     is.  The certificate is the expression of an opinion by the  Secretary
     of State as to the merits of  the  case.   It  is  a  certificate  and
     opinion which remain in  existence,  whether  or  not  an  Adjudicator
     agrees or disagrees with it.  Its force or effectiveness is simply  to
     remove a right of appeal to the Tribunal where the Adjudicator  agrees
     with it.  The position therefore is that when an appeal  is  remitted,
     in the absence of a  specific  statutory  limitation,  the  appeal  is
     before the second Adjudicator as it was before the first  Adjudicator.
     There is no specific statutory limit that deals with  this  situation.
     There was no specific  limitation  imposed  by  the  Tribunal  in  its
     determination.  The fact that the Tribunal itself had  limited  powers
     cannot be itself determinative  of  whether  there  is  a  limitation,
     otherwise the decision in Vairavanathan would have been different.  We
     also take the view that that  case  demonstrates  that,  on  remittal,
     matters are at large as is the general position.

 24. When we then turn to apply the provisions of paragraph 21 of  Schedule
     4 to this appeal, the general appeal provisions  are  subject  to  any
     restriction on the grounds of appeal, but there are no restrictions on
     the grounds of appeal to the  Adjudicator.   Paragraph  9(1)  and  (2)
     relate to an appeal to which the paragraph applies and the Adjudicator
     whose agreement is required is the  Adjudicator  who  is  hearing  the
     appeal.  That was the Adjudicator hearing the second  appeal  and  so,
     notwithstanding the limitations on the Tribunal's powers,  there  were
     no such limitations  imposed  when  the  second  Adjudicator  came  to
     determine the appeal that was then before him.  That  appeal  was  the
     same as the appeal before the first  Adjudicator.   It  was  incumbent
     upon the second Adjudicator to consider whether he agreed or not  with
     the certificate and he was obliged to reach his own view on whether he
     did or did not do so.

 25. The Adjudicator accordingly erred in his judgment as to whether he did
     not did not have jurisdiction.  Additionally, although  we  appreciate
     the pragmatic thinking which underlay his approach to the human rights
     issues before him, an  Adjudicator  whose  powers  are  in  some  ways
     limited ought nevertheless to deal with the issues which he does  have
     jurisdiction to deal with.  It might have avoided  the  necessity  for
     all these proceedings because, depending upon the view  which  he  had
     formed in relation to the human rights matters, the pragmatic  further
     solution referred to by Simon Brown LJ in Dube might have avoided  the
     need for these further proceedings.

 26. But, as it is, the determination of the Adjudicator is quashed and the
     matter should go back for hearing before another Adjudicator  than  Mr
     Jamieson or Ms Lynch.  By the time it is heard, we anticipate that  it
     will  be  dealt  with  by  the  AIT.   It  would  be  appropriate  for
     consideration at least to be given as to whether it should be heard by
     a panel because it has been in the system for a very  long  time  now,
     but we are not able to make any directions to that effect.

 27. This determination is reported for what we say about jurisdiction  and
     certification.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
