

                  BK (Kosovo - Subesh) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKIAT
                                   00001                                 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  22 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             11 January 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                               Mrs E Hurst JP

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Wantumi, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Walsh, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Mr R A Miller, promulgated on 21 March  2003.   The
     Tribunal had allowed the Secretary of State's  appeal  on  23  October
     2003 but when permission to appeal was granted by the Court of  Appeal
     in May 2004, its decision was quashed and remitted by the  consent  of
     the parties on 3 September 2004.  It was remitted on the  basis  of  a
     particular point made by Sedley LJ in granting permission.

  2. The Claimant is a Muslim Kosovar from  Pristina,  born  in  1972.   He
     arrived in the United Kingdom in April 1998 and  claimed  asylum.   He
     was granted Exceptional Leave to Remain until 1 August 2000.   He  was
     refused permission to vary that leave to enter or remain,  from  which
     decision he appealed to the Secretary of State  in  2002.   No  asylum
     claim could be pursued before the Adjudicator and it was conceded that
     he had no family  life  engaging  Article  8.   The  case  was  argued
     exclusively on the right to a private  life  under  Article  8.   This
     claim was based on the work which he had done and continued to  do  in
     the United Kingdom.  He had worked in  doctor's  surgeries  and,  when
     funded, for the local  NHS  Trust  as  an  interpreter  for  Albanian-
     speaking patients and translating hospital leaflets for them.  He  had
     then started working with a local authority youth service and  studied
     to obtain further relevant diplomas.  He  was,  at  the  time  of  the
     Adjudicator's  decision,  a  keyworker   for   behaviour   improvement
     programmes.   This  involved  working  with  unaccompanied   immigrant
     minors, assisting asylum teams and educational units.

  3. The Secretary of State submitted to the Adjudicator that the grant  of
     Exceptional Leave to Remain was not to be  seen  as  a  lever  to  the
     development of a private life.  His private life had  developed  while
     his status was precarious;  his skills could be used in Kosovo;  there
     was nothing exceptional about the case.  Mr Walsh, for  the  Claimant,
     submitted that he was a resilient immigrant, who  had  behaved  in  an
     exemplary manner, without exaggerating his claim.  The private life he
     had developed was beneficial to the community.  Its need to retain his
     skills could not be over-emphasised.  He could  not  apply  for  entry
     clearance if he left and he would not be entitled to  a  work  permit.
     Indeed, the evidence actually was that the Claimant had been refused a
     work  permit  in  April  2002  because   he   lacked   the   necessary
     qualifications and did not fulfil the evidential requirements for  the
     work permit;  (that does not mean he was working illegally).

  4. The Adjudicator's conclusions start in paragraph 16, as follows:

           "16.  This Appellant has established a right  to  private  life.
                 That right would be interfered with  if  he  were  removed.
                 The issue however resolves as to whether he can  show  that
                 such an  interference  would  be  disproportionate  to  the
                 legitimate needs of immigration policy.  ...  It  has  been
                 established that for interference  to  be  disproportionate
                 there must be circumstances exceptional to the  Appellant's
                 position.  Yet the interference  must  still  be  necessary
                 within one of the factors in sub-section  2.   Reality  and
                 common sense are not displaced by sub-section 2 but  indeed
                 are brought into the equation.  In this individual case the
                 community's  safety  and  well-being,  the  prevention   of
                 disorder and crime and the protection of health and  morals
                 require  that  the  Appellant  remain  in   this   country.
                 Therefore it is not possible to  say  that  the  legitimate
                 application  of  immigration   control   necessitates   his
                 removal.  It does not.


           17.   I therefore find that the Appellant on the low standard of
                 proof establishes that he has exceptional circumstances  in
                 the development of his private life, namely  his  right  to
                 develop a life involving service and  contribution  to  the
                 community,   an   interference   with   which   would    be
                 disproportionate  to   the   legitimate   requirements   of
                 effective immigration control."

  5. The Adjudicator went on to say  that  he  would  have  made  a  strong
     recommendation for the Claimant to stay because of  the  advantage  of
     the work he did assisting the integration of young immigrants  had  he
     not allowed the Claimant's appeal.  He  allowed  the  appeal  only  on
     human rights grounds.

  6. Neither before the Adjudicator nor before the Tribunal  did  Mr  Walsh
     rely on any Article 8 family life argument  based  on  the  Claimant's
     developing friendship with a woman with whom he worked, but with  whom
     he  did  not  live.   It  did  not  form  part  of  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions either.  We did not understand Mr Walsh to say  that  that
     deepening friendship, which still continued,  was  irrelevant  to  the
     private life of the Claimant, but the real factor upon which he relied
     was the fact of the Claimant's  employment  and,  more  strongly,  its
     particular nature.

  7. The Secretary of State appealed to the Tribunal on  the  grounds  that
     the Adjudicator had no real basis for his  conclusion  on  Article  8.
     The Adjudicator had focused on compassionate grounds  and  good  works
     and the lack of a false exaggeration.  Mr Wantumi, for  the  Secretary
     of State, referred to Beqiri [2002] UKIAT 00725, in which the Tribunal
     said:

           "Adjudicators should not equate Article 8  deliberation  with  a
           subjective assessment of the  value  of  an  individual  to  the
           community  or  with  the  exercise  to  compassion  or  of  some
           additional discretion.  Rather they should conduct the Article 8
           'balancing exercise' by reference to the principles as  set  out
           by the Court of Appeal in Mahmood."

  8. We were also referred to the approach  to  proportionality  issues  in
     Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716, [2003]  INLR  361,  as  developed  by  this
     Tribunal in M* (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT 00024.  He pointed out that  the
     Secretary of State in a supplementary reasons  letter  of  28  October
     2002 had considered the work position of the  Claimant  and  had  said
     that the work had been undertaken whilst the Claimant  knew  that  his
     immigration status was uncertain.  The Secretary of  State  considered
     other issues not now raised and concluded that the Claimant should  be
     returned.  He did not have before him information as to the particular
     friendship which the Claimant had.

  9. Before us, Mr Walsh contended that the  real  issue  was  whether  the
     Tribunal was entitled to interfere on the appropriate test and it  was
     insufficient merely for there to be disagreement  about  the  relative
     weight to be accorded to the material elements.  In  his  submissions,
     he drew upon paragraph 3 of Sedley LJ's comments  in  granting  leave,
     comments expressed in terms of arguability alone.  Mr Walsh  submitted
     that the correct approach to the assessment of proportionality was not
     that in Edore and M* (Croatia) and that neither authority could now be
     regarded as good law in the light of the decisions  of  the  House  of
     Lords in Ullah and Razgar [2004] UKHL 26 and 27.

 10. In Razgar, paragraph 20, Lord Bingham dealt with whether  interference
     with Article 8 rights in pursuance of a lawful immigration policy  was
     proportionate to that legitimate end.  He  said  that  a  decision  on
     proportionality involved striking a fair balance between the rights of
     the individual and the interests of the community.  He continued:

           "The Secretary of State must exercise his judgments in the first
           instance.  On appeal the adjudicator must exercise  his  or  her
           own judgment, taking account of any material which  may  or  may
           not have been before the Secretary of State.  A reviewing  court
           must assess the judgment which would or  might  be  made  by  an
           adjudicator on appeal.  In  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department  v  Kacaj  [2002]  Imm  AR  213,  paragraph  25,  the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal (Collins J, Mr C M G Ockelton and Mr
           Freeman) observed that:


                 'although  the  [Convention]   rights   may   be   engaged,
                 legitimate immigration control will almost  certainly  mean
                 that derogation from the rights will be proper and will not
                 be disproportionate.'


           In the present case, the Court of Appeal had no doubt (paragraph
           26 of its  judgment)  that  this  overstated  the  position.   I
           respectfully consider the element of overstatement to be  small.
           Decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of  immigration
           control will be proportionate in all save a  small  minority  of
           exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis."


 11. The difference from Edore and M* (Croatia) relied on by  Mr  Walsh  is
     the reference to the Adjudicator exercising his or her  own  judgment.
     This showed, he said, that the Adjudicator should  not  be  exercising
     simply a review jurisdiction.

 12. Mr Walsh then relied on Ullah at paragraph 15 to  contend  that  there
     was a crucial distinction between the approach in "foreign" cases  and
     "domestic" cases, and that this case was a domestic  case.   Paragraph
     15 of Ullah, so far as material, said:

           "The crucial issue dividing the parties is, therefore,  whether,
           in a foreign case, reliance may be placed on any article of  the
           Convention other than  article  3,  and  in  particular  whether
           reliance may be placed on article 9."

 13. It is, however, necessary to look at  other  paragraphs  in  Ullah  in
     order to understand the distinction that Lord Bingham was drawing.  At
     paragraph 9, he  explained  what  he  meant  by  his  distinction.   A
     domestic case in relation to Article 8 was exemplified  by  Abdulaziz,
     Cabales and Balkandali v  United  Kingdom  (1985)  7  EHRR  471.   The
     Applicants were complaining in that case of  a  breach  of  Article  8
     arising out of the refusal of  leave  to  enter  or  remain  to  their
     husbands.  But the  Applicants,  who  were  the  wives,  were  already
     settled here.  That was what made  it  a  domestic  case  because  the
     Applicants were complaining of an interference here with family  life.



           "9.    Domestic  cases  as  I  have  defined  them  are  to   be
                 distinguished from cases in which it is  not  claimed  that
                 the state complained of has violated or  will  violate  the
                 applicant's Convention rights within its own territory  but
                 in which it is claimed that the conduct  of  the  state  in
                 removing a person from its territory (whether by  expulsion
                 or  extradition)  to  another  territory  will  lead  to  a
                 violation of the person's Convention rights in  that  other
                 territory.  I call  these  'foreign  cases',  acknowledging
                 that the description is imperfect,  since  even  a  foreign
                 case assumes an exercise of power by the state affecting  a
                 person  physically  present  within  its  territory.    The
                 question was bound to arise whether the Convention could be
                 relied on to resist expulsion or extradition in  a  foreign
                 case."

 14. Lord Bingham further commented, in paragraph 18:

           "As observed in paragraph 8 above, Abdulaziz was not  a  foreign
           case  since  the  applicants'  complaint  related  not  to   the
           violation of their Conventions  rights  under  article  8  which
           would occur if they were removed to another country but  to  the
           violation of those rights which they would suffer here if  their
           husbands  were  refused  entry  or  leave  to  remain.   Several
           authorities cited fell into the same  category.   But  some  did
           not, and were of a hybrid nature.  The removal of a person  from
           country A to country B may both violate his right to respect for
           his private and family life in country A and  also  violate  the
           same right by depriving him  of  family  life  or  impeding  his
           enjoyment of private life in country B."

 15. After consideration of other cases for  the  purposes  of  considering
     whether in a "foreign" case Article  8  was  available  at  all,  Lord
     Bingham concluded that:


           "... reliance may be placed on article 8 in a foreign case where
           the applicant can show that  removal  will  seriously  interfere
           with his rights guaranteed by article 8 and such interference is
           not shown to be justified."


 16. Boultif v Switzerland [2001] 33 EHRR 1179, to which Lord Bingham  made
     specific reference, concerned a  non-Swiss  applicant,  married  to  a
     Swiss, facing removal, who was able to rely on Article 8.

 17. Mr Walsh then submitted that the approach of the  Tribunal  should  be
     governed by Subesh and others v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 56, and paragraph
     44 in particular.  That paragraph dealt with the  position  where  the
     Tribunal, as here, has a jurisdiction over errors of fact  and  errors
     of law.  The appeal was not to be  a  re-run  of  the  first  instance
     hearing and it was insufficient merely for an  Appellant  to  persuade
     the Tribunal to disagree with the  Adjudicator  on  a  factual  issue.
     Laws LJ said:

           "An appellant, if he is to succeed,  must  persuade  the  appeal
           court or tribunal not merely that a different view of the  facts
           from that taken below is reasonable and possible, but that there
           are objective grounds upon which the  court  ought  to  conclude
           that a different view is the  right  one.   The  divide  between
           these position is not caught by the supposed difference  between
           a perceived error and a disagreement.  In either case the appeal
           court disagrees with the court below, and, indeed,  may  express
           itself in such terms.  The true distinction is between the  case
           where the appeal court might prefer a different view (perhaps on
           marginal grounds) and one where it concludes that the process of
           reasoning, and the application of the relevant law,  require  it
           to adopt a different view. The burden which an appellant assumes
           is to show that the case falls within this latter category."


 18. It is to be noted that the actual  issues  before  the  Tribunal  upon
     which the Court of Appeal was ruling were not credibility  issues  but
     the  weighing  of  the  risk  assessment  factors  for  persons  of  a
     particular profile in the light  of  relevant  Tribunal  decisions  on
     general country conditions.

 19. Mr Walsh further submitted that Beqiri was wrong insofar as  it  could
     be read as saying that a contribution to the welfare of the  community
     was irrelevant to an Article 8 decision, although he  recognised  that
     purely compassionate factors were not relevant.   If  the  Adjudicator
     had gone too far in saying that the benefits  of  the  work  "require"
     that the Claimant  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  nonetheless  the
     factors were relevant.  They were factors specifically referred to  in
     Article 8(2).  Insofar as the Adjudicator had erred in paragraph 17 in
     referring to the "low standard of proof", that  error  had  played  no
     part in the decision.  There was very little new material after the 28
     October 2002 letter from the Secretary of State.  The  later  personal
     relationship was not relied on by the Adjudicator.   The  relationship
     had deepened, but not into family life.  The essential features of the
     job remained the same.  There had been the continuation  of  the  same
     sort of beneficial work and additional voluntary work.

 20. We now turn to our conclusions.  It is clear  to  our  minds,  in  the
     light of the more extensive citations from Ullah  which  we  have  set
     out, that this Claimant's case is a foreign and not  a  domestic  case
     within those  very  broad  and  imperfect  categories.   We  were  not
     entirely clear as to the significance which Mr Walsh sought to  attach
     to this supposedly crucial distinction in view of the arguments  about
     proportionality which he naturally addressed.  But  it  is  a  foreign
     case, like Boultif, because it concerns a claim to stay by someone who
     has no other entitlement to stay in the United Kingdom and it is not a
     claim by someone who is settled in the United Kingdom.

 21. Edore and M* (Croatia) raise a number  of  issues  on  proportionality
     which are not directly considered in Razgar.  The relevance of changed
     circumstances at the various stages of  the  appeal  process  and  the
     interaction between what is lawful and  the  review  jurisdiction  are
     matters for another case.  We are not clear how far a different result
     was intended from the well-established Court of Appeal authorities  in
     the absence of explicit reasoning from the House of Lords.  So far  as
     M*  (Croatia)  is  concerned,  it  specifically  deals  with  how   an
     Adjudicator should approach the issue of proportionality on  the  very
     assumption  that  in  certain  circumstances,   the   Adjudicator   is
     exercising his or her own judgment.  We do not see that  Razgar  shows
     it to be wrong.  It simply sets out the question to be asked  for  the
     exercise of that judgment, as a means of  attributing  consistent  and
     due weight to the legitimate interests of  immigration  control.   For
     present purposes, assuming that what Lord Bingham said in paragraph 20
     of Razgar represents a different approach, in practice  there  may  be
     very little difference in the result from that which would  have  been
     arrived at under Edore  and  M*  (Croatia).   We  emphasise  the  last
     sentence of paragraph 20.

 22. As to Subesh, it is worth making a few points.  We see  paragraphs  46
     and 47 as recognising that the nature of the factual  issue  which  is
     being appealed, whether it is credibility based on  oral  evidence  or
     background conditions based  on  documentary  or  oral  evidence,  may
     affect the ease or  difficulty  with  which  the  Tribunal  should  be
     persuaded  that  it  ought  to  adopt  a  different  view   from   the
     Adjudicator.   For  example,   risk   assessment   may   involve   the
     ascertainment of factors based on a Claimant's oral evidence.  It  may
     involve the weighing of factors peculiar to  that  case,  but  it  may
     involve the assessment of conditions in a country for someone  of  the
     particular profile of a Claimant.  We also point out that the test  or
     approach required by the Court of Appeal is explicitly stated to be  a
     general one and not one requiring sophistication.  It is  plainly  not
     as stringent a test as requiring irrationality or unreasonableness  to
     be shown, as understood in the public law Wednesbury sense,  for  that
     would suffice to demonstrate an error of law.   It  is  necessarily  a
     lesser test, best applied by  asking,  without  undue  sophistication,
     whether the Tribunal simply would prefer a different result as opposed
     to concluding that a different view is required.  It is  only  in  the
     latter circumstances that it should allow an appeal  on  an  error  of
     fact.  "Unsustainability" is  not  the  test  and  suggests  that  too
     restrictive an approach is  being  adopted.   We  add  that  we  would
     normally regard a decision departing from  Tribunal  guidance  on  the
     assessment of conditions in a country, in the absence of adequate  and
     expressed reasons for such a departure, as involving an error  of  law
     through a failure to understand  the  guidance  or  to  take  it  into
     account or to give legally adequate reasons  for  the  departure.   It
     would not be just an error of fact.

 23. We take the view that the Adjudicator's  decision  is  clearly  wrong,
     both applying the Subesh test, and indeed in law, although it  is  not
     necessary to go so far as to find an error of law here.  Far from  the
     Adjudicator being required, as he said,  to  come  to  the  conclusion
     which he did, he has given far too little weight to the  interests  of
     immigration control and a manifestly disproportionate  weight  to  the
     limited content of the  Claimant's  Article  8  claim.   He  has  also
     ignored what is a crucial factor, in the light of the weight  he  gave
     to the work done by the Claimant, namely that he was  refused  a  work
     permit.  It is  not  necessary  to  conclude  that  the  decision  was
     irrational, though it may be.  This is because before applying  Subesh
     to the weighing  of  factors,  it  is  necessary  to  see  whether  an
     Adjudicator has  asked  the  right  question,  or  adopted  the  right
     approach.  His approach here does not reflect the tests in Edore or M*
     (Croatia).  Razgar is clear that decisions in the legitimate interests
     of immigration control will  almost  always  be  proportionate.   That
     indicates the real weight of the  countervailing  factors  which  must
     exist before the conclusion can  be  reached  that  the  interests  of
     immigration control should be set aside.  As we have said, we consider
     that, insofar as there is a conceptual difference  between  Edore,  M*
     (Croatia) and Razgar, it would be rare for it to lead to  a  practical
     difference in its effect in any given case.  Adjudicators are not free
     simply to appraise matters as they see fit.  It is very  difficult  to
     see from the Adjudicator's decision here, how in substance the  Razgar
     approach can have been applied.  The factors relied on, namely that  a
     person with Exceptional Leave to Remain, but no  work  permit  and  no
     other basis for staying, has been in beneficial employment  for  three
     years, are far too flimsy to mean that return  is  a  disproportionate
     enforcement of immigration control.

 24. Although the Adjudicator referred  to  these  circumstances  as  being
     "exceptional", there is very little that is unusual about anyone  with
     Exceptional Leave to Remain working and having friendships,  providing
     a degree of benefit to the community.  Insofar as  that  reference  to
     exceptional circumstances was said to show an accord with the approach
     of the House of Lords in Razgar, by reference  to  the  last  part  of
     paragraph 20, we disagree.  It is perfectly clear that the content  of
     the Article 8(1) claim here cannot fall within that small minority  of
     exceptional cases to which Lord Bingham  referred.   It  would  be  to
     create a significant category of persons who would be entitled to some
     sort of leave, which could not be confined to those identical  to  the
     Claimant, and would extend to many analogous cases.  It is  a  mistake
     that the test in Razgar as satisfied merely because a case is  unusual
     in some way or other, such that an unusual feature  suffices  for  the
     interests of  immigration  control  to  be  outweighed.   That  is  to
     substitute a less stringent test of exceptionality  for  what  is,  in
     truth, the recognition by the House of Lords  that  the  interests  of
     immigration control will nearly always outweigh the Article 8 claim.

 25. But, in any event, even if there was no error of law, we are compelled
     to a different conclusion from that arrived at by the Adjudicator.  It
     is necessary to point out how limited was the content of  the  private
     life.  There was, of course, no  family  life.   The  content  of  the
     private life was the work undertaken by the Claimant and  the  benefit
     to the community which that brought.   No  weight  was  given  by  the
     Adjudicator to the relationship which the  Claimant  had  and,  on  Mr
     Walsh's own case, it is not something which could be given  more  than
     very little weight.  It cannot be  very  important  at  all  that  the
     Claimant was an honest, failed asylum seeker, who had not  exaggerated
     his case.  The Claimant had engaged in  the  beneficial  work  he  had
     done, while he only had Exceptional Leave to Remain and knew that  his
     immigration  status  was  precarious.   The  same  is  true   of   his
     relationship.  The Claimant had been refused a work permit in relation
     to that work because he was not qualified for it and could not provide
     the necessary evidence.  If the  beneficial  nature  of  the  work  is
     important, it is difficult to see how real weight could  be  given  to
     that in the light of the refusal of the work  permit.   There  was  no
     evidence either that others would not be able to take his place.   The
     substantive content of his private life is effectively  no  more  than
     employment  of  a  nature  beneficial  to  the  community  whilst  his
     immigration status was precarious, plus the sort of  friendship  which
     is likely to develop for anyone with a certain amount  of  time  in  a
     country.  It is plainly wrong to see that as a basis  for  outweighing
     the interests of immigration control.  The Secretary of  State's  view
     appears to have been ignored or given little weight.  Taking Razgar at
     its most favourable to the Claimant, the Secretary of State's view  as
     to the weighing of factors is very important.  It appears to have been
     ignored.

 26. There are a whole range of subjective, value judgments  which  can  be
     made about whether a job is beneficial to the  community,  or  why  it
     needs to be beneficial to the community in this sense  as  opposed  to
     enabling a family to survive without state benefits and paying  taxes,
     or eg enabling building work to be done more cheaply and quickly  than
     would otherwise be the case.  The refusal  of  a  work  permit  is  of
     relevance here, as we have said.  Beqiri should not be seen as  saying
     that such benefits to the community are irrelevant, but they  are  not
     by their nature circumstances which can be given much weight  and  the
     weight  given  here  to  the   nature   of   the   work   was   wholly
     disproportionate.  The Adjudicator treated  it  as  a  matter  arising
     under Article 8(2) as a countervailing interest of the state.   It  is
     possible to conceive of instances where that might be so,  but  it  is
     difficult to see that the nature of the work done here  properly  fits
     into a state interest of the sort Article 8(2) is dealing  with.   The
     possible benefit to the community from the nature of the work done  is
     probably better seen as an aspect under Article 8(1)  of  the  private
     life of the Claimant.

 27. We add two further comments on Mr Walsh's submissions.  The suggestion
     that it would be disproportionate for  the  Claimant  to  be  returned
     because he would be unable to obtain entry clearance is  an  illogical
     submission which the Adjudicator did not adopt.  The Immigration Rules
     should be regarded  as  a  generally  proportionate  response  to  the
     various family and personal circumstances which arise  in  immigration
     control.  To permit someone to remain in the country on the basis that
     they would not be entitled to succeed  in  an  application  for  entry
     clearance would be perverse.  It would give greater  weight  to  those
     who could not succeed in an application for entry clearance, but  were
     nonetheless in the United Kingdom, than to those who were  potentially
     able to obtain entry clearance but had not come to the United Kingdom.
      It is difficult to see why the significance of the Immigration  Rules
     did not weigh heavily in the Adjudicator's determination.

 28. Whilst we accept Mr Walsh's point that  there  is  no  clear  line  in
     private life that can be drawn between compassionate circumstances and
     other circumstances, with the former being irrelevant  to  Article  8,
     nonetheless Beqiri is correct to point out that Article 8 is not to be
     the vehicle  for  the  exercise  of  a  sympathetic  or  compassionate
     judgment by reference to  circumstances  which  are  not  relevant  or
     weighty in relation to the content of an Article 8 private life claim,
     or to the degree of interference with it or to the proportionality  of
     the removal decision.  Article 8 is not an all-embracing compassionate
     fallback for cases which may fail in  other  respects,  in  particular
     failures in relation  to  Article  3.   One  can  understand  why  the
     Adjudicator felt sympathy for the Claimant who was working hard  in  a
     useful job.  But that, which was virtually  all  the  content  of  his
     Article  8  claim,  could  not  outweigh  the  proper   interests   of
     immigration control, applying the approach in Razgar.

 29. We are by no means clear that the Adjudicator's phrase about  the  low
     standard of proof did not lead him to err in the ease  with  which  he
     thought that the proper interests  of  immigration  control  could  be
     outweighed.  It is difficult, however, to see the scope for a standard
     of proof in the proportionality assessment  itself.   In  finding  the
     facts, in a non-risk assessment case, it is difficult to see  why  the
     standard of proof should be other than the normal  civil  standard  of
     the balance of probabilities.

 30. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.  The case is reported for what  we
     say about Subesh.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


