
H-TW-V3

|Heard at Field House       |        |SY (Kurd-No Political       |
|                           |        |Profile)                    |
|                           |        |Syria [2005] UKIAT 00039    |
|On 4 January 2005          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|15 February 2005                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen - Vice President                                     |
|Mr A L McGeachy - Vice President                                  |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr B Bedford for Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, who is a national of Syria of Kurdish origin,  appeals
    with permission against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mrs  C  M
    Hawden-Beal, in which she dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision of 26 May 2004 to issue  directions  for  his  removal
    from the United Kingdom, asylum having been refused.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 4 January 2005.  Mr B Bedford for
    Sultan Lloyd Solicitors appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Miss J
    Sigley appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    The Appellant claimed to fear persecution on account of his work for,
    and involvement with, the Al-Amal association and with  the  press  and
    other non-governmental organisations as well on account of his  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He claimed to have been turned off a  course  at  the  High
    Institute for Applied Science and  Technology  because  he  received  a
    negative security clearance from the Intelligence Services and presumed
    that this was because of his family's political history, his  ethnicity
    and the fact that he did not belong to the Ba'ath party.   Subsequently
    he attended Damascus University studying civil engineering but  dropped
    out fairly soon.

4.    Thereafter he claimed to have become involved  with  non-governmental
    organisations and the press, training to be a  journalist.   He  joined
    the Iraqi Al-Amal organisation and  the  Human  Rights  Association  of
    Syria and helped to edit reports in Kurdish magazines and also  illegal
    Communist newspapers.

5.    He claimed that in 2001 he was offered the opportunity to go to Egypt
    to take part in a workshop with the Iraqi Al-Amal  organisation,  which
    was organised by the United Nations.  He said that  he  applied  for  a
    passport and was told to go to the Intelligence Department to get their
    approval.  He claimed to have been  detained  by  that  department  for
    twelve  days  and  interrogated  and  tortured  and  beaten.   He   was
    questioned about his family's political history and why he  was  not  a
    member of the Ba'ath party.  After eight days he managed to  bribe  the
    guard to contact his father and tell him  where  he  was  and  after  a
    further four days he was released after those in authority  intervened.
    His father was a doctor and he treated the injuries he had suffered  to
    his knees, back, leg and arms during the two month period in  which  he
    recovered before resuming his work.

6.    He claimed to have become more and more  involved  with  the  Kurdish
    political parties and was arrested  as  a  consequence  of  helping  to
    organise two demonstrations at Damascus University.  He  said  that  he
    was released without charge.  He claimed to have been in Qamlishi  when
    the violence of 12 and 13 March 2004  occurred.   He  claimed  to  have
    distributed leaflets during the curfew on 13 March 2004.  He said  that
    the security forces began to round up suspects on 14 March and, fearing
    that they would arrest him next, he stayed at his friend's house rather
    than his parents which was apparently raided by the security forces  on
    three occasions.  He fled to his aunt's on the Turkish border where  he
    was visited by his father who brought with him an agent who accompanied
    him to Turkey and thereafter he came to the United Kingdom on 30  March
    2004.  He claims that the authorities were still looking  for  him  and
    had even questioned his ex-flat mate in Damascus.

7.    The Adjudicator gave consideration to the Appellant's claim.  She set
    out in some detail the representatives' submissions and  the  objective
    evidence, and at paragraphs 48 to 60 of her determination assessed  the
    claim.

8.    A number of matters caused her to doubt credibility and these are set
    out in particular at paragraphs 48 to 59 of the  determination.   These
    matters led her to conclude as she stated at paragraph 59 that she  was
    not satisfied to the lower standard of proof that any of that which the
    Appellant claimed to have happened to him did so happen.

9.     Leaving  aside  for  a  moment  the  quality  of  the  Adjudicator's
    credibility findings, it is important to move thereafter  to  paragraph
    60.  There the Adjudicator considered  the  human  rights  claim.   She
    stated the following:

      "Despite the  number  of  detentions  and  interrogations  which  the
         Appellant claims to have undergone, he has produced no evidence of
         death threats to himself.  I have  already  said  that  I  do  not
         accept  that  the  Appellant  was  as  badly  treated  during  his
         detention as he claims and so I do not accept  that  he  was  ill-
         treated in any of the frequent detentions thereafter."


10.   It can readily be seen that there  is  a  contradiction  between  the
    findings at  that  paragraph  and  those  at  paragraph  59  where  the
    Adjudicator found the Appellant in effect entirely to lack  credibility
    whereas it would seem from paragraph 60 that, on the face  of  it,  she
    accepted a level of ill-treatment and perhaps detentions also.

11.   In submissions before us  Mr  Bedford  challenged  the  Adjudicator's
    adverse credibility findings, going into some  detail  on  the  various
    matters that caused her to doubt credibility and also pointing  to  the
    contrast between paragraphs 60 and 59.

12.   Miss Sigley defended the Adjudicator's adverse  credibility  findings
    but accepted that if the Tribunal was not with her then remittal  would
    be necessary.

13.   We do not consider that the contrasting findings at paragraphs 59 and
    60 can be resolved by us.  On the one hand the Adjudicator appeared  to
    disbelieve the account given, on the other hand she appeared to believe
    aspects  of  it.   Those  findings  are   in   our   view   essentially
    contradictory, and as a consequence we cannot be clear as to what it is
    precisely that the Adjudicator accepted and what she did not accept  of
    the Appellant's account.  On that basis the appeal  would  have  to  be
    remitted for consideration afresh by a different Adjudicator.

14.   There is however a further issue.  This was also a matter of detailed
    submissions before us.  That is the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return to Syria even if the  Adjudicator's  adverse
    credibility findings insofar as they were adverse credibility  findings
    could be sustained.  On this basis he would return to Syria as  a  Kurd
    with no history of political involvement or political  association  but
    simply a Kurd who had left Syria as it may be without  permission  (and
    this was an issue on which Miss Sigley in particular addressed us)  and
    who might be regarded as a person who had sought to  apply  for  asylum
    while in the United Kingdom.  If we found that he was at risk  on  this
    account then remittal would not be necessary, whereas  if  we  did  not
    find risk on that account then it is clearly of  particular  importance
    especially in the light of the  more  recent  evidence  that  has  been
    produced, for the matter to be considered on a fresh hearing since  the
    evidence, if credible, indicates the kind  of  political  profile  that
    arguably might place the Appellant at risk.

15.   We have had the benefit of considering various Tribunal  authorities,
    in particular ZB and AK [2004] UKIAT 00217 and RS [2004]  UKIAT  00257.
    We also have the decision of the Court of Appeal in Hariri [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 807.

16.   In ZB and AK  the  Tribunal  had  before  it  two  appeals  involving
    Claimants in relation to both  of  whom  there  was  some  past  family
    political association accepted in Syria, and in the case of AK  a  more
    direct political involvement  on  his  part  in  Syria  had  also  been
    accepted.  Otherwise aspects of credibility were challenged.   However,
    the  Presenting  Officer  in  those  cases  conceded  the  appeals  and
    therefore the Tribunal did not have the opportunity  to  give  detailed
    consideration to the evidence other than noting the characteristics  to
    which we have referred above, and making reference to  aspects  of  the
    objective evidence concerning risk on return to Syria.

17.   In RS the Claimant, who was also Syrian, had a current valid passport
    in his own name regularly issued by his own government which on his own
    account bore a proper exit stamp on the occasion when he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom and it was  clearly  open  to  him  to  return  on  that
    document without it needing to become known to the  Syrian  authorities
    that he had claimed asylum abroad.

18.   Hariri is concerned with  a  challenge  to  a  determination  of  the
    Tribunal which upheld the determination of  an  Adjudicator  concerning
    risk on return to Syria and in particular focusing on the relevant test
    as to the level of ill-treatment required for a claim to  be  made  out
    under the Refugee Convention.

19.   Mr Bedford took us to page 122 of his bundle which is  an  update  by
    the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of  Canada  concerning  the  Syrian
    government's attitude to its citizens  who  have  sought  asylum.   The
    report is dated 16 September 2003.  Among other  things  it  is  stated
    that any Syrian  national  who  departs  the  country  illegally  faces
    judicial consequences that may in  principle  result  in  up  to  three
    months' imprisonment.  It is said  that  generally  speaking  the  same
    treatment for unsuccessful Syrian asylum seekers who have departed  the
    country  illegally  may  be  expected.   The  response  of  the  Syrian
    authorities is said to be very much dependent upon the  nature  of  the
    departure and the profile and background  of  the  individual.   If  it
    becomes known that they have applied for asylum, the  consequences  may
    be severe.  However, if  the  individual's  claim  for  asylum  remains
    confidential then he or she may  avoid  further  complications  of  the
    local law enforcement agencies and judicial authorities.   It  is  said
    that of course the maintenance of confidentiality will depend  in  part
    on the manner in which the individual is returned  to  the  country  of
    origin.  Mr Bedford  also  referred  us  to  the  Syrian  Human  Rights
    Committee Report at page 131 of the bundle, in particular at  page  134
    concerning the real risk to people who are accompanied on  return.   He
    referred us also to the report of Dr Rebwar Fatah who  stated  no  more
    than that people with a profile were at risk on  return.   The  Amnesty
    International Report of 2004 on Syria contained examples  of  returnees
    who had been arrested on return.

20.   Miss Sigley argued that in the light  of  the  Adjudicator's  adverse
    credibility finding it was plausible that the Appellant  had  not  even
    left Syria illegally.  If he had left  illegally  then  there  was  the
    concession in ZB and AK but  there  were  the  references  there  to  a
    political profile.  The actual cases cited, for example, at  paragraphs
    7 and 8 in RS concern people who  had  clear  profiles.   The  Canadian
    document at page 122 of the Appellant's bundle did  not  show  that  an
    illegal departure could be equated to risk on return.  Miss Sigley also
    referred to  aspects  of  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah's  report  on  the  various
    profiles, but argued that these  essentially  concerned  Syrian  exiles
    returning from abroad and people who were  suspected  of  having  links
    with the Muslim Brotherhood and Al Qaida.  She also informed us that  a
    person such as the Appellant  would  not  be  escorted  back  to  Syria
    without a specific reason and this as  such  would  not  be  the  usual
    practice.  A document would be issued which would be  a  Syrian  travel
    document and it would be necessary to approach the  Syrian  authorities
    for this though it would not be disclosed that he was a  failed  asylum
    seeker.  It would be speculative to suggest that an inference would  be
    drawn.   In  any  event  the  Appellant  had  the  option   to   depart
    voluntarily, though again he would need  documentation  for  this.   As
    regards the question of being a Kurd, it had been mentioned in  ZB  and
    AK as an exacerbating factor but there was no evidence in the  case  of
    any of the particular returnees referred to in the examples that it was
    a factor of significance.

21.   It would seem to us to be implicit in the concession made  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State in ZB and AK that a Syrian citizen of Kurdish
    ethnicity who has an accepted past political profile and who left Syria
    illegally may be at  risk  on  return  on  account  of  those  factors.
    Equally it is clear to our mind from RS that a person  who  left  Syria
    with their own passport and with a proper exit stamp would  not  be  at
    risk on return as there would be no reason to suspect any opposition to
    the Syrian state by dint of that departure and subsequent return.   The
    relevant risk issues are well set out in the Canadian document at  page
    122 of the Appellant's bundle.  Clearly the nature of the departure and
    the profile and background of the individual  are  of  importance.   It
    seems that an application would have to be made either by the Appellant
    or on his behalf for documentation from the Syrian authorities in order
    for him to be returned.  There  must  be  a  risk  that  a  Syrian  who
    approaches the Syrian Embassy or on whose behalf an  approach  is  made
    for documentation might be regarded by the authorities as somebody  who
    had sought asylum in the United Kingdom.  Equally it is clear  that  no
    information to that effect  would  be  made  available  to  the  Syrian
    authorities.

22.   We do not consider that it can properly be said that there is a  real
    risk of an inference of this kind being drawn.  The Appellant,  on  the
    Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings, is  a  person  who  has  no
    political profile in Syria.  Any check of Syrian records that might  be
    made by the authorities as a consequence of an application  being  made
    for travel documents would reveal nothing to his discredit.  It  is  in
    our view  purely  speculative  and  indeed  fanciful  to  suggest  that
    nevertheless there would be inferred to him an attitude adverse to  the
    interests of the Syrian state by the fact that he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and needed travel documentation in order to return.  It may  be
    that it would come to light that he had left the country  illegally  in
    which case he would face up to three months' imprisonment, but  on  the
    one hand that would involve prosecution and on the other hand would not
    to our mind, given that it is unclear whether such a  person  would  be
    sentenced at all, quite apart from how long  within  the  three  months
    maximum they might be in prison, be such as to give rise to a real risk
    of breach of Article 3 rights.  As Miss Sigley  has  pointed  out,  the
    examples given, for example in  the  Amnesty  International  Report  at
    pages 141 to 142 of the bundle of  Syrians  arrested  and  detained  on
    return were mainly people suspected of having  links  with  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood and were people who were returning from  exile.   The  same
    point can be made with regard to the examples given by Dr Rebwar  Fatah
    concerning a number of Syrians held and ill-treated who again appear to
    be people who had returned to Syria from exile and all appear  to  have
    been regarded as people who were or at  least  were  believed  to  have
    links with the Muslim Brotherhood or other organisations regarded  with
    extreme suspicion by the Syrian  government.   Accordingly  we  do  not
    consider that  the  specific  examples  in  the  evidence  support  the
    contention that a person without political profile returning  to  Syria
    having left  without  authorisation  and  therefore  returning  without
    documentation which would enable them  to  enter  the  country  without
    question is a person who faces a real risk of persecution or breach  of
    their human rights.

23.    There remains therefore the question of whether on the basis of  the
    evidence concerning the claimed political activities  rejected  by  the
    Adjudicator the claim can be sustained before a different  Adjudicator.
     That is of course very much a matter for him or her, though  no  doubt
    they will be assisted by the further evidence that has now been put in,
    in enabling them to come to a conclusion on this matter.  We  conclude,
    therefore, that there is no real risk for a person with  a  profile  as
    found by the Adjudicator at least at paragraph 59 of her  determination
    of not  being  credible  as  regards  the  claimed  political  profile,
    detention and ill-treatment, but that the appeal must be remitted given
    the conflict between paragraphs 59 and  60  of  the  determination  for
    consideration afresh by an Adjudicator other than Mrs Hawden-Beal.





            D K ALLEN
            VICE PRESIDENT
