
H-NB-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 18 October 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|SA (Absence of party -late evidence.) Sri Lanka [2005] UKIAT 00028|
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|25 January 2005                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)                                 |
|Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr P Bompas                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G S Peterson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Underwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, has been granted permission to
    appeal to the Tribunal against the Determination of an Adjudicator  (Mr
    M  Cohen)  promulgated  on  25  March  2004,  when  he  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.    The Vice President, Miss B Mensah, in granting permission  considered
    that the  grounds  of  appeal  raised  arguable  issues  regarding  the
    Adjudicator's refusal to admit into evidence a medical report submitted
    on the day of hearing which it  was  said  may  have  made  a  material
    difference to the Adjudicator's consideration of the case.

3.     The  parties'  representatives  agreed  with  us  that  this  was  a
    Determination flawed beyond cure and that the appropriate course was to
    allow the appeal to the extent that it was remitted for a fresh hearing
    before another Adjudicator.

4.     We  do  not  propose  to  detail  here  individual  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's claim that will now have to be considered  as  a  whole  by
    another Adjudicator.  It suffices to observe,  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  in  his  Letter  of  Refusal  doubted  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account inter alia, based upon a lack of  medical  evidence
    notwithstanding that the Appellant purported to  submit  proof  of  the
    hospital treatment that he claimed to have received.

5.    The grounds explain that two days before the hearing  of  the  appeal
    before the Adjudicator, the Appellant's legal representatives  received
    further medical evidence relating to  the  Appellant's  claimed  mental
    difficulties from the Appellant's  GP  on  25  February  2004.   It  is
    claimed that they could not serve the document on the Court or upon the
    Home Office in time for the hearing.  In the meantime the  Home  Office
    gave notice that there would be no Presenting Officer at the hearing.

6.    The grounds contend that at the hearing,  the  medical  evidence  was
    produced and representations were made for admitting the document  into
    evidence, in particular with reference to its import on  the  challenge
    to the Appellant's credibility.

7.    In the event, the Adjudicator refused the application and his reasons
    for so doing are set out at paragraph 16 of his determination under the
    sub heading "Preliminary Issue".   Three reasons were given, namely:

      (i)   The report was dated 24 February 2004 and "since  the  document
        was not produced before the day of the  hearing  or  in  accordance
        with the Procedure Rules I excluded it from evidence".

      (ii)  The Respondent "would not have had the opportunity  to  respond
        to this evidence".

      (iii) The Appellant had been in the United Kingdom since May 2000 and
        there had been ample time to produce and submit such evidence.

8.    The parties' representatives agreed with us  that  it  was  upon  the
    basis of the first two reasons given that the Adjudicator erred in law.



9.    Our starting point is Rule 4 of the 2003 Procedure Rules:

            "The overriding objective of these Rules is to secure the just,
        timely and effective disposal of appeals and  applications  in  the
        interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public
        interest".

10.   Rule 48(5) of the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules
    2003 provides as follows:

            "An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not consider any  evidence
        which is not filed or served in accordance with time limits set out
        in these Rules or directions given under Rule 38  unless  satisfied
        that there are good reasons to do so" (emphasis added).

11.   The evidence in question had not been filed in  accordance  with  the
    time limit set out in the standard-form directions sent to both parties
    and therefore the Adjudicator clearly had the  power  to  exclude  that
    evidence, namely the medical report, under Rule 48(5).  The  issue  was
    however whether he was right to do so.

12.   The provisions of Rule 48(5) are  mandatory  in  their  terms.   They
    provide expressly that an Adjudicator must not  consider  any  evidence
    which is filed or served late unless he is  satisfied  that  there  are
    "good reasons to do so".

13.   We drew to the attention of the parties, the decision of the Tribunal
    in AK (Admission of Evidence - Time Limits) (Iran) [2004] UKIAT  00103,
    in which the Tribunal, comprising two Vice Presidents,  explained  that
    the qualification "good reasons to do so" related to good  reasons  for
    considering the evidence, not good reasons as to why the  evidence  was
    not filed or served in time.

14.   It follows that the Adjudicator erred as  regards  the  first  reason
    given for refusing to allow  the  medical  report  to  be  tendered  in
    evidence.

15.   The Tribunal in AK rightly observed:

            "There is a clear public interest in ensuring  that  it  should
        not be open to parties to disregard with impunity directions  given
        by the Immigration Appellate Authority, whether by  an  Adjudicator
        or this Tribunal.  The same public  interest  applies  in  ensuring
        that parties should not  be  entitled  to  disregard  with  similar
        impunity the requirements of the Procedure Rules.

      However, the understandable desire on the part  of  Adjudicators  and
         this Tribunal to enforce due compliance with such  directions  and
         provisions must be balanced against  a  competing  requirement  to
         ensure that justice is done in a  jurisdiction  in  which  appeals
         routinely require the "most anxious scrutiny"  and  in  which  the
         issues at stake frequently  involve  matters  of  life,  limb  and
         liberty.  There is an inevitable tension between those conflicting
         interests.

         Whilst there may be individual cases in which it  would  be  right
         for an Adjudicator to exclude material,  or  potentially  material
         evidence on which party (normally the Appellant) wishes to rely by
         reason of the failure by that party to file or serve the  evidence
         in time, nevertheless, as a general principle, the requirement  to
         ensure that justice is done in appeals requiring the most  anxious
         scrutiny, will in most cases outweigh the understandable desire on
         the part of the Immigration Appellate Authority to ensure that its
         directions and the provisions  of  the  Procedure  Rules  are  not
         flouted with impunity."

16.   This brings us back to the provisions of Rule 4 and  the  requirement
    to ensure that justice is done in appeals requiring  the  most  anxious
    scrutiny.  This indeed was a factor that Mr Underwood, in supporting Ms
    Peterson's submission that the appeal should be remitted, considered of
    particular importance in the context of this appeal.

17.   He agreed with us that it also raised in the  circumstances  of  this
    case, an issue as to perception of fairness.

18.   In this regard, Mr  Underwood  most  helpfully  raised  before  us  a
    further concern, with which we agree, that led  him  to  conclude  that
    this appeal should be  remitted,  namely;  that  as  contended  in  the
    grounds, the Adjudicator, having refused to allow the medical report to
    be tendered in evidence (notwithstanding that it was available  to  him
    at the hearing), failed to consider evidence that might (and he put  it
    no higher than that) have had direct relevance  to  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.    The  Adjudicator  then  proceeded  to  make
    adverse credibility findings that  included  at  paragraph  34  of  his
    Determination a consideration of the Appellant's claim that he was in a
    poor state of  health  when  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    concluded that the Appellant had attempted "to enhance and bolster  his
    claim" in terms  of  his  evidence  "concerning  the  reasons  for  his
    hospitalisation and length of his hospitalisation" that the Adjudicator
    described as "extremely damaging to his credibility".

19.   We now turn to  the  second  reason  given  by  the  Adjudicator  for
    refusing permission for the report to be  entered  into  the  evidence,
    namely that the Respondent  would  not  have  had  the  opportunity  to
    respond to it.

20.   In fairness to the Adjudicator, we recognise that he may have had  in
    mind the fact that, had the medical report been  served  in  accordance
    with the Rules, the  Respondent  would  have  had  the  opportunity  of
    considering it beforehand.  However, the  Adjudicator  failed  to  make
    this clear at paragraph 16 of his Determination and thus  left  open  a
    concern that his refusal was also based upon the fact that there was no
    Presenting Officer in attendance at the hearing.

21.   In this regard, we would observe that in such circumstances it  would
    be wrong in principle, that a party who  failed  to  attend  either  in
    person or by his representative before an Adjudicator, should be  in  a
    better position to resist the admission of late evidence than  a  party
    who had attended.

22.   In this case, the Appellant's application to  tender  fresh  evidence
    was refused, inter alia,  for  a  reason  that  would  appear  to  have
    benefited the Respondent, notwithstanding his  absence.  A  party  that
    attends should not be disadvantaged by the absence of the other party.

23.   It follows that, in these circumstances, the  Adjudicator's  decision
    to exclude that evidence from consideration was one which he ought  not
    to have taken in the sense that he was not  justified  in  taking  that
    decision, notwithstanding that he was empowered to  do  so  under  Rule
    48(5) in the particular circumstances before him.   In  so  doing,  the
    Adjudicator allowed himself to fall into error.

24.   For the above reasons and in accordance with the provisions  of  Rule
    22 of the 2003 Procedure Rules, we have decided  that  the  appropriate
    course is to allow this appeal to the extent that it is remitted for  a
    fresh hearing before another Adjudicator.





                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice-President
Approved for electronic distribution.
