
ar

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|  GS (Article 8 - public interest not a fixity) Serbia and        |
|Montenegro                                                        |
|[2005] UKAIT 00121                                                |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2005                  |                                |
|                                |.........09/08/2005.............|
|                                |.......................         |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Dr J O De Barros                                                  |
|Mrs M Padfield JP                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr S  Muquit  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Aston  Clark
Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Serbia and Montenegro.  The  respondent
      decided on 18 February  2004 to refuse  his  application  for  further
      leave to remain and to give directions for  his  removal.  His  appeal
      against that decision was heard by an Adjudicator, Mr D.E. Collyer who
      in a determination  notified on 20 May  2004  allowed  the  appeal  on
      Article 8 grounds. The respondent then appealed against that  decision
      to  the  Tribunal.   By  virtue  of  Article  5  of  the   Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 (Commencement No. 5
      and Transitional Provisions) Order 2005, the appeal now  comes  before
      us as a reconsideration.

2.    The  grounds  of  appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  were
      threefold. The first two alleged that the Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      pay due deference to  the  decision   of  the  respondent.  Mr  Parker
      conceded that these two grounds have now fallen away in the  light  of
      the recent Court of Appeal judgment in  Huang  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105.
      Despite accepting that it was unlikely that the appeal would have been
      pursued had it been known what  Huang  was  to  establish,  Mr  Parker
      confirmed that he wished to pursue the appeal  on  the   third  ground
      (set out in paragraphs 3 and 4). This contended that  the  Adjudicator
      had been wrong in finding the appellant's case to be exceptional.

3.    We  have  some  reservations  whether  ground  3  was  entirely  free-
      standing; it appears  to  further  develop  the  due  deference/review
      points arising under the first two grounds.  Paragraph 4 reads:

             "It is submitted that this is not an exceptional case in which
             the Adjudicator has been correct in finding the  decision  was
             outside  the  range  of  reasonable  responses  open  to   the
             Secretary of State..."

4.    However, we are prepared to consider it as freestanding since  if  the
      Adjudicator was indeed wrong to regard the cases as exceptional,  then
      it follows from the principles set out by the House of Lords in Razgar
      that he had perpetrated a material error of law.

5.    The grounds contend that the reasons  given  by  the  Adjudicator  for
      allowing  the  appeal  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  case  was  an
      exceptional one:

             "His reasons were the length of time the appellant had been in
             the UK, in this case 5 years, his positive contribution  since
             he had been in the UK and that he  has  no  family  or  social
             ties, education, employment and housing if he was returned  to
             Kosovo."

6.    This is not a promising start for a ground of appeal since it  plainly
      fails to identify all of the reasons  given  by  the  Adjudicator.  In
      particular  the  Adjudicator  placed  considerable  emphasis  on   two
      additional quite separate factors.

7.    Firstly there was the fact that when the appellant arrived in  the  UK
      in April 1999 as an orphaned unaccompanied minor from Kosovo,  he  had
      legitimate reasons for coming to the UK.  Both  this  Adjudicator  and
      the Adjudicator who had dealt previously with  his asylum  appeal  had
      accepted that the appellant had  genuine  asylum-related  reasons  for
      leaving Kosovo when he did.

8.    Furthermore, there was the factor of delay.  It was accepted  that  it
      was not until 16 March 2001 that the respondent had made a decision on
      the  asylum  application  the  appellant  made  in  April  1999.   The
      Adjudicator earlier found that "Any delay in decision making  ...  are
      not caused by the appellant or his representatives".  And at paragraph
      37 he stated: "I find that the fact that  the  appellant  was  in  the
      United Kingdom legitimately and that his earlier claims  were  subject
      to delay that were not his cause is a  further  positive  factor  when
      assessing the proportionality of the respondent's decision".   We also
      note that, even though the appellant had only been granted six  months
      exceptional leave to remain until September 2001,  his  subsequent  in
      time application for further leave to remain made on  10  August  2001
      had not been the subject of decision until 18 February  2004,  a  date
      well past the time when he turned 18 (5 September 2001).

9.    Before leaving  the  issue  of  delay,  we  should  clarify  that  the
      Adjudicator here treated it as a relevant factor only and going to the
      effect  that  it  had  on  the  appellant  becoming  as  a  result  an
      "integrated alien within the United Kingdom with few if any  remaining
      ties to his country of origin" (paragraph 45).  Had he sought to treat
      it as decisive or as a factor on its own he would have been  in  plain
      error as is clear from leading  decisions  of  the  Tribunal  and  the
      courts. The proper approach is summarised in MB (Huang-proportionality-
      Bulletins)  (Croatia)  [2005]  UKIAT  00092  at  paragraph  28.    The
      President, Ouseley, J stated:

             "It is very difficult to envisage a case in which the  removal
             of someone who  has  no  claim  to  enter  and  no  claim  for
             international  protection  would  be  disproportionate  merely
             because of a  delay  in  decision-making,  which  had  had  no
             disadvantage as in Shala or which had not led to the  creation
             of    circumstances    which    themselves    made     removal
             disproportionate. It is the  effects  of  delay  to  which  an
             Adjudicator should look rather than to the fact or  extent  of
             delay  itself.  Delay  by  itself  would  be  no  such  rarely
             determinative as rarely ever significant."

10.   What we have to decide in this case is not  whether  we  consider  the
      decision was proportionate or disproportionate but solely whether  the
      decision was one which was not reasonably open to the Adjudicator:  CA
      [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  We have to bear in mind the principles set  out
      by the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] 2 AC  368,  in  particular  the
      statement of Lord Bingham at 374F: "Decisions taken  pursuant  to  the
      lawful operation of immigration control will be proportionate  in  all
      save a small minority of exceptional cases,  identifiable  only  on  a
      case by case basis".  Our start-point must be, to use the  words given
      in a recent case   chaired by the former IAT   President,  Mr  Justice
      Ouseley  "...  it  needs  to  be  remembered  that  the  very   strict
      boundaries, laid down in  Razgar and reflected in Huang, mean that the
      range of circumstances within which an Adjudicator, without  error  of
      law can find that a Secretary of State removal decision is within  the
      Rules but unlawful because of  Article  8,  is  narrow  indeed".   (CW
      (Deportation - Huang - proportionality) Jamaica [2005]  UKIAT 00110).

11.   Mr Parker has  contended  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  identify
      reasons  for  regarding  the  appellant's   circumstances   as   truly
      exceptional. However, particularly bearing in mind as we have  already
      explained that the Adjudicator's  reasons  were  more  extensive  than
      represented in the grounds of appeal, we  think  the  Adjudicator  did
      identify adequate reasons for arriving at the decision he did. It  may
      be that simply focusing on the appellant's interests in not wishing to
      return to a country where he  no longer had any  family  ties  and  in
      wishing rather to stay in the UK - in order to  maintain  his  private
      life relationships with  his  foster  parents  and  other  circles  of
      friends and acquaintances - the grounds are correct to say that  these
      were not exceptional. Albeit the appellant had been orphaned at a very
      young stage and had lost contact with relatives,  it  was  not  argued
      that he would be unable for physical or mental reasons  to  cope  with
      life back in Kosovo. His length of stay in the UK was only five years.
      Eloquent as they were, the tributes  paid to his personal and academic
      achievements by tutors, employers and  guardians  only  established  a
      positive contribution to British  society  over  a  relatively   short
      period.   However, firstly a balancing exercise  must  always  involve
      looking at both sides of the scale:  looking at the public interest as
      well as the appellant's interests. Secondly, it must be borne in  mind
      that on both side of the  scales to be considered  in  any  individual
      case there  will  be  some  variation  in  the  relevant  factors  and
      circumstances.  Certainly the Immigration Rules reflect the fact  that
      the interests  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  maintenance  of
      immigration control are weighty in  the  general  run  of  cases,  but
      neither Razgar nor Huang are authority for the  proposition  that  the
      public interest is a fixity or that there is  a  fixed  weight  to  be
      accorded to the interests of the state in the effective maintenance of
      immigration control. As Laws LJ noted in Huang and paragraph 57:

             "In these cases, the Rules have themselves struck the balances
             between the public interest and the private right, the  search
             for which is inherent in the ECHR as it has been   interpreted
             by the Strasbourg court.  At least they have done so  for  the
             general run of cases" (emphasis added).

12.   In our view it is common sense that the extent of the public  interest
      may vary in cases which fall outside the normal or the "general  run".
      Depending on the particular circumstances  of  a  case  it  may  be  a
      relevant factor that the state has seen an individual to fall within a
      particular category of persons deserving of a grant of  limited  leave
      on exceptional grounds  or  for  reasons  of  extra-statutory  policy.
      Considering appeals on a "case by  case"  basis,  as  Razgar  enjoins,
      would be meaningless if, irrespective of particular facts relating  to
      the past approach of the Secretary of State to a case,  the  interests
      of a state in the effective maintenance of  immigration  control  were
      unfailingly a "trump card" because it always had a fixed weight.

13.   We are fortified in the view we have taken by the reasoning  given  by
      the Court of Appeal in its recent  judgment  in  the  case  of  Akaeke
      [2005] EWCA Civ 947 in  which  Carnwath,  LJ  expressly  rejected  the
      Secretary of State's counsel Mr Robb's contention that the  importance
      of maintaining immigration control  was  to  be  taken  as  a   "fixed
      factor" (paragraph 15).   Addressing the question of what meaning  was
      to be given to Laws LJ's statement in Huang that the  Adjudicator  was
      not required to address "the  relative importance of the public policy
      and the individual rights"  Carnwath, LJ stated:

             "He was not saying, as I understand it, that the  public  side
             of the balance is immutable.  If there are  factors  which  in
             the special circumstances of a  particular  case,  reduce  the
             significance of the public  policy  considerations  underlying
             immigration control in general, there is nothing in Huang,  or
             in Article 8 itself, which requires them to be excluded."

14.   As already noted this was not a  case  where  it  could  be  said  the
      appellant  had come to the UK without valid reasons. Nor was it a case
      where the appellant had stayed unlawfully or  illegally.  Furthermore,
      given that he was an orphaned unaccompanied  minor  aged  15  when  he
      came, it could not easily be said he should have understood he had  no
      secure basis for remaining. By virtue of the original  grant  of   ELR
      and the delay in failing to make a prompt decision first on his asylum
      application and then on his application for further exceptional  leave
      to  remain,  the  respondent  acquiesced  in  the  appellant,   at   a
      particularly vulnerable and formative period of his  life,  developing
      close ties with foster parents which he has maintained.  The effect of
      delay in his  case was to encourage him to integrate  with  the  wider
      community.

15.   In  our  view,  the  Adjudicator's  assessment  that  the  appellant's
      particular circumstances were exceptional was one which was reasonably
      open to him on the evidence.

16.    Accordingly,  we  are  satisfied  that  the   determination  of   the
      Adjudicator did not contain a material error of law and  as  a  result
      his decision to allow the appeal must  stand.





                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE




