
                                                                        SW
(Adjudicator's questions)  Somalia
                                                 [2005] UKIAT 00037
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  24 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           8th February 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)
                               Mr I W Dove QC



Between:


                                                                    PPELLANT


                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr Juss, instructed by Hammersmith & Fulham
Community
                 Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Davidson, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Background

1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia who arrived in the  United  Kingdom
  on 18 June 2003 and claimed asylum on arrival.  She appeals against  the
  determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D A Radcliffe, who  dismissed  her
  appeal in a determination which was  promulgated  on  17 November  2003.
  That appeal was against the  Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  asylum  on
  6 August 2003.  The matter came before the Tribunal following an initial
  refusal of leave on 22 December 2003, which was reversed by a decision of
  Mr Justice McCombe dated 16 February 2004.  The issues on appeal relate
  to the fairness of the Adjudicator's questioning of the Appellant.



Facts

2. The essence of the Appellant's claim is set out in  paragraph 3  of  the
  Adjudicator's determination.  The  Appellant  claims  that  both  of  her
  parents were from the Isaaq tribe from  northern  Somalia.   She  claims,
  however, to have been brought up in the Balaad area  of  Somalia  by  her
  grandmother who, she contends, was a member of  the  Ogaden  tribe.   She
  claims to have lived all her life amongst the Ogaden,  pretending  to  be
  one of them.  She fears that, if they find out she is in fact  an  Isaaq,
  they will kill her.  She is equally concerned that she cannot relocate to
  northern Somalia because her Ogaden accent  will  be  identified  by  the
  Isaaq clan members, putting her at risk of death in their hands.  On this
  basis she claimed asylum, and also breaches of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the
  ECHR were she to be returned as proposed to Somalia.  She had  said  that
  her grandmother had assisted in her departure.

3. Until the hearing before the Adjudicator, there had  been  no  suggestion
  that the grandmother, though ageing, was not alive, able to provide  some
  familial support and protection to the Appellant, as she had been  doing.
  However, at the hearing the Appellant said that her grandmother had died.
   The Adjudicator recounted the evidence as follows in his determination:

           "6.   She said that her  grandmother  died  around  the  end  of
                 August 2003.  At the time of the Asylum Interview  on  24th
                 July 2003 her grandmother was still alive.  She  said  that
                 she  mentioned  her  grandmother's  death  in  her  Witness
                 Statement dated 7th October  2003.   Asked  why  it  wasn't
                 referred to in the Statement, she then said she wasn't sure
                 if she had mentioned it to her solicitor, Ms  Sheona  York.
                 She  agreed  that  her  grandmother's  death  was   'rather
                 important' and that it was surprising  that  there  was  no
                 reference to it in her Witness Statement.  Invited  by  the
                 Adjudicator to call Ms York as a witness if she wished  to,
                 she said it was possible she didn't  tell  her.   This  was
                 because the issue was not raised.  If Ms York had asked her
                 about it she would have mentioned it.  If she went back  to
                 Somalia she  would  have  no-one  to  live  with.   If  she
                 returned to Somaliland she would have no-one to  live  with
                 and there would be a 'problem' of people thinking  she  was
                 from 'the Ogaden' because  of  her  accent.   There  was  a
                 'possibility' that she might be attacked.   She  said  that
                 she now lived  with  her  sister  Safia  and  Safia's  four
                 daughters and one son in Isleworth."

4. The Adjudicator concluded that there were  significant  discrepancies  in
  her account and found that the Appellant was lacking in credibility  over
  what she said about her grandmother's death.  He said:

           "9.   I did not find the appellant  a  credible  witness  as  to
                 whether she had been persecuted.   There  were  significant
                 discrepancies in her accounts.  She said  in  evidence  she
                 feared death at the hands of the Ogaden if she returned  to
                 Balaad, and yet she said in the  SEF  Interview  that  when
                 some Ogaden realised that she was an Isaaq nothing happened
                 to her except verbal abuse and touching (see the answer  to
                 question 29).

           10.    Her  story   about   her   grandmother's   death   lacked
                 credibility.  In the appellant's  witness  statement  which
                 was dated 7th October 2003, there was no reference  to  the
                 grandmother  dying  in  August  2003.   I  have  no   doubt
                 whatsoever that if the grandmother had died in August  2003
                 that fact would have been  communicated  to  Ms  York,  the
                 solicitor who the appellant said took her  statement.   The
                 fact that it was not communicated to  Ms  York  led  me  to
                 conclude that  I  could  not  be  satisfied  to  the  lower
                 standard of  proof  that  the  grandmother  had  died,  nor
                 consequently was I satisfied to the lower standard of proof
                 that the appellant had a grandmother who was  a  member  of
                 the Ogaden tribe who had lived in Balaad.

           11.   I noted furthermore that in the  Skeleton  Argument  dated
                 8th October 2003, apparently compiled by a  member  of  the
                 Hammersmith Law  Centre,  there  was  a  reference  to  the
                 grandmother 'becoming old and ill'.  If the grandmother had
                 died at the end  of  August,  this  fact  would  have  been
                 mentioned because it was vital for the  appellant  to  show
                 that she had no-one to look after her.  The  death  of  the
                 grandmother was known to be of seminal  importance  to  the
                 appellant and her failure to mention it to Ms York  was  of
                 great significance in  the  context  of  her  claim  to  be
                 vulnerable on return.  In her evidence the  appellant  gave
                 conflicting accounts as to whether she  had  told  Ms  York
                 about this event.  To start with she was sure that she  had
                 told Ms York.  When asked why  it  wasn't  in  her  Witness
                 Statement she became less sure and  said  that  she  wasn't
                 sure that she had mentioned it at all.  She agreed that  it
                 was an important part of her case  and  it  was  surprising
                 that there was no reference to it.   My  invitation  to  Ms
                 Brown of Counsel to call Ms York was not accepted.  In  all
                 the circumstances I was not satisfied to the lower standard
                 or proof that the appellant had told Ms  York  at  all.   I
                 concluded that if the  grandmother  had  really  died  that
                 would have been mentioned to Ms York.   The  fact  that  it
                 wasn't significantly damaged the credibility  not  just  of
                 the grandmother's death story but of the whole core of  the
                 grandmother's story.  There was  no  corroboration  of  the
                 existence of a grandmother living in Balaad."

5. The Adjudicator then rejected  the  value  of  other  evidence  given  to
  suggest that the Appellant was from southern Somalia.  He concluded:

           "13.  Taking fully into account the objective evidence drawn  to
                 my  attention  by  Ms  Brown  about  the  vulnerability  of
                 returning single women and balancing that against my  clear
                 adverse credibility findings, I could not be  satisfied  to
                 the lower standard of proof that  the  appellant  had  fled
                 Somalia because she feared persecution nor was I  satisfied
                 to the lower standard or proof that the story about  living
                 with her grandmother in Balaad was  true.   If  she  was  a
                 member of the Isaaq clan she was unlikely to  be  subjected
                 either to a risk of persecution by other  clan  members  or
                 Article 3 mistreatment."

6. The Adjudicator then rejected the evidence of the Appellant  and  another
  witness who claimed to be her sister, and if that rejection  were  wrong,
  rejected the claim that the Appellant's return  to  Somalia  would  be  a
  disproportionate interference with such rights as she  might  have  under
  Article 8.

7. It is clear that the evidence  about  the  grandmother's  death  was  the
  major  influence  in  the  Adjudicator's  rejection  of  the  Appellant's
  credibility.

8. The issues arising in this  appeal  centre  on  the  evidence  which  was
  adduced at the hearing and the impact on it  of  the  way  in  which  the
  Adjudicator asked questions about the grandmother's death.  We,  and  the
  parties, have  been  provided  both  with  the  Adjudicator's  record  of
  proceedings and also with the notes of the proceedings taken  by  Counsel
  who represented the Appellant at the time of the hearing, Ms Grace Brown.
   It appears from those records that, having given evidence in respect  of
  her case in line with what has been set out in paragraph 2, the Appellant
  said that  her  grandmother  had  died.   Because  of  the  lateness  and
  importance of that evidence, the question naturally arose as  to  whether
  that was in fact so, and if so, when, and when the Appellant knew of  it.
  Taking the matter from the Adjudicator's record of proceedings, his  note
  of her answers to him is as follows:

           "If I went back now to the south, I would have no  one  to  live
           with.  My grandmother died around the end of  the  eighth  month
           2003.  I don't remember the exact date but I heard about the end
           of the eighth month - I know it was August.  I referred to it in
           my statement to my solicitors  of  7/10/03.   I  thought  I  had
           mentioned to my solicitor Sheona York.  I am not sure if  I  did
           mention it.  I agree it's rather  important  -  it's  surprising
           that there is no reference."




9. In Ms Brown's notes of the proceedings, there is a note of the Appellant
  saying that if she returned to the south she would have no  one  to  live
  with, and then she has noted:  "[Fifteen  minutes  on  why  grandmother's
  death not mentioned]".

10. There is no record in Ms Brown's notes of the nature and extent of  the
  questions.  However, she has recorded that she made a formal objection to
  the questions which had been put by  the  Adjudicator  and,  further,  an
  objection that the Appellant had not been permitted to give full  answers
  because she and the interpreter had been continually interrupted  by  the
  Adjudicator.  She records the Adjudicator in response as saying that  the
  Appellant was free to say anything that she wished, in effect giving  the
  Appellant the opportunity to add anything which she felt she had not been
  able to say.  Nothing of significance was added, according to the record.
   The Adjudicator makes no reference in his record of proceedings to these
  objections.

11. A witness statement was lodged by Ms Brown affirming the  truth  of  the
  grounds of appeal in accordance with directions given  by  the  Tribunal,
  and a later further statement.  In the first statement, she described the
  Adjudicator's manner as  being  "overbearing"  and  "intimidating".   She
  reiterated her concern in relation to the interruption of the interpreter
  by the Adjudicator and the interruption of the Appellant's answers.  In a
  second statement dated 24 March 2004, she  attached  her  notes  of  the
  proceedings and reiterated her complaints about the Adjudicator's manner.
   Ms Brown's first statement said that the Appellant had  repeatedly  been
  prevented from giving  full  answers,  and  that  the  interpreter  would
  sometimes  be  prevented  from  repeating  the  whole  answer,   by   the
  Adjudicator putting further questions.  She had  specifically  complained
  about this and asked for her complaint to be recorded.  She was unable to
  give further details as to the questions because,  as  she  said  in  her
  second statement, as soon as the answer began to be  translated,  another
  question was asked.   This  objection,  as  with  the  other  complaints,
  related to the Adjudicator's questions about the grandmother's death.

12. The Adjudicator was provided with the grounds of appeal and the  witness
  statements.  In his comments on these dated 8 November 2004,  he  denied
  that he was overbearing or intimidatory.  He stated:

           "There were occasions when I asked the interpreter  to  ask  the
           Appellant to give  shorter  answers,  in  order  to  assist  the
           interpreter, Mr Musa Hussein, who was trying to do his best  to
           translate answers. However because of their  length,  I  decided
           that it would be much easier for Mr Hussein  if  the  Appellant
           paused to enable Mr Hussein to translate the more easily."




13.  He  went  on  to  say  that  he  did  not  continually  interrupt   the
  interpreter.

Submissions

14. At the appeal hearing,  Mr Juss  identified  three  criticisms  of  the
  Adjudicator.  Firstly, he had effectively entered the fray and  had  done
  so in an overbearing and hostile manner.  There were too  many  questions
  and this, the manner in which  they  had  been  asked  and  the  constant
  interruptions, had prevented the Appellant from explaining  her  evidence
  as she had wanted  to.   He  should  have  asked  Ms  Brown  to  ask  the
  questions;  he should not have asked them when he did, if he  were  going
  to ask them.  Secondly, he had impeded the  giving  of  evidence  by  the
  Appellant through his interruptions. Lastly, Mr Juss  submitted  that  on
  the basis of background evidence there were good grounds to suppose  that
  young Somali women were separated at birth from their parents,  and  that
  therefore there was a sensible foundation for the Appellant's story which
  the Adjudicator had not addressed.

15. The first two submissions of  Mr Juss  require  consideration  of  MNM*
  [2000] UKIAT 00005 dealing with the Surendran  guidelines  which  provide
  advice on dealing with cases where the Home Office is unrepresented.   He
  referred to paragraph 19, which in part says:

           "In Muwyinyi v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
           (Immigration Law Update Vol 3 No 3 p. 13) the President observed
           that adjudicators were not bound  to  accept  accounts  at  face
           value but  could  and  should  probe  apparent  improbabilities.
           However,  they  must  not   involve   themselves   directly   in
           questioning appellants  or  witnesses  save  as  was  absolutely
           necessary to enable them to ascertain the truth and  must  never
           adopt or appear to adopt a hostile  attitude.   That  is  wholly
           consistent with the Surendran  guidelines  which  show  how  the
           adjudicator should conduct such an exercise."

16. Mr Juss also placed considerable reliance on the Tribunal  decision  in
  Oyono [2002] UKIAT 2034.

           "32.  When evidence is being taken  from  a  witness  and  where
                 there is representation on  both  sides,  an  Adjudicator's
                 role is of silent  listening.   It  may  very  occasionally
                 happen that an Adjudicator is so unclear as to what he  has
                 heard that he needs to ask for  something  to  be  repeated
                 and, of course, there may occasionally be difficulties with
                 interpreters causing the Adjudicator's general control over
                 the proceedings to come into  play.   But  it  is  for  the
                 parties to bring out  evidence  in  the  order  they  think
                 appropriate and it is  for  the  parties  to  put  whatever
                 contradictions in the  evidence  need  to  be  put  to  the
                 witness.  When the evidence has been finished, in the sense
                 that  there  has  been  examination-in-chief   and   cross-
                 examination  and  re-examination,  it  may  be   that   the
                 Adjudicator wishes  to  put  matters  arising  out  of  the
                 evidence to the witness:  but the time for that is after re-
                 examination.  If the Adjudicator does ask the  witness  any
                 questions, he must then always give an opportunity  to  the
                 parties to ask any further questions which arise from  his.
                 An Adjudicator who intervenes during the course of evidence
                 is running the risk that he will be seen to be  taking  the
                 side of one party or the other."



      That case addressed the question of the role of the Adjudicator  in  a
      case where both the Appellant and the Home Office were represented. It
      is therefore understandable and correct  that  the  advice  given  was
      that,  in  those  circumstances,  an  Adjudicator  should  await   the
      conclusion  of   examination-in-chief,   cross-examination   and   re-
      examination before asking questions which arose out of  the  substance
      out of the evidence.

17. It was not said here that the Adjudicator was  not  entitled  to  reject
  the  Appellant's  credibility  because  of   the   evidence   about   the
  grandmother's death;  rather, the case was that if that were  to  be  the
  basis of the decision, that had to be reached fairly, which  it  had  not
  been.  Although Mr Juss said that the Adjudicator  had  placed  too  much
  weight on the evidence about the grandmother in reaching his  conclusions
  in credibility, it is not arguable that it was an error of law for him to
  base his reasoning on it.  Mr  Juss  accepted  that,  following  what  he
  called "the right process", the  Adjudicator  could  properly  reach  the
  decision he did.

18. We note that the complaint is not of actual  or  apparent  bias  but  of
  conduct which was unfair because it had  the  effect  of  curtailing  and
  inhibiting the giving of the Appellant's evidence.


Conclusions

19. Prior to dealing with the substance of the submissions, we wish to  draw
  attention to a decision which is commonly  quoted  to  the  Tribunal  and
  which has emerged in this  case  at  paragraph 4.3  of  the  Appellant's
  grounds of appeal.  In the Tribunal decision in Guine [13868], it said:

           "A  decision  which  concentrates  primarily  on   findings   of
           credibility for its outcome is in  general  more  likely  to  be
           found to be flawed ..."

     This quote was added to the comments of Turner J in R v IAT ex  parte
     Hussain [1982] Imm  AR  23  to  the  effect  that  the  assessment  of
     credibility was not the true focus of an Adjudicator's task.

20. This extract from Guine, quoted out of context, puts the matter far  too
  high and should not be cited again.  Findings of credibility are  one  of
  the primary  functions  of  the  Adjudicator,  since  they  lead  to  the
  establishment of much of the factual matrix for the determination of  the
  Appellant's case.  In some cases, but by  no  means  all,  the  issue  of
  credibility may be  the  fulcrum  of  the  decision  as  to  whether  the
  Appellant's  claim  succeeds  or  fails.   Therefore,  it  would   be   a
  misdirection to say that findings of credibility  are  not  an  important
  element upon which the Adjudicator should concentrate and for  which  the
  Adjudicator should provide appropriate reasons.  Turner J  was  right  to
  point out that an assessment of credibility is not the ultimate focus  of
  an Adjudicator's determination.  In an asylum or human rights case,  that
  focus is the potential breach of either  Convention  which  will  usually
  involve an assessment of the nature and  risk  to  an  Appellant  of  his
  removal.  An Appellant who is partly or even wholly disbelieved may still
  be at a real risk eg for his ethnicity.  He may have lied  to  bolster  a
  true case.  Yet that does not  remove  or  even  undermine  the  need  to
  establish, to the appropriate standard of proof, the  factual  basis  for
  the consideration of risk.  The citation of what Turner J said in Hussein
  has been too often used as an invitation to ignore  credibility  and  its
  importance.

21. We do not regard the point in the proceedings at which  the  Adjudicator
  intervened, that is during the  presentation  of  evidence-in-chief  when
  there was to be no cross-examination, as unfair.  Where there is  a  Home
  Office Presenting Officer, any Adjudicator questions should be left  till
  after cross-examination and re-examination.  The advice in  Oyono  should
  be followed.  That is very different from the situation in a  case  where
  the Home Office is unrepresented, and where the Appellant's account  will
  not be tested through cross-examination.

22. Where the Home Office is unrepresented and therefore the appellant  will
  only go through his or her evidence once, it may well be more sensible to
  raise such issues at the point in the evidence  when  they  arise  rather
  than waiting until the end.  Indeed, to undertake all  questioning  after
  the appellant has rehearsed his or her evidence has the potential to make
  it appear that the Adjudicator, in the absence of the Presenting Officer,
  is  assuming  some  of  the  Presenting  Officers'  cross-examination  or
  adversarial role which is, of course, inappropriate.

23. Adjudicators  are  also  expected  to  have  read  beforehand  the  most
  significant papers for the case.  They are  accordingly  expected  to  be
  aware of the main aspects of the claim.   Where  significantly  different
  evidence is given in chief orally for the first time, it is  only  to  be
  expected  that  there  will  be  an  intervention  for  the  purpose   of
  understanding whether the evidence  is  now  being  accurately  given  or
  misunderstood by the Adjudicator.

24. The Adjudicator, it appears to us, was surprised by  the  new  evidence,
  sought clarification and had no idea that the answers to him would be  so
  changeable, each giving rise to further questions.  He would have had  no
  idea at the outset how long it would take, or that  it  would  take  more
  than a very few minutes, yet once embarked on it, he could properly  feel
  that it was better to conclude the questions rather than return later  to
  it.  It is a question of judgment for the  Adjudicator,  where  the  Home
  Office is not represented, as to how far he asks questions at the  moment
  when a new point arises of such apparent importance, or whether he leaves
  it to the end of examination in chief.   The  Adjudicator  correctly  did
  give Ms Brown the opportunity to ask further questions of  the  Appellant
  arising out of his own questions and we note that there do not appear  to
  have been any further questions raised on  the  point,  from  either  the
  Adjudicator or Miss Brown's note.

25. We  also  accept  that  the  Adjudicator  did  give  the  Appellant  the
  opportunity, following a complaint, to say what she wanted to say.  We do
  not regard that as an opportunity lacking real substance.

26. The point at which the questions were asked was not itself a  matter  to
  which Ms Brown took exception, nor could she properly have done  so.   It
  follows that we do not accept Mr Juss' suggestion that it was unfair  or
  an error of law for the Adjudicator to ask questions during the course of
  the Appellant's evidence rather than to wait until its conclusion.

27. There was no objection by Ms Brown either to the fact that  it  was  the
  Adjudicator  who  asked  these  questions.   It  is  always  open  to   a
  representative to say that he or she intends to follow up the point,  now
  or later.  If that is said,  Adjudicators  should  allow  examination-in-
  chief by the  representative  to  be  the  means  whereby  the  issue  is
  developed.  The Adjudicator can always come  back  to  it  if  necessary.
  There is, however, no obligation on the Adjudicator, quite contrary to Mr
  Juss' suggestions, to ask the representative to ask  the  questions.   It
  may  be  wise  to  do  so   in   certain   instances;    it   may   avoid
  misunderstandings;  but it may also be too roundabout a way of  obtaining
  answers to the real questions  which  the  Adjudicator  has.   These  are
  essentially matters for the judgment of the Adjudicator.  Indeed,  it  is
  clear from the Surendran guidelines, as well as  WN  (DRC)  [2004]  UKIAT
  00213, that the Adjudicator can ask questions and is under no  obligation
  in law or fairness to invite the representative to ask them instead.

28. Mr Juss' submissions on this focussed in particular on the statement  in
  MNM that Adjudicators must not involve themselves in  direct  questioning
  save where absolutely necessary.  There is a danger that that quote could
  give a  wholly  false  impression  of  the  role  of  Adjudicators.   The
  Surendran guidelines show the circumstances when  direct  questioning  is
  necessary, which  must  now  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  Surendran
  guidelines and their necessary  evolution  in  WN  (DRC),  in  which  the
  Tribunal said:

           "38.  Questions should not be asked in  a  hostile  tone.   They
                 should not be leading questions which  suggest  the  answer
                 which is desired, nor should  they  disguise  what  is  the
                 point of concern so as to  appear  like  to  a  trap  or  a
                 closing of the net.  They should be open  ended  questions,
                 neutrally phrased. They can be persisted in,  in  order  to
                 obtain an answer;  but they should not be persisted in  for
                 longer than is necessary for the Adjudicator  to  be  clear
                 that the question was understood, or to  establish  why  it
                 was not being answered, or to pursue so  far  as  necessary
                 the detail underlying vague answers.  This will be a matter
                 for the judgment of Adjudicators and it should not  usually
                 take more than  a  few  questions  for  an  Adjudicator  to
                 establish  the  position  to  his  own  satisfaction.    An
                 advocate should always be given the chance to ask questions
                 arising out of what the Adjudicator has asked,  which  will
                 enable him to follow up, if he wishes,  the  answers  given
                 thus far.  The Adjudicator can  properly  put,  without  it
                 becoming a cross-examination, questions which  trouble  him
                 or inferences from answers given which  he  might  wish  to
                 draw adversely to a party.  These questions should  not  be
                 disproportionate in length to the evidence given as to  the
                 complexity of the case,  and,  we  repeat,  an  Adjudicator
                 should be careful to avoid developing his own theory of the
                 case.

           39.   There is a tension, reflected in the  guidelines,  between
                 fairness in enabling a party to know the points on which an
                 Adjudicator may be minded to reach conclusions  adverse  to
                 him where they have not directly otherwise been raised, and
                 fairness in the Adjudicator not appearing to  be  partisan,
                 asking questions that no-one else has thought it  necessary
                 to ask.   This  has  proved  troublesome  on  a  number  of
                 occasions.

                 The tension should be resolved, so far as  practicable,  by
                 recognising the following:

                       (1)   It is  not  necessary  for  obvious  points  on
                            credibility to be  put,  where  credibility  is
                            generally at issue in the light of the  refusal
                            letter or obviously at issue  as  a  result  of
                            later evidence.

                       (2)   Where the point is important  to  the  decision
                            but  not  obvious  or  where   the   issue   of
                            credibility has not been  raised  or  does  not
                            obviously arise on new material,  or  where  an
                            Appellant is  unrepresented,  it  is  generally
                            better for the Adjudicator to raise  the  point
                            if it is not otherwise raised.  He can do so by
                            direct  questioning  of   a   witness   in   an
                            appropriate manner.

                       (3)   We have set out the way in which such  question
                            should be asked.

                       (4)   There is no hard and fast rule embodied in  (1)
                            and (2).  It is a question in each case  for  a
                            judgment  as  to  what  is  fair  and  properly
                            perceived as fair.

                 The Surendran guidelines and MNM should be read  with  what
                 we have set out above."




29. We add that  Surendran  and  MNM  should  not  be  cited  to  us  or  to
  Adjudicators without WN (DRC) also being cited.

30. Questions can be  unfair,  both  by  what  they  ask  and  by  the  way,
  including tone, length and overall  manner,  in  which  they  are  asked.
  There  was  nothing  here  unfair  about  the  information  sought;   the
  questions were directly relevant to the issues being considered including
  credibility.

31. The issue of the Appellant's grandmother's death  was  an  entirely  new
  issue which arose out of the blue in her evidence at the appeal.  It  had
  not been mentioned at any of the earlier stages at  which  her  case  was
  documented.  It further appears from the record of proceedings  that  the
  questions were put by the Adjudicator in order to gain  an  understanding
  both  of  the  circumstances  of  the   Appellant's   learning   of   her
  grandmother's death and also how it came to be that  this  fact  had  not
  previously found its way into any of the documents in the case  recording
  her evidence.  That line of enquiry led to a number  of  questions  being
  asked in order to establish as complete a picture as  possible,  it  does
  not appear that the length of  time  taken  (bearing  in  mind  that  the
  questions had to be put through an interpreter and this was  an  entirely
  fresh point) was excessive.  They do not appear in  style  to  have  been
  asked as if in cross-examination.   They  are  all  directly  and  openly
  pertinent to what was clearly an  important  point  which  needed  to  be
  explored: the Appellant's grandmother was  a  central  character  in  her
  case, and the point discussed in the evidence  could  well,  and  in  the
  event  did,  resolve  the  Adjudicator's  decision  in  respect  of   her
  credibility.

32. We accept that the questioning by the Adjudicator  lasted  some  fifteen
  minutes which is quite a long time.  But these  questions  were,  to  his
  mind, crucial.  The Appellant was giving answers which changed  when  the
  obvious next question with its attendant problems were put to  her.   She
  was giving evidence through an interpreter which, as we  shall  come  to,
  was giving rise to some problems itself.  It also seems to us inevitable,
  where the answers appear to vary in such a way, that  there  will  be  an
  element of repetitive questioning simply to try to establish what exactly
  is the final answer of  the  witness.   We  do  not  see  the  length  of
  questioning  itself  as  being  unfair  or  intimidatory,  let  alone  as
  inhibiting such explanation as the Appellant  had  being  provided.   See
  also now in this context Ates v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1347, Brooke LJ.

33. We turn to the way in which the questions were asked and  first  to  the
  interruptions of the evidence.  There appear  to  us  to  be  essentially
  compatible versions of what  was  happening  but  viewed  from  different
  perspectives.  The Adjudicator accepts in  his  comments  on  Ms  Brown's
  statement that he intervened  during  the  answers  being  given  by  the
  Appellant.  It is not clear whether  he  is  accepting  interrupting  the
  later translation  by  the  interpreter  of  answers  because  he  denies
  "continually   interrupting"   which   suggests   acceptance   of    some
  interruptions.  We believe that that probably happened because of what Ms
  Brown says and it makes sense in the context of what the  Adjudicator  is
  saying.

34. We accept that the purpose of the Adjudicator's  interruptions  was,  as
  he said in his comments, to ensure that the answers were given in shorter
  passages, more readily translatable.  This improves the  quality  of  the
  evidence.  It is a  common  experience  and  problem  of  evidence  given
  through an interpreter that the answers are too long for  the  translator
  to translate completely.  It may be necessary  to  interrupt  a  witness'
  answers in order for translation to proceed.  Whether that  is  necessary
  can really only be judged by the Adjudicator.  It may also  be  necessary
  to interrupt an interpreter when  it  is  clear  that  the  answer  being
  translated does not  respond  to  the  question,  just  as  it  would  be
  legitimate to interrupt the witness himself.  We do not see  anything  in
  the interruptions by themselves  as  demonstrating  that  there  was  any
  unfairness.

35. We turn next to the criticism  that  the  questions  were  asked  in  an
  overbearing and intimidatory manner.  We also note that  this  allegation
  is made by responsible counsel, and denied by the  Adjudicator,  who  may
  not be however in the best position to judge, or at any rate to judge the
  impact which his manner may be having on the evidence.  We recognise that
  this allegation relates in  part  to  the  timing  and  duration  of  the
  Adjudicator's  questions  as  well  as  to  the   interruptions.    Taken
  individually those other points do not persuade us  that  there  was  any
  unfairness, as we have said.  We think that this point has to be taken in
  the round with those other points in order to asses whether  the  hearing
  was fair or not.

36. We do not consider it necessary to reach a  conclusion  on  whether  the
  Adjudicator's manner was intimidatory or overbearing  or  not.   We  will
  assume, making  it  clear  however  that  we  are  not  reaching  such  a
  conclusion on the evidence, that it was.  The root question remains,  was
  the hearing unfair?  The fact, as we assume it to be, that a judge may be
  at times overbearing or intimidatory does not of itself mean that a trial
  or hearing is unfair.  It is necessary to see what  impact  that  manner,
  seen together with  the  overall  way  in  which  the  hearing  has  been
  conducted, has had on the fairness  of  the  hearing.   This  is  not  to
  condone any such behaviour.  The allegation  is  not  one  of  actual  or
  apparent bias.

37. It is not said by Ms Brown that she  was  prevented  or  inhibited  from
  carrying out her function as counsel.  The effect is said to be that  the
  Appellant was prevented from giving her evidence fully or effectively.

38. We do not accept that at all.  The  Appellant  was  asked  a  number  of
  questions about an important issue raised unexpectedly at the last minute
  and kept changing her answers when asked relevant questions about it.  It
  is clear from the statement made by the Appellant for the purposes of the
  Statutory Review that her evidence also took Ms Brown by  surprise.   The
  Adjudicator allowed the Appellant the opportunity, following  Ms  Brown's
  objections, to say what she wanted to say.  He allowed Ms  Brown  to  ask
  subsequent questions but she chose, as a  legitimate  tactical  decision,
  not to pursue the grandmother's death and why  it  had  not  been  raised
  earlier.

39. The Appellant has produced no evidence as  to  what  she  was  inhibited
  from explaining though she has said that  she  felt  intimidated  and  Ms
  Brown says that she thought that the Appellant was  "unduly  daunted"  by
  the Adjudicator's manner.  The Appellant's statement for the purposes  of
  Statutory Review says (paragraph 10) that she only became scared  at  the
  point where the Adjudicator asked her about her grandmother's death.  She
  says that this was "because in truth I wasn't sure about it ...  after  I
  heard the first news that she might have died, I think I felt emotionally
  that she was no longer alive, even though I did not  know  for  certain".
  This is her explanation for becoming scared, not evidence as to what  she
  was inhibited from saying.  But it is  easy  to  see  why  she  would  be
  scared;  she admits that she was saying something which she did not  know
  to be true and not saying what the truth was and she was being questioned
  about the late change of evidence in that respect.  There is no  evidence
  at all that she was inhibited from putting this, if  it  was  indeed  the
  explanation for her late, uncertain and variable  evidence.   We  do  not
  find it difficult to imagine an element of exasperation at the quality of
  the evidence.

40.  In  her  Statutory  Review  statement,  the  Appellant  says  that  her
  solicitor asked her, after the hearing, why she had not told her that her
  grandmother was dead.  She says that she told the solicitor that she  did
  not do so because she did not know if it was true.  This  is  essentially
  the same as the reason she now gives for becoming scared when  the  judge
  asked her questions.  Yet there is no reason for her to be scared, or  to
  feel inhibited about telling her solicitor beforehand  exactly  what  she
  thought and how she was uncertain about her grandmother.   She  does  not
  suggest that she was.

41. It is difficult to see how the Adjudicator  could  have  scared  her  or
  inhibited her into not  saying  something  which  she  had  been  equally
  unwilling not long beforehand to  reveal  to  her  solicitor,  preferring
  instead to say something which she admits she did not know  to  be  true.
  It could not have assisted her case to have provided that explanation for
  her evidence, or to have stated that was  her  current  understanding  of
  what had happened to her grandmother.

42. We accordingly find no evidence of any actual unfairness.   In  reality,
  the problems stems from a surprise last-minute  change  in  the  evidence
  which the Appellant could not explain in any  satisfactory  way  at  all.
  She had plenty of opportunities to do so.  The Adjudicator  was  entitled
  to find as he did.

43. It is right to observe that the Appellant's statement in  the  Statutory
  Review  contains  material  which  represents  the   Appellant's   latest
  understanding of the grandmother's position.  This could  not  have  been
  before the Adjudicator, but it does not show an  error  of  law,  nor  is
  there any material error of law such as would entitle us to look  at  it.
  It follows that the way in which the Adjudicator dealt with this issue in
  the  circumstances  of  this  case  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
  Surendran guidelines and MNM as considered and explained in WN (DRC).

44. Turning to Mr Juss's last point, we do not consider that there  is  any
  substance in the suggestion  that  the  Adjudicator  made  a  finding  in
  respect of the Appellant's credibility that failed to have proper  regard
  to its context in the objective evidence.  It is clear from paragraphs 9
  and 13 of the determination that the Adjudicator was alive to the context
  of the objective evidence, and that he made his findings with respect  to
  credibility conscious of those matters.  Mr Juss also accepted  that  the
  Adjudicator was entitled to reach the conclusion he did on  the  material
  before him.

45. Mr Juss submitted that it was an error on the part of  the  Adjudicator
  not to  have  noted  Ms Brown's  objections  either  in  the  record  of
  proceedings nor in his determination.  Such objections, and  the  grounds
  of them, should be recorded.  But the failure to do so does not amount to
  an error of law.  Nor has that caused any  difficulty  in  resolving  the
  appeal.

46. The appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we say about  the  way
  in which Adjudicators ask questions.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
