
LSH
|Heard at:  Field House     |        |JA (Ethnic Palestinian-     |
|                           |        |Iraq- Objective Evidence)   |
|                           |        |Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00045  |
|On 7 January 2005          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|27 January 2005                                                   |
|Given orally in court                                             |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Vice President)                                      |
|Mr C H Bennett                                                    |
|Miss R I Emblin                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr A Deve, a Legal Representative of the
                       Refugee Legal Centre (London)
For the respondent:    Miss R Brown, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is an ethnic Palestinian, born on 20 December  1978  who
      was formally habitually resident in Iraq.  He claims to  have  arrived
      clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 25 October 2001.    He  was  at
      all events here on  29  October  2001  when  he  applied  for  asylum.
      Following an initial screening interview and the provision of  a  self
      evidence form, but a failure to attend at interview, the Secretary  of
      State refused that application for the reasons which are set out in  a
      letter  dated  11  July  2003,  which  deals  substantively  with  the
      appellant's claim on the basis of the information before the Secretary
      of State.

2.    On 24 November 2003,  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  notice  of  his
      intention to issue directions for the removal of the appellant to Iraq
      as an illegal entrant after refusal of his  asylum  application.    He
      appealed against that decision on both asylum and human rights grounds
      and on 22 March 2004 his appeal was heard by an  Adjudicator,  Miss  R
      Eban.

3.    The basis of the appellant's claim  had  originally  been  that  as  a
      Palestinian refugee in Iraq he feared the  adverse  attention  of  the
      former Saddam Hussein regime because he had come particularly  to  the
      notice of certain members of that regime by reason of the interest  of
      Uday Hussein in his sister.  By the time of the hearing that basis  of
      his claim of course no  longer  applied  because  the  Saddam  Hussein
      regime had been overthrown.  His claim was based solely on a fear that
      as an ethnic Palestinian he would be either  persecuted  or  that  his
      protected human rights under Article  3  of  the  European  Convention
      would be breached if he were now returned by  reason  of  the  general
      hostility of the Iraqis to ethnic Palestinians in Iraq.

4.    The Adjudicator considered his appeal on this basis and she  deals  at
      paragraphs 10 and 11 of the determination with the objective situation
      shown by the background material as follows.

      "10.  I have considered the letters from UNCHR in the bundle and  that
           produced at the hearing but regrettably there is very little  up
           to date  background  evidence  before  me.    I  have  read  the
           expert's report of Ibrahim  Al-Marashi.   I  accept  that  third
           country nationals in Iraq are  viewed  with  suspicion  by  many
           Iraqis due  to  their  perceived  affiliation  with  the  former
           regime.   In particular Palestinian refugees have been  targeted
           in the aftermath of the war.  I accept that Palestinian families
           have been evicted, mainly by landlords, who  were  compelled  by
           Saddam Hussein to let Palestinians houses  at  artificially  low
           rents, and who are now unhappy with the lease terms  imposed  by
           the former regime and who are demanding huge rent  increases  or
           that the Palestinians  leave  the  properties.   I  accept  that
           evictions have in some instances been  violent,  and  that  they
           continue.   I  accept  that  third  country  nationals  such  as
           Palestinians are being forced out of their  homes  and  jobs  by
           Iraqis who consider them to be supporters of the  former  regime
           because they received favourable treatment under Saddam Hussein.

        11. It is apparent from the article produced to me at page 66 of the
           appellant's bundle that some Palestinians have  been  forced  to
           live in refugee camps, where conditions are poor."


5.    Having correctly disposed of the  proposition  that  statelessness  of
      itself  gives  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,   the
      Adjudicator then points out that her decision must be whether there is
      a real possibility that a danger exists for this appellant with regard
      to his claimed fear of persecution or breach of  his  protected  human
      rights.   Having dismissed any such claim based on the fear  of  those
      formerly in power, she  then  deals  with  the  current  situation  at
      paragraphs 17 and 18 as follows:

      "17.  As to whether the appellant  would  face  persecution  in  post-
           Saddam Hussein Iraq from non-state agents, taking account of the
           background situation as I have accepted it  to  be,  and  having
           considered  the  views  of  UNCHR,  I  find  that  the   present
           conditions in Iraq, although they may be uncomfortable, pose  no
           real  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to  persecution  to   this
           appellant.  Accordingly I find that there  is  no  current  real
           risk of persecution by the state or by citizens opposed  to  the
           Saddam Hussein regime.

       18.  The appellant has submitted that his rights under Article  3  of
           the Human Rights Convention are engaged and in order to  succeed
           in his claim under Article 3, the appellant must show that there
           is a real risk  that  return  will  expose  him  to  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment.  In assessing this  it  is  appropriate  to
           take  into  account  all  the   circumstances,   including   any
           particular impact that there may be on  the  appellant  himself.
           Such treatment as the appellant is  reasonably  likely  to  face
           needs to cross a high threshold.  For the reasons set out  above
           I find that the  appellant  would  be  of  no  interest  to  the
           authorities were he returned.  It appears  from  the  background
           evidence before me that there is no  real  risk  of  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment under the Human Rights Convention because of
           the present circumstances, even were the appellant to be removed
           from his home and forced to live in a refugee camp."


6.    The Adjudicator therefore dismissed his appeal.

7.    The appellant sought permission to appeal against  that  decision  and
      it is appropriate to set out ground 1 in full.  It is as follows:

      "1.   It is submitted that the Adjudicator's finding that there is  no
           risk to the  appellant  from  citizens  opposed  to  the  Saddam
           Hussein  regime  is   perverse   and   materially   flawed   and
           unsustainable for the following reasons:


           1.1   The Adjudicator fails to consider the  issue  against  the
                 background evidence  and  the  expert  opinion,  which  she
                 accepts  in  paragraph  10,   as   clearly   showing   that
                 Palestinians were being targeted since the end of  the  war
                 in Iraq.


                 1.1.1 In paragraph 10 of her determination, the Adjudicator
                 states  unequivocally  her  acceptance  of  the  background
                 evidence   detailing   the   targeting   of   Palestinians,
                 particularly because of the  perception  that  Palestinians
                 were supporters of the Saddam  Hussein  regime.   All  this
                 background evidence supports the appellant's claim to be at
                 risk if returned to Iraq, and it is submitted that  if  the
                 Adjudicator had considered the claim against this evidence,
                 she ought to have concluded that the appellant would be  at
                 risk in Iraq.


                 1.1.2 It is further submitted that there is  no  foundation
                 in the Adjudicator's assertion that there was no up-to-date
                 evidence before her as she had the UNCHR position paper and
                 the expert opinion  both  dated  18  March  2004  (and  the
                 hearing was on 22 March 2004),  other  reports  were  dated
                 from September 2003 to February and March 2004.


            1.2   The Adjudicator's finding is unreasoned and this gives the
           appellant  no  indication  as  to  the  basis  upon  which   the
           Adjudicator reaches  this  finding.   The  lack  of  reasons  is
           particularly  important  if  one  considers  the   Adjudicator's
           acceptance of the appellant's account as well as  the  objective
           evidence, but then proceeds  to  make  a  finding  that  is  not
           supported by the accepted evidence."


      Ground 2 simply then seeks to rely on the same points in  relation  to
      the human rights claim under Article 3.

   8. Before us Mr Deve relied upon those grounds of appeal but this  is  an
      appeal to which Section 101 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002 applies and an appeal will lie to  the  Tribunal  only  on  a
      point of law.   Applying the ratio in CA v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  1165,
      it is essential to identify a material error of law on her part before
      the Tribunal is entitled to revisit the Adjudicator's determination on
      a merits basis. Mr Deve contended that there was such a material error
      of law for the reasons in the grounds of appeal and in this respect he
      relied specifically on what was said in the UNCHR letter of  18  March
      2004, which he said had been obtained specifically in relation to this
      appeal, and in the expert report referred to previously.


   9. There are only two passages in the UNHCR document upon which  reliance
      is  placed.    The  first  appears  under  the  heading  "The  current
      situation following the regime change"  and  simply  says  that  UNCHR
      understands Palestinian refugees in Iraq would generally be  perceived
      to have enjoyed privileged treatment under the Saddam  Hussein  regime
      and that this had serious repercussions in the aftermath of the regime
      change, which was common to all refugee groups but was particularly so
      in the case of Palestinian refugees.

10.   What is meant by that appears to  be  fleshed  out  in  the  following
      section under the heading "Protection Concerns" which is as follows:

           "The most immediate protection concern held  by  UNCHR  and  the
           refugee  community  relates  to  the  physical   protection   of
           refugees.   Physical  threats  to  "foreigners"  including   the
           refugee population increased dramatically in  the  aftermath  of
           the regime change.   The threats came in the  form  of  leaflets
           distributed among the  local  population  asking  foreigners  to
           leave the country in one year's time.   Refugees  were  also  in
           many instances subjected to physical threats on an ad hoc basis.
              The  perception  that  the  refugee  population  was  closely
           associated with the previous regime  was  basically  the  motive
           behind these threats.  The Iraqi  press  also  voiced  criticism
           against Palestinian refugees in particular.

           The ex-Iraqi regime issued provisions  relating  to  Palestinian
           refugees on an ad hoc basis.  With the  absence  of  a  national
           authority willing and capable of providing Palestinian  refugees
           with needed safeguards a gap in the  protection  of  this  group
           might be foreseen.  It is against this background that the UNCHR
           launched  a  registration  exercise  in  July  2003   aimed   at
           collecting credible information on Palestinian refugees in  Iraq
           a prerequisite for ensuring protection.

           In addition to  this  the  refugee  population  in  Iraq  is  in
           immediate need of material assistance.  Despite  the  fact  that
           Palestinian refugees are allowed to work the worsening  economic
           situation together with the decreased  employment  opportunities
           had impacted sharply on their chance to  have  sustainable  jobs
           and left many of them in a critical situation.

           In conclusion the refugee population in Iraq is in a  precarious
           situation in the aftermath of the regime change with the absence
           of a national party willing and capable of providing the  needed
           protection and assistance".

11.   The expert report fleshes out these general observations  slightly  in
      the passage under the heading "The Second flight: Out  of  Homes  into
      Tents".    This is as follows:

           "As the recent US led war ended Palestinians in Iraq  were  left
           particularly vulnerable given their  uncertain  status  and  the
           fall of a government that  provided  them  housing  concessions.
           More than 1,000  families  in  Baghdad  have  been  expelled  or
           threatened  with  expulsion  and  that   number   grows   daily.
           Landlords who no longer receive subsidies  from  the  government
           for renting to Palestinians are forcing them out of their homes.
            On 20 April 2003 a new Palestinian refugee camp was established
           not in Palestine or Jordan but  in  Baghdad.   The  majority  of
           those expelled now live in the Al-Awda camp.   The camp is  full
           of danger an unexploded bomb lies buried in the middle too  deep
           (the military says) to be removed.  As  residents  bake  in  the
           midday sun in the tents provided by the United Nationals Refugee
           Agency (UNCHR) they  must  deal  with  minimal  electricity  and
           inadequate water and sewage.  Community leaders have  petitioned
           the occupation  coalition  provision  authority  to  identify  a
           building that they  could  rehabilitate  to  house  the  growing
           number of refugees but with no success. ... Dr Al Awawdeh and Dr
           Mohammod Abed Al Wahid, Director of the  Palestinian  Office  in
           Iraq, are  working  tirelessly  to  find  new  housing  for  the
           displaced."

12.   The only other passage in that report  which  is  relevant  (save  for
      that which deals with the potential difficulties  of  returning  as  a
      failed refugee because of  immigration  regulations  and  which  is  a
      matter with which we are not concerned as going to the practicality of
      return) appears in the conclusion in the following terms:

           "After examining the present situation in Iraq it is my  opinion
           that due the poor security conditions (sic) in post-Saddam Iraq,
           I cannot guarantee that Mr Abozuhruh can safely return  to  Iraq
           without suffering from reprisals by Iraqis  for  the  mere  fact
           that he is Palestinian.  I believe that he will be discriminated
           there on the basis of his race."

13.   It is immediately apparent, however, from those passages on  which  Mr
      Deve places reliance first that the  expert  has  not  approached  the
      issue of  persecution  from  the  correct  jurisprudential  standpoint
      because he appears to be seeking  guarantees  rather  than  addressing
      himself for the question of whether  there  is  a  real  risk  to  the
      appellant. Secondly, that report is based  on  generalities,  most  of
      which date back some considerable time prior to the report.  There  is
      nothing anywhere in  either  of  the  documents  which  suggests  that
      Palestinians are as such being targeted in Iraq by Iraqi citizens  and
      indeed the only specific issue raised in the UNCHR  document  is  that
      the threats to which they refer come in the form  of  leaflets  asking
      foreigners to leave the country  in  one  year's  time,  which  hardly
      points to any immediacy of danger at the point  when  the  Adjudicator
      was considering the evidence before her.    It  is  also  clear  that,
      paying due regard to the displacement of  those  Palestinian  refugees
      who could no longer enjoy subsidised rented accommodation,  the  UNCHR
      and, as we understand it from other passages in the objective material
      before  the  Adjudicator,  the  International  Committee  of  the  Red
      Crescent have taken steps to provide  refugee  camp  accommodation  in
      which essential services are provided even though  it  is  undoubtedly
      correct that they do  not  provide  the  most  comfortable  of  living
      conditions.  It seems to us that on the basis of the evidence on which
      Mr Deve relies the most that can be  said  is  that  the  position  is
      uncomfortable and to some extent  discriminatory  which  is  precisely
      what the Adjudicator herself concluded at paragraph 17 and 18  of  her
      determination.  Insofar as the challenge in the grounds of  appeal  is
      that there was up to date evidence before the Adjudicator  because  of
      the dates  of  the  two  reports  to  which  we  have  given  specific
      consideration, it seems to us that her  comment  is  wholly  justified
      since they are clearly based on material which is anything but  up  to
      date at that stage.  The only conclusion that can be reasonably  drawn
      from that is that there is no subsequent adverse material which  would
      show a worsening of the situation  of  ethnic  Palestinians  in  Iraq.
      Insofar as there  are  allegations  of  violence  against  Palestinian
      refugees following the fall of the Saddam Hussein regime,  it  appears
      from the evidence before the Adjudicator that these arose primarily in
      circumstances of eviction from subsidised rented  property.  That  was
      not, of course, a category into which this appellant  fell,   so  that
      this basis of discrimination would have no relevance to  his  case  at
      all.

14.   In so far as it is challenged that the Adjudicator's reasoning is  not
      sufficient to substantiate her conclusions we do not agree.   Although
      she expresses the points shortly at paragraph 17 what she  is  clearly
      saying is that when looked  at  in  the  round  the  totality  of  the
      objective evidence does not show a position where the  high  threshold
      necessary to engage either the refugee Convention  or  from  what  she
      says in paragraph 18, the  European  Convention  is  reached.   Having
      adequately spelled out what that evidence is at paragraphs 10  and  11
      we see no basis for criticism of that approach having  looked  at  the
      evidence before her and the way in which she deals with  it.   We  are
      satisfied there is no material  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the
      Adjudicator in  the  findings  which  she  had  made  leading  to  the
      dismissal of the appeal  before  her.   In  those  circumstances,  and
      applying the ratio of CA, there is no  basis  on  which  it  would  be
      proper for us to consider this appeal further.

15.   It follows that it must be and is dismissed.





                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President




