

             ST (NS Case - Scope of appeal) Sri Lanka [2005] UKIAT 00006 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 27 September 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:

                              19 January 2005
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr P R Moulden (Vice President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr J Martin, instructed by Messrs Raja & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr A Underwood QC and Mr S Grodzinski,
instructed
                       by Treasury Solicitor

While a certificate under s 11 or 12 is in  force  there  is  no  in-country
appeal under s 69.  There is an appeal under s 65 (unless  that  appeal  has
been certified under s 72(2)(a)) but that  has  to  be  on  the  basis  that
removing him to the third country breaches his human rights.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  appeals,  with  permission,
     against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr F R C Such, dismissing
     his appeal against the decision of the Respondent who on  22  December
     2000 refused him leave to enter and  decided  to  remove  him  to  the
     Netherlands, having previously refused him asylum and on  12  December
     issued a certificate under section 11 of the 1999 Act.

  2. The Appellant has argued that, despite the terms of s 72 of  the  1999
     Act, he has a right of appeal under both ss 65 and  69  of  that  Act.
     Before us,  however,  Mr  Martin  accepted  on  his  behalf  that  the
     Secretary of State's skeleton argument was correct on this  issue  and
     that there is no right of appeal from within  the  United  Kingdom  on
     asylum grounds.

  3. In order to  succeed  in  an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,  the
     Appellant in  this  case  needs  to  show  that  his  removal  to  the
     Netherlands exposes him to  a  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
     Article 3.  It has not been suggested that such  would  occur  in  the
     Netherlands.  The question is  therefore  whether  the  Appellant  has
     established  that  the  Netherlands  authorities  would   return   the
     Appellant to Sri Lanka, and that such ill-treatment would  take  place
     there.  This is the composite question whose risk has to be  assessed;
     and it amounts in essence to the question whether there is a real risk
     that the Netherlands authorities will act in breach of Article 3.

  4. The material before the Adjudicator  and  before  us  shows  that  the
     Appellant has previously claimed asylum in the Netherlands twice.  His
     first claim was rejected on 29 February as it was "clearly groundless"
     (in the words of the translation we have).  The second application was
     rejected on 22 June 2000 in view of the following consideration:

           "It is not apparent from the applicant's  declaration  that  the
           present application is based on new points or circumstances.  In
           fact the motives put forward for asylum  by  the  applicant  are
           those  which  he  put  forward   at   the   first   proceedings.
           Furthermore  the  applicant  stated  that  he  would  not   have
           submitted a second application if he had not been advised to  do
           so by his authorised representative."


  5. In our view, this decision  contains  a  clear  implication  that  the
     Netherlands authorities will give substantive consideration to  a  new
     application that is based on "new facts or circumstances".  Despite Mr
     Martin's submissions to the contrary, we find that there  are  clearly
     such facts or circumstances in this case.   There  is  before  us,  as
     there was before the Adjudicator, a report by Dr Michael  Seear  dated
     22  April  2002.   That  report  indicates  that  the  marks  on   the
     Appellant's body are "most singular and ...  highly  consistent  with"
     his allegation of torture in Sri Lanka  by  being  hung  up  on  hooks
     (which the Appellant described in detail to the doctor).  Not only  is
     this specific expert evaluation of the evidence new, but it is in  our
     view inconceivable that an asylum  claim  supported  by  it  could  be
     regarded by the Netherlands authorities as "clearly groundless".

  6. There is, further, no evidence before us  that  (independently  or  in
     conjunction with an asylum claim) the Appellant or anybody else in the
     Netherlands is at risk of being treated by the Netherlands authorities
     in a manner contrary to Article 3 by removal from the Netherlands to a
     place of risk or in any other way.

  7. We accordingly find that the Appellant has not  established  that  his
     removal to the Netherlands will breach his human  rights.   We  accept
     the Secretary of State's  skeleton  argument  in  full:   as  slightly
     amended at the hearing, it is appended  to  and  forms  part  of  this
     determination.
  8. This appeal is dismissed.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                 NS/15257/01

                        MR. SOMASUNDARAM THAVAKUMARAN
                                      v
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                   SECRETARY OF STATE'S SKELETON ARGUMENT



     1. The Secretary of State understands that the Tribunal adjourned this
        appeal  so  that  it  could  give   full   consideration   to   the
        interpretation of, and interplay between, sections 11, 12,  65  and
        72 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  ("the  1999  Act").  In
        particular, the Tribunal has invited submissions on the  extent  of
        the right of appeal under  section  65,  and  the  implications  of
        restricted and wide interpretations. This Skeleton will set out the
        Secretary of State's position on  those  sections,  and  will  then
        briefly comment on their successor provisions in  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). It will then turn
        to the application of the law to the instant appeal.



The 1999 Act


The mechanism of certifying under section 11


     2. The starting point is that an asylum claimant may  not  be  removed
        from, or required to leave, the United Kingdom until the  Secretary
        of State gives him notice of the  decision  on  his  asylum  claim:
        section 15(1).


     3. That bar does not operate where the Secretary of State has issued a
        certificate under section 11: see section 11(2).

     4. The fact that a section 11 certificate lifts  the  bar  imposed  by
        section 15 means that Parliament must have contemplated the section
        11 certificate  to  be  issued,  and  removal  effected,  where  no
        substantive decision has been made on the asylum claim.

     5. The structure of section 11 is such that  where  the  Secretary  of
        State decides to remove a  claimant  and  certifies  his  claim,  a
        member state of the EU is regarded as one  that  will  not  act  in
        breach of  the  Refugee  Convention  directly  or  indirectly:  see
        section 11(1). (Such a member state is generally referred to  as  a
        "safe third country"). In short, the deeming provision applies when
        considering whether  the  decision  to  remove  places  the  United
        Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention.


The mechanism of certifying under section 12


     6. Section 12 deals with two discrete categories of third country. The
        first is those identified in subsection (1), namely a member  state
        of the EU to  which  removal  is  not  being  made  under  standing
        arrangements (i.e under the Dublin  Convention),  or  a  designated
        country  which  is  not  a  member  state.  The  second   category,
        identified in subsection 4, is a country  which  is  not  a  member
        state or a designated country.


     7. The difference in treatment between the two categories  relates  to
        appeals, which will be dealt with below.

     8. The common features of both categories are that
        a. a certificate given under the section removes the bar imposed by
           section 15: subsections 12(2) and (5);
        b. to invoke the section the Secretary of State must  certify  that
           the conditions set out in subsection (7)  are  fulfilled.  Those
           conditions are to the effect that the claimant is not a national
           of the third country and that it is a safe third country.

     9. The distinction between section 11  and  section  12  certificates,
        accordingly, is that the safety of the  third  country  (under  the
        Refugee Convention) is deemed under section 11.  Under  section  12
        that safety must be certified, and accordingly Parliament must have
        intended the issue of safety to be open to challenge.



Rights of appeal


    10. By section 69 there are five situations in  which  a  claimant  may
        appeal on the ground that his removal, or being required to  leave,
        would be contrary to the Refugee Convention. It is  unnecessary  to
        elaborate on them.

    11. By section 65 a person may appeal against any  decision  under  the
        Immigration Acts relating to his entitlement to enter or remain, if
        he alleges that the authority taking the decision acted  in  breach
        of his human rights.

    12. Section 11(3) provides that where a human rights  appeal  has  been
        made by under section 65, then unless  it  has  been  certified  as
        manifestly unfounded (under section 72(2)(a)), the person  may  not
        be removed from the UK. Section 11  (2)(b)  recognises  that  as  a
        result of an appeal under section  65,  a  certificate  made  under
        section 11(2) may be set aside.

    13. Section 12 contemplates  that  an  appeal  under  section  65  will
        impinge on the operation of a certificate issued under it  in  ways
        that are similar to the  effect  of  an  appeal  on  a  certificate
        issued under section 11: see sections 12(2), (3) and (5).

    14. There is a right of appeal under section 71 against  a  certificate
        issued under section 11 or 12,  on  the  ground  that  any  of  the
        conditions applicable to the certificate were not satisfied when it
        was issued or have since ceased to be satisfied. Clearly,  such  an
        appeal does not relate to human rights  issues.  In  respect  of  a
        section 11 certificate, that appeal is accordingly limited  to  the
        question whether a member state has accepted that,  under  standing
        arrangements, it is the responsible state and that the claimant  is
        not a national of it. That follows from the deeming provision.  The
        appeal against a section 12  certificate  is  not  limited  by  any
        deeming provision.

    15. In the Secretary of State's submission,  where  a  certificate  has
        been issued under sections 11 or 12, there is no  right  of  appeal
        under section 69. That is so because:
        a. section 72(1)  expressly  provides  that  unless  a  certificate
           issued under sections 11 or 12 has been set aside on  an  appeal
           under section 65 or 71 (or otherwise ceases to have effect),  no
           appeal arises as respects  any  matter  before  the  appellant's
           removal from the UK: its true meaning is that unless and until a
           certificate issued under sections 11 or 12 has been set aside or
           ceases to have effect, no other appeal may be brought under  the
           Act, whether or not the appellant is in the country;
        b. sections 11 and 12 contemplate removal without determination  of
           an asylum claim.  It  would  be  surprising  if  Parliament  had
           intended them to be dealt with on appeal in the same  manner  as
           those decisions which follow from a substantive rejection of  an
           asylum claim;
        c. section 71 operates in a manner  which  allows  asylum  appeals,
           subject to restrictions that are consistent with the purpose  of
           sections 11 and 12. It gives three gradations of appeal rights:
           i. An appeal against  a  certificate  issued  under  the  second
              category of section 12 is  exercisable  in  country  and  may
              challenge the safety of the third country. That  untrammelled
              right is consonant with the third country not being a  member
              State or designated;
          ii. An appeal  against  a  certificate  issued  under  the  first
              category of  section  12  is  unlimited  in  scope  but  only
              exercisable from abroad: see section 72(2)(b). That  reflects
              the fact that the third country  is  either  a  member  state
              (though the removal is not under standing arrangements) or  a
              designated country;
         iii. A section 11 certificate is susceptible to appeal only as  to
              the  requirements  that  the  third  country   has   accepted
              responsibility and that the claimant is  not  a  national  of
              that country. Again, that appeal must be brought from abroad:
              see section 72(2)(b).  That  is  consistent  with  the  third
              country being a member state to which removal  will  be  made
              under  standing  arrangements.  If  the   appeal   were   not
              restricted in that way the purpose of  section  11  would  be
              frustrated.



The effect of appeals


    16. As noted above, a section 65 appeal operates as a bar  to  removal:
        sections 11(3) and 12(3), and paragraph 20 of Schedule 4.


    17. That bar is itself lifted if the Secretary of State  certifies  the
        allegation  which  gives  rise  to  the  appeal  to  be  manifestly
        unfounded, as the appeal  is  then  only  exercisable  outside  the
        United Kingdom: section 72(2)(a). This applies if the  claimant  is
        to be sent to a member state or a country designated under  section
        12(1)(b).

    18. An appeal under section 71 in respect of a section  11  certificate
        and the first category of section  12  certificates  is  only  ever
        exercisable out of country: section 72(2)(b).  In  respect  of  the
        second category of section 12 certificates it is suspensive on  its
        face: section 12(5)(b), and it is exercisable in-country.

    19. A section 69 appeal is suspensive: paragraphs  10,  11  and  18  of
        schedule 4.




The scope of a section 65 appeal


    20. The decision against which an appeal may be brought  under  Section
        65, namely "any decision under the Immigration Acts relating to [a]
        person's entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom",  is
        nowhere defined in the Act.


    21. The language of the section is wide, as the Court of  Appeal  noted
        in R (Kumarakuparan) v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  1102,  and  at  least
        extends to give a right of appeal against removal directions.

    22. As is apparent from sections 11(2) and (3) and 12(2),(3) and (5) of
        the 1999 Act, Parliament intended an  appeal  to  be  available  on
        human rights grounds. See paragraphs 12 and 13 above.

    23. The purpose of section 65 clearly was to make the  adjudicator  the
        "appropriate court or tribunal" under section 7 of the Human Rights
        Act.

    24. It is plain, therefore, that any decision  which  is  part  of  the
        chain of events leading to the removal of a claimant  may  properly
        be regarded as being capable of "relating to"  the  entitlement  to
        enter or remain. However, the purpose of the appeal jurisdiction is
        to give  redress  for  breaches  of  human  rights,  and  the  only
        conceivable decision relating to the entitlement to leave to  enter
        or remain which could breach human rights is one which will, or  is
        likely to, result in removal or detention.

    25. The ramifications of that construction are not wide. A  person  who
        alleges that the section 11 or 12 certificate itself  breached  his
        human rights will be able to appeal against  it,  or  a  subsequent
        decision to remove him, on that ground while he is  in  the  United
        Kingdom (assuming  that  his  allegation  is  not  certified  under
        section 72(2)(a)). He will not be able to appeal in respect of  the
        safety of the third country on Refugee Convention grounds while  he
        remains here unless the certificate was in the second  category  of
        section 12.

    26. Section 72(1) does not detract from that analysis, as  it  prevents
        an appeal being conducted in country unless the  certificate  under
        section 11 or 12 has been set aside under section 65 or  71.  There
        is  no  contradiction  between  that  subsection   and   subsection
        72(2)(b): see paragraph 19 above.

    27. Section 77 deems the appellant to be bringing all  his  appeals  at
        once. However, that is subject to section 72(2): see section 77(2).
        Insofar as an out-of-country appeal right subsists under section 71
        the appellant is entitled to  two  appeals:  one  on  human  rights
        grounds, and one as described in  paragraph  15.  b.  ii.  or  iii.
        above.


The 2002 Act


    28. The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was not  in  force
        at the time material to this appeal, but in case it may assist  the
        Tribunal, what follows is the Secretary of State's analysis of  the
        replacement provisions for sections 11, 12, 65 and 72 of  the  1999
        Act.



Section 11 of the 1999 Act


    29.  This has been substituted by a new section 11 set out  in  section
        80 of the 2002 Act.


    30. The barrier to removal of an asylum claimant until notified of  the
        Secretary of State's decision, formerly contained in section 15  of
        the 1999 Act, is now in section 77 of the 2002 Act.

    31. That bar is inoperative if the asylum claim is certified under  the
        new section 11 of the 1999 Act. See the new section 11(2).

    32. It remains the Secretary of State's submission that Parliament must
        have contemplated the issue of a section 11  certificate,  and  the
        removal of the asylum claimant, where no substantive  decision  has
        been made on the asylum claim.

    33. It also remains the Secretary of  State's  case  that  the  deeming
        provision in section 11 as to  the  safety  of  the  third  country
        arises when determining whether the Secretary of  State's  decision
        to remove a person places the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
        obligations under the  Refugee  Convention:  see  the  new  section
        11(1).

    34. Accordingly the effect of section 11 is unchanged.


Section 12


    35. This has been amended by SI 2003 No. 1016.  The  relevant  text  is
        attached.


    36. It still deals with the two discrete categories of  third  country,
        as subsection (1) is unchanged.  The  difference  between  the  two
        categories, which relates to whether an appeal is  exercisable  in-
        country, has been  retained  in  section  93(1),  which  refers  to
        certificates under section 12(2)  but  not  to  certificates  under
        12(5).

    37. Certificates issued under section 12 continue to disapply  the  bar
        to removal: see paragraphs 11(a) and (c)  of  the  Schedule  to  SI
        2003/1016, provided that the Secretary of State certifies that  the
        conditions set out in the section are satisfied. Those  conditions,
        set out in subsection 7, remain the same.

    38. It follows  that  the  distinction  between  section  11  and  both
        categories in section12 is still  that  the  safety  of  the  third
        country is deemed in certificates issued under section 11  but  not
        in any certificates issued under section 12.


Rights of appeal


    39. Part IV of the 1999 Act has ceased to have effect: section  114  of
        the 2002 Act. The new scheme gives a general right of appeal  under
        section 82 against an "immigration decision" as defined, which  may
        be brought on defined grounds (section 84) subject to a  series  of
        exceptions and limitations (sections  88  to  99).  Some  of  those
        exceptions and limitations  go  to  preconditions  to  a  right  of
        appeal, and some go to the ability to bring the appeal while in the
        United Kingdom.


    40. The new sections 11 and 12 do not themselves contemplate any appeal
        against a certificate. Further,  there  is  now  no  equivalent  to
        section 71 providing for an appeal on the basis  that  any  of  the
        conditions applicable to a  certificate  were  not  satisfied  when
        issued or have since ceased to be satisfied.


The effect of an appeal


    41. If a competent appeal is brought under section 82 of the 2002  Act,
        the appellant may not be removed while  the  appeal  is  "pending":
        section 78(1). Further, where a claimant who is the  subject  of  a
        certificate under sections 11 or 12 as substituted has made a human
        rights claim he may not be removed if he has  instituted  or  could
        institute an appeal under section 82(1) of the 2002  Act:  see  new
        section 11(3) and (4) and paragraph 11(e) of  the  Schedule  to  SI
        2003/1016.


    42. However, no appeal may be brought while the  appellant  is  in  the
        United Kingdom if his claim has been certified under section  11(2)
        or 12(2) of the 1999 Act as amended: section 93(1) of the 2002 Act.
        There is an exception to that restriction however,  which  is  that
        the appellant has made a human rights claim and that claim has  not
        been certified as clearly unfounded: section 93(2)(b) of  the  2002
        Act.  The bar to removal contained in sections 11  and  12  of  the
        1999 Act as  amended  is  also  lifted  by  a  "clearly  unfounded"
        certificate: see new section 11(4)(b) of the 1999 Act and paragraph
        11(e) of SI  2003/1016.  "Clearly  unfounded"  means  the  same  as
        "manifestly unfounded" in section 72 of the 1999 Act: R(Michael)  v
        SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 846 at [7].


This appeal


    43. The adjudicator treated the appeal  before  him  as  being  brought
        under section 65 (see paragraph 9) against a removal consequent  on
        the  certificate  issued  under  section  11(paragraph  11  of  the
        determination). He concluded that no breach  of  human  rights  was
        made out (paragraph 24).


    44. The grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal  contend  firstly  that  the
        adjudicator erred in treating the appeal  as  being  brought  under
        section 65 (paragraphs 3 to 5) and secondly that his  treatment  of
        the risk of breach of human rights was wrong (paragraphs 6 to 9).

    45. If the first ground is right then this appeal  is  incompetent,  as
        there was no in-country right of appeal under section  71,  and  no
        right of appeal at all under section  69,  for  the  reasons  given
        above. In fact, the adjudicator was plainly right.

    46. It  is  accepted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  may  withdraw  a
        certificate that has been  issued  under  section  11  or  12.  The
        appellant seeks to argue that the Secretary of State's  acts  prior
        to issuing such a certificate may mean that it is void  ab  initio.
        That is plainly unsustainable. Despite the disclaimer contained  in
        paragraph 12 of the  appellant's  Skeleton,  it  is  tantamount  to
        asserting a right of appeal arising  out  of  an  estoppel.  As  Mr
        Freeman observed in granting leave to appeal,  jurisdiction  cannot
        be created by estoppel.

    47. The Secretary of State  makes  the  following  submissions  on  the
        second ground:
        a. the issue for the adjudicator  was  whether  the  appellant  had
           established  a  real  risk  that  he  would  suffer  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment as a result of the return to Holland;
        b. it was not suggested that such treatment would occur in Holland.
           Rather, it was alleged that the Dutch authorities  would  return
           the appellant to Sri Lanka, where it would take place;
        c. the evidence before the adjudicator included the Dutch  decision
           on the appellant's claim,  which  demonstrated  that  Dutch  law
           allows fresh asylum claims to be brought if new facts or changed
           circumstances are brought forward;
        d. the adjudicator held that Dr  Seear's  report  constituted  such
           material, and that was plainly a rational conclusion;
        e. the adjudicator also  held  that  the  asylum  claim  turned  on
           credibility. He plainly and reasonably believed that the  asylum
           claim and the human rights claim, insofar as they related to the
           treatment  which  awaited  the  appellant  in  Sri  Lanka,  were
           similar;
        f. Holland is a signatory to the ECHR and  there  was  no  evidence
           before the adjudicator to suggest that it fails to  comply  with
           its Convention obligations;
        g. In all  the  circumstances,  the  adjudicator  was  entitled  to
           conclude that removal of the appellant to Holland would not  put
           the United Kingdom in breach of Article 3.


                                                         ASHLEY UNDERWOOD QC
                                                              SAM GRODZINSKI
                                                           14 September 2004
                PARAGRAPH 11 OF THE SCHEDULE TO SI 2003/1016

           Section 12 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (removal of
           asylum claimant other than under standing arrangements with
           member States) shall be amended as follows -

                 (a) in subsection (2) -

                       (i) for "section 15" there shall be substituted
                       "section 77 of the Nationality, Immigration and
                       Asylum Act 2002", and

                       (ii) paragraph (b) shall be omitted,

                 (b) subsection (3) shall be omitted,

                 (c) in subsection (5) -

                       (i) for "section 15" there shall be substituted
                       "section 77 of that Act", and

                       (ii) paragraphs (b) and (c) shall be omitted,

                 (d) subsection (6) shall be omitted,

                 (e) after subsection (7) there shall be inserted -

                     " (7A) Subsection (7B) applies where a person who is
                 the subject of a certificate under subsection (2) or (5) -

                       (a) has instituted or could institute an appeal under
                       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and
                       Asylum Act 2002 (immigration appeal), and

                       (b) has made a human rights claim (within the meaning
                       of section 113 of that Act).

                     (7B) The person may not be removed from the United
                 Kingdom in reliance upon this section unless -

                       (a) the appeal is finally determined, withdrawn or
                       abandoned (within the meaning of section 104 of that
                       Act) or can no longer be brought (ignoring any
                       possibility of an appeal out of time with
                       permission), or

                       (b) the Secretary of State has issued a certificate
                       in relation to the human rights claim under section
                       93(2)(b) of that Act (clearly unfounded claim)."







