

           HG and RG (India - Special Voucher Rules) [2005] UKIAT 00002
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  18 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             11 January 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                            Professor D B Casson
                                Mr R A McKee

Between:




         [                                                         ]

        [                                                           ]

                                                                  APPELLANTS


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an unusual appeal involving, as it  does,  a  Special  Voucher
     holder and his children.  Its unusual nature may have led to  some  of
     the difficulties which have arisen.  The two  Appellants  are  brother
     and sister and are nationals of India.  He was born  in  October  1980
     and she was born in July 1978.  They both sought entry  clearance  for
     settlement to join their father, the sponsor, in the  United  Kingdom.
     In August 2001, an Entry Clearance Officer refused entry clearance and
     on appeal confirmed his decision after  a  review  in  an  explanatory
     statement of  February  2002.   The  Adjudicator,  Mr  R  A  Prickett,
     dismissed the appeal in a  determination  promulgated  on  14th  March
     2003.  The Tribunal refused permission to appeal but that was  quashed
     on Judicial Review and, following the subsequent grant of  permission,
     now comes before us.   In  fact,  an  earlier  application  for  entry
     clearance in 1999 had been refused and an  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator
     dismissed in March 2000.  The manner in  which  that  application  and
     appeal were considered contributed to the problems faced on the second
     application.

  2. The Special Voucher Scheme was devised to permit, but also to control,
     entry into the United Kingdom of Ugandan Asians  and  their  families.
     The scheme was originally outside the Immigration Rules.   We  do  not
     have the full terms of the whole Concession which embodied the Special
     Voucher  Scheme.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  referred   in   his
     explanatory statement to the  part  dealing  with  dependant  children
     which stated as follows:

           "(1)   Dependant  children  (ie  those  who  are  unmarried  and
                 unemployed) of any Nationality who are under the age of  25
                 when their parent received a voucher may be  granted  entry
                 clearance to join or accompany UKPH heads of household  who
                 are settled and present in the United Kingdom ..."

  3. paragraph 252 of the Immigration Rules HC395 provided:

           "252  The requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United
                 Kingdom as the spouse or child of a special voucher  holder
                 are that the person concerned:
                 (i)   is in possession of  a  valid  United  Kingdom  entry
                       clearance for settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                       this capacity; and
                 (ii)   can  and  will  be   maintained   and   accommodated
                       adequately by  the  special  voucher  holder  without
                       recourse to public funds."

  4. That paragraph is no longer part of the  Rules.   Neither  application
     for entry clearance spelt out the basis either in  the  Concession  or
     the Immigration Rules upon which  entry  clearance  was  sought.   The
     first Entry Clearance  Officer  referred  to  paragraph  252  and  the
     guidelines in the Concession.  He said that the requirements were  not
     met in the first place because he concluded that neither Appellant was
     dependent on the sponsor because both were in employment, well able to
     manage financially and indeed had  contributed  substantially  to  the
     family's  living  expenses.   On  the  second  application  for  entry
     clearance, the two Appellants said that they were now dependent on the
     Special Voucher holder, their father,  because  they  had  lost  their
     jobs, had been forced to move and had then been unable to obtain  any,
     or any regular, employment.

  5. Because of inconsistencies in  their  evidence,  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer in the explanatory statement said that he did not accept  that
     they were not in gainful employment in India.  He concluded that  they
     did not satisfy the terms of the Concession because  at  the  time  of
     issue of the Special Voucher  to  the  father  both  were  in  gainful
     employment and were not financially dependent on him (the  finding  of
     facts also showed that they had  not  satisfied  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer  that  they  had  subsequently  ceased  to   be   in   gainful
     employment).  The Entry Clearance Officer obviously interpreted  "when
     their parent received the voucher" as applying both to the  age  limit
     requirement and  to  the  fact  of  dependency.   Further,  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer said that there were  no  exceptional  compassionate
     reasons for the grant of entry clearance  and  like  the  first  Entry
     Clearance Officer  said  that  they  did  not  satisfy  the  terms  of
     paragraph 252 of the Immigration Rules.

  6. Before the Adjudicator, Mr Jafferji, for the Appellants, argued simply
     that only paragraph 252 fell to be considered, the Concession  was  to
     be  ignored.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not  dispute   the
     requirements as to relationship, maintenance  and  accommodation.   He
     said that those  requirements  of  paragraph  252  were  not  disputed
     because the Entry Clearance Officer's decision did not refer to  them,
     and because the decision did not refer to those requirements there was
     no need for the Appellants to address them.  Accordingly, as a  matter
     of law the Adjudicator was obliged to allow the appeal.

  7. The Adjudicator, however, dismissed the appeal on the  basis  that  if
     only paragraph 252 mattered, the Appellants had failed to comply  with
     the requirement in paragraph 252 (i) that the Appellants have a  valid
     United Kingdom entry clearance for settlement as  the  children  of  a
     Special Voucher holder.  As Mr Jafferji pointed out,  that  basis  for
     dismissing the appeal was plainly erroneous in law.  It is commonplace
     for the  Immigration  Rules  to  require  the  prior  grant  of  entry
     clearance before leave to enter is granted.  It does not  matter  that
     sometimes the grant of entry clearance can operate  as  the  grant  of
     leave  to  enter.   It  would  be  illogical  and  would  nullify  the
     Immigration Rules that require a prior grant of  entry  clearance,  if
     the Entry Clearance Officer dealing  with  necessary  application  for
     entry clearance had to refuse it because of the want of the very entry
     clearance being sought.  The Immigration Rules are to  be  applied  by
     the Entry Clearance  Officer  when  considering  the  grant  of  entry
     clearance as paragraph 26 of the Immigration Rules makes  clear;   but
     it is inevitable, as Mr Jafferji pointed out, that when  he  considers
     an application for entry clearance he does so  on  the  basis  of  the
     application of all the other provisions of the Rules  apart  from  the
     one requiring entry clearance to be granted;  any alternative approach
     makes a nonsense of the Rules.  It follows that it  would  be  equally
     illogical for it to be a basis for dismissing an  appeal  against  the
     refusal of entry clearance, that the entry clearance in  question  had
     not been granted.  Nonetheless, that conclusion is not  sufficient  to
     dispose of all the issues in the appeal.

  8. We turn to the relationship between the Concession and  paragraph  252
     of the Immigration Rules.  We had no information  as  to  whether  the
     Concession was still in existence at the decision date in the light of
     paragraph 252.  We reach no conclusion on  whether  an  Applicant  can
     fail paragraph 252 and still  rely  on  the  Concession  as  an  extra
     statutory policy.

  9. But it is  plain  that  an  Applicant  can  fail  the  Concession  and
     nonetheless satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  252  because  of
     differences in the age  test  and  the  dependency  requirement.   The
     Concession places an age limit on the children and requires  that  age
     limit to be satisfied at the time of issue of the Special Voucher.  In
     paragraph 252 no age limit  is  specified.   We  take  the  view  that
     "child" in paragraph 252 is not a minor but  rather  is  son/daughter.
     Although in the abstract the word  "child"  is  apt  to  cover  either
     someone who is a minor or someone who is adult offspring,  within  the
     Immigration Rules the age of a child is specified where the Rules  are
     concerned to limit entry to those who are under eighteen.  We conclude
     that this means that paragraph 252 is  focusing  on  the  relationship
     rather than minority  or  adulthood.   The  terms  of  dependency  are
     different.  In the Concession it is expressed by reference to  marital
     status and employment.  In paragraph 252  the  dependency  requirement
     involves the Special Voucher holder maintaining and accommodating  the
     child without recourse to public  funds.   It  is  not  sufficient  in
     paragraph 252 if the Appellants can  maintain  themselves  or  someone
     other than the Special Voucher holder  can  maintain  them.   This  in
     different language imposes a dependency requirement.  It is one to  be
     satisfied at the decision date.  We reach no conclusion on  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer's interpretation of the Concession in that respect.

 10. With those differences in mind we are satisfied that if  an  Applicant
     satisfies paragraph 252 but  does  not  satisfy  the  Concession,  the
     Adjudicator and Tribunal should allow an appeal against the refusal of
     entry clearance.  There would be no point in paragraph 252 and in  the
     differences from the Concession which it contains if any Applicant had
     to satisfy both the Rules and the Concession.  To  require  compliance
     with both the Rules and the  Concession  would  involve  ignoring  the
     statutory provisions.   Those  provisions  require  an  appeal  to  be
     allowed if the decision is not in accordance with those Rules.  If the
     relevant Rule is complied with entry clearance is to be granted.

 11. A decision by the Entry Clearance Officer may  not  be  in  accordance
     with the law if it ignores or misinterprets a relevant policy  and  it
     is then for the Secretary of State to reconsider his decision  to  see
     if they do comply with a policy and if  so,  whether  any  exceptional
     circumstances exist to deprive an Applicant  of  the  benefit  of  the
     policy.  The extra statutory policy in the form of the  Concession  is
     an  additional  means  of  obtaining  entry  clearance  and   not   an
     alternative means of failing the tests for entry clearance.  There  is
     no room for an extra statutory policy to restrict  the  scope  of  the
     Immigration Rules.  A decision does not fail to accord  with  the  law
     simply because it does not fit with the terms of  an  extra  statutory
     policy.

 12. It was argued that even if the Concession could  not  qualify  or  let
     alone override the Rules, nonetheless the Concession was  relevant  as
     an aide to the interpretation.  In principle, where a Concession leads
     to a Rule that might be a sensible approach.   However  in  this  case
     there  are  differences  in  language  which  mean  that  to  use  the
     Concession as an aide to interpretation would undermine or pervert the
     clear language of the Rules.  We have already explained that  the  two
     key differences relate to the age limit  and  to  the  nature  of  the
     dependency. It would be quite wrong to revert to the concepts  in  the
     Concession in view of the very different way in  which  the  paragraph
     clearly expresses itself when set within the Rules.   The  differences
     are also explicable.  Although the Concession and  Rules  represent  a
     different view of how old a child benefiting from the provisions could
     be, the Rules could be seen as lengthening the  relevant  age  of  the
     child so as to deal with those who were caught within  a  long  queue.
     It may have been thought that very few now could or would satisfy  the
     relevant test or would seek  to  do  so.   The  relevant  test  as  to
     dependency in the Rules is different from the Concession. For some  it
     may be stricter and for others more readily satisfied.  But to try  to
     turn the one into the other or to restrict one  by  reference  to  the
     other would be to undermine the clear language of the Rules.

 13. The gravamen of the  appeal  was  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
     accepted Mr Jafferji's argument that because paragraph 252 had not  in
     substance been dealt with by the Entry Clearance  Officer,  there  was
     therefore no dispute as to its application  and  therefore  inevitably
     and as a matter of a law the Adjudicator had  to  allow  his  clients'
     appeals.  We reject that argument.

 14. An entry clearance application form does not require the precise basis
     for entry clearance to be specified, whether the Immigration Rules and
     if so which, or whether an extra statutory policy, and the  Appellants
     did not specify the basis for seeking entry here.  It is therefore for
     the Entry Clearance Officer  to  consider  what  are  the  potentially
     applicable provisions and to apply them to the facts.  But  that  does
     not by itself permit these Appellants to succeed.

 15. In this case the forms and the interviews dealt with dependency  under
     the Concession at the first application and then with what was said to
     be changes in dependency following the loss of gainful  employment  by
     the Appellants.  Neither  Appellant  provided  anything  in  order  to
     satisfy  the  burden  of  proof  upon  them  as  to  maintenance   and
     accommodation by  the  Special  Voucher  holder  which  paragraph  252
     envisages.  The issues under the Rules were never considered on either
     occasion despite  the  references  to  them  by  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer, but it is very difficult to see how on the brief  information
     provided in the forms about the size of the  rented  accommodation  in
     the United Kingdom occupied by the Special Voucher holder,  any  Entry
     Clearance  Officer  or  Adjudicator  could  have  thought   that   the
     requirements were satisfied.

 16. Although it is commonplace for those aspects of the  Rules  which  the
     Entry Clearance Officer does not rely on, for  failing  an  Applicant,
     not to be the subject of later debate on appeal, it is quite wrong for
     Mr Jafferji to suggest that such issues cannot be  debated  on  appeal
     and cease forever to be potential issues, to be  regarded  forever  as
     conceded and closed.  The question for  the  Adjudicator  as  for  the
     Entry Clearance Officer is whether the decision of the Entry Clearance
     Officer was in accord  with  any  applicable  Immigration  Rule.   The
     question for the Tribunal is whether  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  his
     conclusion that the decision was not in  accord  with  the  applicable
     Immigration Rules.

 17. An Adjudicator has to be satisfied on evidence or Concessions  by  the
     party that the  Immigration  Rule  relied  on  is  met.   If  a  plain
     requirement of the Rules is not met, whether previously overlooked  or
     not, the point should be taken and if not satisfactorily  dealt  with,
     the appeal before an Adjudicator must fail.  This is of course subject
     to the requirements of procedural fairness as to notice being given of
     the point being taken whether by the Secretary  of  State  or  by  the
     Adjudicator and such adjournment being granted as may be necessary  in
     order to deal with it for procedural fairness.

 18. Here, there was no evidence upon which the Adjudicator could say  that
     paragraph 252 of the Immigration Rules was satisfied and  had  he  not
     made the error which he did, he would nonetheless have been  bound  to
     dismiss the appeal or alternatively, to give the Appellants the chance
     to deal with the issues arising under paragraph 252 as at the relevant
     date.  In view of the error made by the Adjudicator and  the  approach
     which we have concluded should be  adopted  to  paragraph  252,  three
     courses of action are open to us.

 19. First, we could allow the appeal of  the  Appellants  because  of  the
     Adjudicator's error and remit it to an Adjudicator in order for him to
     consider the evidence which might be available as to the  satisfaction
     of paragraph 252.  Secondly, we could dismiss the appeal because there
     is no evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer or Adjudicator which
     could show that the Appellants satisfied the requirements of paragraph
     252, notwithstanding the error of  the  Adjudicator;   the  Appellants
     could then reapply for entry clearance.  The third  course  of  action
     would be to dismiss the appeal on the basis that  there  had  been  no
     effective decision by the Entry Clearance Officer on paragraph 252 and
     in effect require him to consider paragraph 252 in the  light  of  the
     evidence which might be placed before him for the first time.

 20. Mr Jafferji urged that we should not simply dismiss the appeal because
     on any reapplication for entry  clearance  by  these  Appellants  they
     would inevitably fail under paragraph 252 because that  had  now  been
     removed from the Immigration Rules.  We accept that there is force  in
     that argument and that the Appellants should be entitled to have their
     application for entry clearance considered under paragraph 252.  If we
     were to say that there had been  no  decision  as  yet  by  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer on the application of paragraph 252, notwithstanding
     the form of the decision on both occasions,  the  Appellants'  success
     will be dependent on the existence  of  an  obligation  on  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer to consider an undetermined application on the basis
     of the entry clearance provisions extant at the  date  of  application
     even though now repealed.   We have not heard a satisfactory  argument
     one way or another as to the power of the Entry Clearance  Officer  in
     relation to such a matter, although we  think  it  probable  that  the
     obligation is to  apply  the  Rules  as  they  were  at  the  date  of
     application.

 21. However, we consider, bearing in mind the position of the  Appellants,
     that the most satisfactory way of dealing with the deficiencies in the
     decision-making process so far at all levels is to allow  the  appeals
     and remit them to an  Adjudicator  for  the  Adjudicator  to  consider
     whether or not the application falls within the scope of paragraph 252
     as at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.  This  means
     that the sponsor will have to provide evidence in  the  light  of  the
     conclusions which have been expressed about  the  credibility  of  the
     Appellants as to the satisfaction of paragraph 252.  We see no  reason
     why the Adjudicator should not hear fresh evidence in relation to that
     position,  even  though  that  evidence  will  be  confined   to   the
     examination of circumstances  at  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer's decision.   That  should  enable  evidence  in  relation  to
     maintenance and accommodation by the Special Voucher holder as at that
     date to be provided and will have the advantage that, as  the  crucial
     evidence would come  from  the  Special  Voucher  holder,  it  can  be
     provided within the United Kingdom rather than provided second hand to
     the Entry Clearance Officer.

 22. For those reasons this appeal is allowed and it  is  remitted  for  an
     Adjudicator to consider.  We see no reason why Mr Prickett  should  be
     unable to handle the remitted appeal, although there is no requirement
     that he do so.

 23. This case is reported for what  it  says  about  the  Special  Voucher
     Scheme and the inter-relationship between the Rules and the Concession
     and the way in which Rules  should  be  approached  on  appeal  by  an
     Adjudicator in the light of the argument put forward by Mr Jafferji.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


