

                         VE (Racial discrimination)  Nigeria [2005] UKIAT
                                         00057                           | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  14 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                ............................

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Vice President)

Between:




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chatwin, instructed by Camden Community Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Andrews, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr T  R
     Cockrill, promulgated  on  11  November  2003.   The  Appellant  is  a
     Nigerian who had applied for entry clearance to  come  to  the  United
     Kingdom as a working holidaymaker.  This application  was  made  under
     paragraph 95 of HC 395.   It  was  rejected  by  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer, Lagos, on almost all possible grounds.  The appeal  was  made
     on the merits of the application and on the grounds that  the  refusal
     of entry clearance discriminated against the Appellant contrary to the
     Race Relations Act 1976  as  extended.   This  appeal  or  ground  was
     brought under section 65 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

  2. The Adjudicator was satisfied that the provisions of  the  Rules  were
     met and allowed the appeal on its merits.  He then said  that  it  was
     therefore quite unnecessary for him to examine the question of whether
     there had been any discrimination on racial grounds.

  3. The Appellant contended in his grounds of appeal that the  Adjudicator
     ought to have reached a conclusion on the racial discrimination point,
     to use a neutral word, because a finding of racial discrimination  was
     necessary in order for the Appellant to pursue a claim in  the  County
     Court for  damages  for  racial  discrimination.   There  was  also  a
     Practice Direction in force requiring Adjudicators to reach a decision
     on this issue when it was raised before them.

  4. An additional point for our consideration was raised at the hearing of
     the appeal when the parties acknowledged that the Secretary of  State,
     reflecting the Adjudicator's determination, had already granted  entry
     clearance and the Appellant had then entered the country with leave to
     do so.

  5. The decision appealed  against  to  the  Adjudicator  was  made  on  5
     December 2002;  the appeal  was  brought  under  the  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 1999.  The  effect  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No 4) Order 2003 SI 754, article  3  and
     Schedule 2 paragraph 6(4) is to continue the rights  of  appeal  under
     the 1999 Act notwithstanding its repeal by the 2002 Act.  However,  we
     also consider the provisions of  the  2002  Act  for  the  purpose  of
     providing guidance for the future.

  6. The relevant statutory provisions are as follows.   Section  65(1)  of
     the 1999 Act enables an appeal to be brought against the  decision  of
     an authority, which includes an Entry Clearance Officer, where  it  is
     alleged  that  in  taking  that  immigration  decision  the  authority
     racially  discriminated  against  him.   By  section   65(2),   racial
     discrimination is constituted by the acts or omissions which are  made
     unlawful by section 19B of the Race Relations Act 1976.

  7. Section 65(3) provides:

           "Subsections (4) and (5) apply  if,  in  proceedings  before  an
           adjudicator or the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on an  appeal,  a
           question arises as to whether an authority has,  in  taking  any
           decision under the Immigration Acts relating to the  appellant's
           entitlement to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,  [racially
           discriminated against the appellant or] acted in breach  of  the
           appellant's human rights."

  8.  By  section  65(4)  and  (5),  where  such  a  question  arises,  the
     Adjudicator or Tribunal has jurisdiction to  consider  it  and  if  it
     concludes that there was racial discrimination may allow the appeal on
     that ground.

  9. It is a mistake to suppose that those provisions  set  up  a  separate
     appeal from that which is made under eg section 59 and Schedule  4  to
     the 1999 Act on the grounds that the decision was  not  in  accordance
     with the Immigration Rules.  There is but  one  appeal  which  can  be
     brought on a variety of grounds.

 10. This is put beyond doubt in the 2002 Act where section 82 sets out the
     appealable immigration decisions and section 84(1) provides:

           "(1)  An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                 decision must be brought on one or more  of  the  following
                 grounds-
                 (a)   that the decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the
                 immigration rules;
                 (b)   that the decision is unlawful by  virtue  of  section
                       19B  of  the   Race   Relations   Act   1976   (c.84)
                       (discrimination by public authorities)."

 11. The obligation in paragraph 2 of the Immigration Rules HC 395  on  the
     relevant officials to "carry out their duties without regard to  race,
     colour or religion ..." does not alter the appealable decision.

 12. Section 19B(1) of the Race Relations Act 1976, inserted  by  amendment
     in 2000 with effect from 2 April 2002, makes it unlawful for a  public
     authority to discriminate racially  in  carrying  out  its  functions.
     There are exceptions permissible in immigration and nationality  cases
     under section 19D where a Minister of the  Crown  acts  personally  or
     where a "relevant authorisation" is in force.   It  is  not  suggested
     that any exceptions apply here.

 13. Section 57 of the 1976 Act enables proceedings for damages for  racial
     discrimination to be brought in the County  Court  or  Sheriff  Court.
     Section 57A is important.  So far as material, it provides:


           "(1)  No proceedings may be brought by a claimant under  section
                 57(1) in respect of an immigration claim if-
                 (a)   the act to which the claim relates was  done  in  the
                       taking by an  immigration  authority  of  a  relevant
                       decision  and  the  question  whether  that  act  was
                       unlawful by virtue of section 19B has been  or  could
                       be raised  in  proceedings  on  an  appeal  which  is
                       pending, or could be brought, under the 1997  Act  or
                       Part IV of the 1999 Act;  or
                 (b)    it  has  been  decided   in   relevant   immigration
                       proceedings that that act was not unlawful by  virtue
                       of that section.
           (2)   For the purposes of this section an immigration claim is a
                 claim that a person-
                 (a)    has  committed  a  relevant  act  of  discrimination
                       against he claimant which is unlawful  by  virtue  of
                       section 19B; ...
           (3)    Where  it  has  been  decided  in  relevant   immigration
                 proceedings that an  act  to  which  an  immigration  claim
                 relates was unlawful by virtue of section  19B,  any  court
                 hearing that claim under section 57 shall treat that act as
                 an act which is unlawful by virtue of section 19B  for  the
                 purposes of the proceedings before it.
           (4)   No relevant decision of an immigration authority involving
                 an act  to  which  an  immigration  claim  relates  and  no
                 relevant decision  of  an  immigration  appellate  body  in
                 relation to such a decision shall be subject  ot  challenge
                 or otherwise affected by virtue of a decision  of  a  court
                 hearing the immigration claim under section 57."

 14. The "relevant decision" is defined in subsection (5)(a) as:

           "in relation to an immigration authority, any decision under the
           Immigration Acts relating to the entitlement of the claimant  to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom."

 15. These provisions of the Race Relations  Act  apply  alike  to  appeals
     under the 1999 Act and under the 2002 Act, except that the Act has now
     been amended to refer to the 2002 Act rather than the 1999 Act.  Their
     apparent effect is clear.  They bar the bringing of  a  damages  claim
     for racial discrimination on the grounds that the question  of  racial
     discrimination "has been  or  could  be  raised"  in  the  immigration
     appeal, or that the question has been determined against the  claimant
     in that appeal.  Where that question has been determined favourably to
     the claimant, the claim can be brought in the  civil  court  and  that
     determination requires the civil court to treat the  act  as  unlawful
     because of racial discrimination.  The decision  of  the  civil  court
     does not affect the  underlying  immigration  decision  or  provide  a
     further avenue for challenging  it.   Where  it  has  been  determined
     unfavourably to the individual, he can appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  but
     cannot  bring  civil  proceedings  for  damages  if  that  appeal   is
     unsuccessful.  The position in question here is  as  to  the  position
     where the issue of racial discrimination has been raised but  has  not
     been determined.

 16. It was this prima facie  need  for  a  favourable  decision  from  the
     immigration appeal process on any racial discrimination ground for the
     claim for damages to be pursued in civil proceedings which led to  the
     Chief Adjudicator's Practice Direction that the racial  discrimination
     issue should be determined  if  it  was  raised,  and  should  not  be
     treated, as it was here, as irrelevant if the appeal had been  allowed
     on other grounds.  In the 2002 Act, section 86(2)(a) provides that  in
     an appeal under section 82 "The adjudicator must determine any  matter
     raised as a ground of appeal (whether or  not  by  virtue  of  section
     85(1)".  So it would now be a matter of statutory duty  and  not  just
     Practice Direction that the issue be dealt with.

 17. Finally, we turn to the abandonment provisions.  Section 58(5) and (9)
     of the 1999 Act provide:

           "(5)  For the purposes of the Immigration Acts, an appeal  under
                 this Part is to be treated as  pending  during  the  period
                 beginning when notice of appeal is given  and  ending  when
                 the appeal is finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned.
           (9)   A pending appeal under any provision of  this  Part  other
                 than section 69(3) is to be treated  as  abandoned  if  the
                 appellant is granted leave to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom."

 18. It was replaced by section 104(1) and (4) of the 2002 Act;  the latter
     provides:

           "(4)   An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  shall  be  treated  as
           abandoned if the appellant-
                 (a)   is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom, or
                 (b)   leaves the United Kingdom."

      It is to the like effect as the 1999 Act.

 19. We note in passing the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order
     2000 SI 1161 which provides in Part II for entry clearance in  certain
     common circumstances to operate  as  the  grant  of  leave  to  enter.
     Otherwise, leave to enter is granted at the point of  entry  into  the
     United Kingdom of those previously granted entry clearance.

 20. It was the Secretary of State's first contention that the  Appellant's
     appeal had been abandoned because of the grant of leave to enter.   It
     was not possible for Mr Chatwin to resist this contention; we  see  no
     answer to it.  There is only one appeal and the consequences for it of
     the grant of leave to enter are very clearly spelt out.  We do not see
     a way under either the 1999 or 2002 Acts in which a ground  of  appeal
     can survive the deemed abandonment of the appeal.

 21. This is a particularly  unfortunate  consequence  of  the  abandonment
     provisions, because it means that the Secretary of State can terminate
     an individual's appeal against the rejection by an Adjudicator of  the
     race discrimination ground by the grant of entry clearance in  certain
     cases.  It also puts the  individual  who  succeeds  on  the  ordinary
     immigration merits, and a Secretary of State who seeks  to  avoid  any
     further delay to that individual's entry into the United  Kingdom,  in
     the position of having to wait the conclusion of the individual's race
     discrimination appeal before obtaining or  granting  leave  to  enter.
     This forces a choice upon the individual as between entry and  pursuit
     of the race discrimination  appeal,  unless  the  Secretary  of  State
     removes that choice by  himself  granting  an  entry  clearance  which
     operates as the grant of leave.

 22. Equally unintended, as it appears, is  the  consequence  that  if  the
     Secretary of State loses the  race  discrimination  point  before  the
     Adjudicator and seeks to appeal it further, that appeal would also  be
     abandoned through  the  grant  of  leave  to  enter.   This  puts  the
     Secretary of State in the position of having to  delay  the  grant  of
     leave, which he may not wish to appeal, in order to  pursue  his  race
     discrimination appeal.  If he grants an entry  clearance,  which  does
     not amount to  leave  to  enter,  the  individual  can  terminate  the
     Secretary of State's appeal by entering the United Kingdom,  obtaining
     leave at the port.

 23. If we had not been obliged to treat the appeal as abandoned, we  would
     have concluded that the failure to comply with the Practice  Direction
     constituted an error of law which meant  that  the  appeal  should  be
     allowed.  It would then have been necessary to consider whether, under
     the 1999 Act, the Tribunal should deal with the issue, as it could do,
     or remit  it.   In  any  remittal,  care  would  be  needed  over  the
     imposition of any restrictions on the scope of the remittal.

 24. We express no concluded view on the effect of section 86(2)(a) of  the
     2002 Act.  It may be that the failure to deal  with  the  issue  means
     that the appeal to the Adjudicator has simply not been  completed  and
     should be returned to that Adjudicator for  the  appeal  to  be  dealt
     with.  Alternatively, it may be necessary to examine  closely  whether
     at least under section 104(2)(a) or (b) of the 2002 Act, a restriction
     on the scope of any remittal should be imposed.

 25. It does appear, however, that because there is only one  appeal  under
     either Act, an appeal against an unfavourable decision on  the  racial
     discrimination point where there has been a favourable decision on the
     merits case under the Immigration  Rules,  will  put  in  hazard  that
     favourable decision.

 26. Where an application for permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal  takes
     issue only with the conclusion or absence of conclusion on the  racial
     discrimination issue, permission to appeal can be granted on the basis
     of some "other compelling reason", because the substantive  result  of
     the appeal would not be changed.

 27. We emphasise the need for Adjudicators to reach explicit findings  and
     conclusions on race relations issues, whatever conclusion  they  reach
     on the other merits.

 28. However, this appeal is deemed to have been abandoned.  It is reported
     for what we say about the treatment of racial discrimination claims.






                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
