
AJ (Assessment of medical evidence -examination of scars) Cameroon [2005]
UKIAT 00060

      IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

Heard at  Field  House                                      Date  heard:  19
January 2005
                                                     Date    prepared:    21
January 2005
                                                          Date  Issued:  4th
March 2005
                                                         04/03/2005
Before

      Ms C Jarvis Vice President
      Mrs G Greenwood
                               Mr A F Sheward

      Between


      Appellant

      and

      Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

Representation
Mr P Jorro of Counsel instructed by Fursdon Knapper Solicitors
Ms F Ahmed Home Office Presenting Officer


      DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  The Appellant appeals, with permission, which  was  granted  by  Vice
      President Mr R Chalkley, on 25 June 2004, to  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal, against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs R  Goldfarb
      issued on 24 March 2004, in which she dismisses the Appellant's appeal
      against the decision of the Respondent made on 3 May 2002 to refuse to
      grant leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  (UK),  following
      refusal to recognize him as a refugee, or to grant leave to  enter  or
      remain based on human rights grounds.


Summary of the Appellant's Case


   2. The Appellant, whose date of birth is given as 7 September 1969, is  a
      citizen of Cameroon.  His case is that he has a well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in the whole of Cameroon, at the hands of the  authorities
      and their agents, by reason of his  political  opinion  as  an  active
      member of the student  group  Auto  Defence,  a  pressure  group.  The
      Appellant was a student at the University of Yaounde, and as a  member
      of Auto Defence (AD), he  was  involved  in  clashes  between  student
      groups as well as in demonstrations and clashes with the police. As  a
      result of the political agitation, the university was  closed  at  the
      end of 1992 for a period of some three months.

   3. The  Appellant  then  became  an  intelligence  gatherer  for  AD  and
      infiltrated  various  groups  posing  as  a   sympathizer   with   the
      opposition. As a result of information he gathered and gave to  AD,  a
      number of persons was arrested. His activities caused him problems  in
      1994,  when  the  authorities  came  to  suspect  that  he  had  given
      information to an opposition group, Southern Cameroon National Council
      (SCNC). He was detained, tortured and otherwise seriously  ill-treated
      over 8 days,  before  being  released  when  a  high  ranking  officer
      intervened.

   4. He was again detained  by  the  authorities,  tortured  and  otherwise
      seriously ill-treated in 1996, and released with a warning  about  his
      poor performance.

   5. The Appellant's home was then set  alight,  in,  it  seems,  1997,  he
      believes  by  members  of  SCNC.  The  government  provided  him  with
      alternative accommodation.

   6. In February 2000 he was again detained by security officers who raided
      his home, assaulting his wife in  the  process.  He  was  taken  to  a
      detention camp where he was again subjected  to  torture,  being  told
      that there was evidence of his collaboration with  the  SCNC.  He  was
      pressured to confess, and threatened with death  if  he  did  not  co-
      operate. He gave a statement, but was told that it was not enough  and
      that he faced death. He enlisted the help of a guard who had  been  at
      university with him, through whom, a third party helped him to  escape
      the detention camp and leave the country. He learned  that  his  house
      had been ransacked after his arrest, his wife  had  been  raped  by  a
      security  officer  and  the  family  had  moved  away.  The  Appellant
      travelled to the UK where he claimed asylum.

   7. The Appellant produced an expert medical report from Dr Duncan Forrest
      of the Medical Foundation. He was examined at the Medical  Foundation,
      by Dr Forrest, on 8 July and 22  July  2003.  The  credentials  of  Dr
      Forrest are at Appendix A and his acknowledgement of his duty  to  the
      court is at Appendix B to the report,  which  is  written  on  Medical
      Foundation medical report paper. The front page of the report  invites
      any queries to be addressed to the Legal Officer

   8. Dr Forrest documented 22 sets of scars to the Appellant's  person.  He
      is of the expert opinion that  of  the  scars,  all  those  which  the
      Appellant attributes to torture /mistreatment are consistent or  fully
      consistent with that explanation. He also finds that several  of  them
      are indicative (i.e. typical or more than consistent with) of  certain
      forms of violence as claimed by the Appellant. He is  of  the  opinion
      that the medical evidence gives  strong  support  to  his  account  of
      severe  violence  in  detention.  Dr  Forrest  refers  to  a   Medical
      Foundation publication dealing with torture and other ill-treatment in
      Cameroon, "Every Morning Just Like Coffee", 26 June 2002.

   9. The Adjudicator also received a medical  report  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's partner, but her account was not explored at the hearing.

  10. The Adjudicator did not believe the Appellant's claim in  relation  to
      past events in Cameroon. She noted that there was a date given in  the
      Home Office Country Assessment, for the closure of the university that
      differed from that given by the Appellant in his account and therefore
      formed the view that his account was  not  entirely  true.  She  noted
      other differences as between dates of  various  events  given  by  the
      Appellant in a written statement, and dates given when interviewed  by
      Dr Forrest. She rejected the Appellant's account as an explanation for
      leaving Cameroon and found that he was not of adverse interest to  the
      authorities there. He was not a refugee nor at real risk of breach  of
      his Article 3 rights.

  11. The Adjudicator took the view that the medical report  should  not  be
      given weight as she doubted that  Dr  Forrest  was  connected  to  the
      Medical Foundation, doubted his expertise, and  doubted  that  he  had
      been authorized by the Medical Foundation to prepare the  report.  She
      took the view that the report relied  upon  the  Appellant's  account,
      which she had found to be wanting because of the differences in  dates
      as mentioned, and was therefore wanting itself.  She  notes  that  the
      Appellant's representative sought to persuade her that a  report  from
      Medical  Foundation,  in  itself,  goes  to  the  bona  fides  of  the
      Appellant's account of ill-treatment. However,  she  was  plainly  not
      persuaded. Instead she undertook herself, an examination of the  scars
      and conducted an assessment of her own.  She  then  held  against  the
      Appellant that he had not adduced  medical  evidence  from  Manchester
      Hospital, where he had attended the Accident and Emergency  Department
      shortly after arrival in the UK, or from a  hospital  in  Bedfordshire
      where he had also been a patient.

  12. The Adjudicator decided that the medical evidence should, in the light
      of the above, be given only little weight (paragraph 39).

The Grounds of Appeal

  13. The grounds of appeal in  respect  of  which  permission  was  granted
      (paragraphs 4-10), are, in summary, that the Adjudicator's approach to
      the expert medical  evidence  was  fatally  flawed.  She  should  have
      resolved any doubts as  to  the  provenance  of  the  report  and  the
      credentials of Dr Forrest by causing the  Appellant's  representatives
      to clarify the position, or instructing  her  clerk  to  take  up  the
      invitation in the report to  contact  the  Legal  Officer  of  Medical
      Foundation. In the circumstances it was irrational for the Adjudicator
      to apparently reject the validity of the medical report, so as  to  be
      Wednesbury unreasonable and in error of law.

Documentation

  14. We had before us the Tribunal bundle, the documents that  were  before
      the Adjudicator, together with a Tribunal Bundle  for  the  Appellant,
      skeleton argument, and the February 2004 US  State  Department  Report
      (USSDR) from the Respondent.  Mr  Jorro  also  lodged  copies  of  the
      following cases:

           Virjon B v Special Adjudicator CO/3829/2001 (17 June 2002)


           HE(DRC-credibility and psychiatric reports) DRC CG [2004]  UKIAT
           00321 Reported


           R v SSHD ex parte Khaira QBD [1998} INLR

Submissions

  15. As we were uncertain as to whether it would be of any relevance to the
      appeal, at the outset of the hearing we informed Mr Jorro and Ms Ahmed
      that we were, sadly,  aware of  the  death  of  Dr  Forrest  in  early
      December 2004, one of us having read  his  obituary  in  the  national
      press. Mr Jorro indicated that this loss should not affect his ability
      to present the case nor ours in determining the appeal.


  16. Mr Jorro relied upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  upon  his  skeleton
      argument. He submitted that  the  Adjudicator  had  had  the  original
      medical report before her at  the  hearing  and  had  not  raised  any
      queries or doubts about it at all in the course  of  the  hearing.  We
      have no way of knowing when it was that concerns arose in her mind. If
      it was after the hearing, the  proper  course  was  to  reconvene  the
      hearing having first given directions to the parties as to  the  issue
      on which she wished to receive evidence and submissions. Alternatively
      she could have instructed her clerk to write to the Legal  Officer  at
      Medical  Foundation  to  check  Dr  Forrest's  credentials   and   his
      connection to the Medical Foundation. Her apparent  rejection  of  the
      validity of the report at paragraph 37 was Wednesbury unreasonable.


  17. At paragraph 39 the Adjudicator appeared to conduct  her  own  medical
      examination and to second guess the doctor. She had no business to  do
      so. He relied upon the judgment in Khaira at page 736, where the judge
      noted that where there is a medical issue:" there  may  be  two  views
      about it, but I do not see on what basis the lay  person  is  able  to
      express this view without the benefit of some medical advice."

  18. Mr Jorro submitted that he did not know whether  the  Adjudicator  was
      also a doctor, but if so, she ought to have disclosed that fact to the
      parties at the hearing.

  19. Had the Adjudicator raised her concerns at the hearing, the Presenting
      Officer would also have been in a position to produce the Home  Office
      Asylum  Directorate  Instructions  (ADIs)  in  relation   to   Medical
      Foundation. At 2.3 of that guidance, it is to  be  noted  that  it  is
      important that reports  prepared  on  behalf  of  the  Foundation  are
      understood fully and given proper weight in the consideration process.
      It is important to stress that caseworkers must avoid making  clinical
      judgments about medical evidence. If  they  have  any  concerns,  they
      should discuss them with a senior caseworker, who may refer the matter
      to the Foundation by writing to the Legal Officer.

  20.  Mr  Jorro  submitted  that  the   medical   evidence   was   strongly
      corroborative  of  the   Appellant's   claim   to   have   experienced
      persecution, not just that he had suffered injuries. The injuries were
      consistent with the account, some were typical of the type of  torture
      claimed such as tearing of the skin with cordelettes and  beatings  to
      the soles of the feet. The medical evidence gives  strong  support  to
      the Appellant's account of severe violence in detention, according  to
      Dr Forrest who was a specialist with much experience in  dealing  with
      scarring,  methods  of  torture  and  torture  victims,  as  per   his
      credentials,  which  experience  he  had  built  upon  following   his
      retirement as a consultant paediatrician,  although  he  continued  to
      work often with children, documenting their injuries.

  21. Mr Jorro  drew  attention  briefly  to  the  background  evidence  and
      submitted that it supported the Appellant's claim to ill-treatment and
      showed that such problems continued within Cameroon.

  22. It was a material error of law on the part of the Adjudicator to  have
      given no more than little weight to this strong evidence in favour  of
      the Appellant. In the circumstances the appeal should be remitted  for
      a fresh hearing before another Adjudicator.

  23. Ms Ahmed in her submission agreed that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
      raised any concerns that she had about the report at the hearing.  She
      may have had these questions in her mind only after  the  hearing.  Ms
      Ahmed did not seek to challenge the credentials  of  Dr  Forrest.  She
      submitted that the Adjudicator had looked at  the  scars  herself  and
      noted that evidence of bruising was  not  before  her.  This  evidence
      could have been provided by the Appellant. Ms Ahmed accepted that  the
      Adjudicator had not made  findings  arising  from  the  facts  in  the
      medical report. She had merely made points relating to differences  in
      dates. All she did was to highlight the differences between  dates  in
      the medical report and dates elsewhere. She made no findings. Ms Ahmed
      also completely accepted that the Adjudicator had not made findings of
      credibility and fact in relation to the  Appellant's  account.  Rather
      she had merely stated  at  paragraph  36  that  the  account  was  not
      entirely true and that she was not satisfied that it was  a  full  and
      frank account at 44.

  24. Mr Jorro, in reply, submitted that the Adjudicator's error of  law  in
      relation to the  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  vitiated  her
      credibility findings. She did not accept that he had been ill-treated,
      and that finding could not stand in the light of her approach  to  and
      assessment of the medical evidence (see Virjon B). She had  failed  to
      properly consider, assess  and  give  proper  weight  to  the  medical
      evidence, and in turn that infected her findings  of  credibility  and
      fact, the matter should go back to another adjudicator  and  then  all
      the up to date evidence could be considered.

  25. At the conclusion of the hearing we indicated to the parties  that  we
      proposed to allow the appeal to the extent that it would  be  remitted
      for a fresh hearing before another Adjudicator and  we  now  give  our
      reasons for that decision.

Consideration and Findings

  26. We remind  ourselves  that  by  the  provisions  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No 4) (Amendment) (No 2)
      Order 2003, any Adjudicator's determination promulgated after  9  June
      2003 may be appealed to the Tribunal only pursuant to  Section  101(1)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ( the  2002  Act).
      Section 101(1) provides:

           "(1) A party to an appeal to an Adjudicator under Section 82  or
           83 may, with the permission of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,
           appeal to the Tribunal against the  Adjudicator's  determination
           on a point of law."


  27. Following the judgment of the Court of Appeal in CA  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      1165 20 July 2004, it is clear that when hearing an appeal in  respect
      of a determination of an Adjudicator that was promulgated after 9 June
      2003, the Tribunal must first decide whether or not that determination
      discloses a material error of law. It is only where that  question  is
      answered in the affirmative that it is open to the Tribunal to  go  on
      to consider what relief, if any, should be granted, and whether or not
      fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.


  28. We also remind ourselves of the provisions of Section 8 of the  Asylum
      and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 (the 2004  Act),
      which was brought into force on 1 January 2005. The section is  headed
      'Claimant's credibility'.  It requires 'a deciding authority' to 'take
      account, as damaging credibility,  of  any  behaviour  to  which  this
      section applies'.

      'Deciding authority' is defined  in  subsections  (7)  and  (13).   It
      includes the Secretary of State, Immigration Officers,  the  AIT,  and
      Adjudicators and the IAT.  The section is drafted in such a way as  to
      apply to all assessments of  credibility  by  'deciding  authorities',
      even if  they  are  hearing  appeals  from  decisions  based  on  such
      assessments before the commencement of the section.  In  other  words,
      even if  hearing an appeal against  a  pre-1  January  2005  decision,
      nevertheless, there is a  need to apply the section.


      'Behaviour to which this section applies' is set  out  in  subsections
      (2), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (9).   (The  regulations  required  before
      subsection (5) can have any practical effect (see  the  definition  of
      'notified' in subsection (7)) have been made as SI 2004 No 3263).  The
      section is mandatory.  It does not  require  disbelief,  but  it  does
      require the conduct to be taken into account.


  29. We note that there is a challenge to the findings as to credibility by
      the Appellant before us. As we are to remit this appeal  for  a  fresh
      hearing, it will be for the Tribunal hearing the  appeal  to  consider
      that aspect of the matter afresh also, as all matters will be at large
      once more, although we have borne in  mind  and  applied  the  section
      here, as required.


  30. We find that the Adjudicator did fall into a material error of law  in
      that she materially  erred  in  her  approach  to,  analysis  of,  and
      apparent finding in relation to the validity  of  the  medical  report
      from  Dr  Forrest,  which  we  find  to  have  been  irrational.  That
      irrationality has, in turn,  infected  her  approach  to  the  medical
      evidence in that she appears to  have  conducted  a  form  of  medical
      examination of her own, at the hearing, and/or afterwards, it  is  not
      wholly clear, which it was manifestly not open to her to do. She  then
      failed make any findings in respect of  the  content  of  the  report,
      other than that it should be accorded only little weight.  It  is  not
      clear from an examination of the determination where that  weight  was
      actually  placed,  if  anywhere  at  all.  As  has  been  noted,   the
      Adjudicator highlighted some  differences  in  dates  as  between  the
      history given in the medical report and the history given elsewhere in
      a statement. She does not say what she made of those differences,  nor
      why.  The  Adjudicator  found  the   Appellant's   account   to   lack
      credibility, but failed to make any detailed findings in that  regard,
      so that it is not possible to say what evidence she accepted and  what
      she rejected and why. We have been assisted by the submissions made by
      both representatives, who as is evident from the summary above,  agree
      with one another, in essence. We agree with them, for the reason  they
      have given.


  31. The credentials of Dr Forrest were attached to  his  report  in  brief
      form, and  any  detail  required  could  have  been  produced  to  the
      Adjudicator. His Curriculum Vitae (CV) was at page 101 of  the  bundle
      before us. This could have been faxed to  court  had  the  Adjudicator
      asked. If her doubts did not enter her mind until after  the  hearing,
      then she should have acted as was indicated  above  and  resolved  her
      doubts  in  a  public  forum,  whether  in  written  form  or  through
      reconvening the hearing, with all the relevant evidence before her.

  32. There was also before us a letter from the  Medical  Foundation  Legal
      Officer, dated 13 April 2004, which enclosed the  CV.  It  points  out
      that Dr Forrest is the Editor and chief author of the  Guidelines  for
      the Examination of Survivors of Torture [2002], (as mentioned  in  the
      Home Office ADIs). We find that he  was  clearly  a  most  valued  and
      distinguished member of the panel  of  doctors  working  with  Medical
      Foundation.  The Legal Officer expresses  surprise,  as  this  is  the
      first time, to his knowledge, that a comment has been made  about  the
      relationship between the Medical Foundation  and  one  of  its  report
      writers. He notes that the Adjudicator observed that the  examinations
      of the Appellant were carried out at the Medical Foundation, and  that
      the report was written on Medical Foundation paper, with a footnote to
      address enquiries to the Legal Officer. He is of the view that  it  is
      difficult to see what could have aroused the suspicion that the report
      was not authorized by the Medical Foundation, which he  confirms  that
      it indeed was. Dr Forrest had confirmed as much in his declaration  to
      the  court  at  Appendix  B  to  the  report,  which  was  before  the
      Adjudicator. The letter from the Legal Officer points  out  that  even
      had the Appellant obtained a brief report from Manchester Hospital  to
      confirm that he had bruising to his abdomen as claimed, it is doubtful
      that such a report  would  have  been  as  cogent  as  the  specialist
      evidence of Dr Forrest in relation to, for example, injuries cause  by
      blows from a cordellette.  We agree with this summary  of  the  letter
      from the Legal Officer.


  33. That it is  possible  that  evidence,  for  example  of  bruising  and
      swelling, could have been provided by a report  from  another  source,
      but was not provided, is not, we find, in itself a sustainable  reason
      for rejecting or diminishing the value of the evidence that  has  been
      provided, which the Adjudicator has failed  to  consider  and  assess,
      either properly or at all.

  34. In any event, it was not for the Adjudicator to embark  upon  her  own
      medical  examination  and  diagnosis,  whether  at  the   hearing   or
      afterwards. Where an Adjudicator has specific skills,  qualifications,
      knowledge and experience, then he or she should disclose that  to  the
      parties and make clear what, if any use it is intended to put them  to
      in the course of the hearing and determination process.

  35.  Where  an  Adjudicator  has  made  use  of  such  knowledge,  skills,
      qualifications or experience without disclosing it, then  that  aspect
      of the judicial process remains forever closed  to  the  parties,  and
      indeed to other members of the judiciary and the general public. There
      is a lack of transparency and accountability.  For  how  may  a  party
      fully  understand  the  reasons  for  a  judicial  decision  in   such
      circumstances? And how may a party raise a challenge to a part of  the
      judicial process that is not revealed in the judgment  that  has  been
      handed down?

  36. We remind ourselves of the guidance of the Court  of  Appeal,  in  the
      words of Lord Phillips MR in the case of English  v  Emery,  Court  of
      Appeal 30 April 2002 NLJLR :

           'Putting the matter at its simplest, justice would not  be  done
           if it was not apparent to the parties why one had  won  and  the
           other  had  lost.  If  the  appellate  process   was   to   work
           satisfactorily, the judgment had to enable the  appellate  court
           to understand why the judge reached his  decisions...the  issues
           the resolution of which were vital to the judge's conclusion had
           to be identified and the manner in which he  had  resolved  them
           explained.'

The Examination of Scars at a Hearing

  37. It appears that the Adjudicator  may  have  examined  the  Appellant's
      scars in the course of the hearing. We would add  a  note  of  caution
      here in that regard. In general, it  is  not  for  an  Adjudicator  to
      conduct any physical examination of an appellant or witness before him
      or her, for the reasons highlighted above.


  38. It may be appropriate, on a very rare occasion, with the full  consent
      of the Appellant  or  witness,  for  an  Adjudicator  to  examine  and
      document a scar or scars in the course  of  a  hearing,  for  example,
      strictly to confirm physical presence as claimed, and  no  more.  Such
      requests are made from  time  to  time  by  representatives,  or  even
      Appellants in person.  It  is  necessary  for  an  Adjudicator  to  be
      completely clear as to the reason(s) why such an examination should be
      conducted, and where it may lead before deciding to proceed.




  39. On the very rare occasion where such an examination is  being  carried
      out, great care must always be taken in conducting any such  exercise,
      to maintain the utmost sensitivity and propriety, and to maintain  the
      dignity of the Appellant or witness, as well as that of the court.  It
      may be that the exercise should be conducted only after excluding  the
      public.  However,  an  Adjudicator  should  never  be  alone  with  an
      Appellant or witness when conducting such an exercise. It would not be
      appropriate for an Appellant or witness to remove clothing other  than
      an outer layer such as shoes, socks or a  jacket  or  jumper/cardigan.
      The Tribunal has given guidance in the past on  the  subject  and  has
      indicated that scars sited above the knees or on the torso  would  not
      be inspected.

  40. It is suggested that an Adjudicator read aloud  to  the  parties,  the
      note that has been made in the record of proceedings in respect of the
      examination of the scar(s), to include a brief description,  and  that
      the  Adjudicator  also  notes  in  the  record  and  in  his  or   her
      determination,  the  procedure  followed  and  the   explanation   and
      information  given  to  the  parties  by  the  Adjudicator,  and   any
      responses.

  41. However, it is first and foremost necessary  to  have  regard  to  the
      evidential purpose for which such an exercise would be conducted. Will
      such an exercise produce cogent relevant evidence; always  bearing  in
      mind that without being an expert, there  is  no  competence  to  make
      medical/clinical assessments and judgments? If it will  not,  then  it
      should not be embarked upon, and it may be that  consideration  should
      be given as to whether  the  production  of  expert  evidence  is  the
      appropriate course to take.


   Decision


  42. In all the circumstances, for all the foregoing reasons, the  Tribunal
      allows the appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted  for  a  fresh
      hearing before an Adjudicator other than Mrs R Goldfarb.







Catriona Jarvis
Vice President
