
EG (Abuse of process-legitimate expectation) Serbia and Montenegro [2005]
UKIAT 00074

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 8 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               22 March 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Buley, instructed by RFK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Elliott, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Serbia and Montenegro.  He is an ethnic
      Albanian who had lived  in  Preshevo,  southern  Serbia.   He  appeals
      against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  G  D  Thompson,
      promulgated on 28  January  2004,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
      decision taken on 23 June 2003 to refuse asylum and to give directions
      for his removal  as  an  illegal  entrant  to  Serbia  and  Montenegro
      (Serbia).  There had been two earlier decisions  on  this  case.   The
      first, on 7 August  2001,  was  withdrawn.   There  had  then  been  a
      decision on 1 November 2001 to give directions for his removal to  the
      Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Kosovo) and  to  refuse  asylum.   The
      Appellant had appealed, and in a determination promulgated on 12 March
      2002, an Adjudicator, Mrs R Goldfarb, allowed that appeal because  she
      considered those directions were not in accordance with the law.

   2. Mr Thompson, in his 28 January 2004 determination, found that when the
      Appellant left southern Serbia in 1999 he was fleeing  persecution  at
      the hands of the Serbian police, particularly  the  VJ  Army  who  had
      targeted him for his support of the LDK.   However,  in  view  of  the
      material change of circumstances which had occurred in southern Serbia
      since early 2001, the Adjudicator dismissed his asylum as well as  his
      Article 3  grounds of appeal.

   3. In relation to Article 8, Mr Thompson  first  considered  whether  the
      medical evidence disclosed a breach of that Article.  That  issue  was
      complicated by the fact that the medical report  relied  on  had  been
      written by a Dr Baluchi, into whose professional conduct there was  an
      ongoing enquiry.  He concluded that he could place no reliance on this
      doctor's report save for the  physical  description  it  gave  of  the
      Appellant's injuries.

   4. Turning to the private and family  life  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 claim, he noted that the presence of  the  Appellant's  wife
      and his dependants had not been raised in the notices of appeal or  in
      Counsel's skeleton argument.  In any event, he  noted,  the  Appellant
      was excluded from consideration under Article 8 in relation to  family
      life by virtue of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Ullah  &  Do
      [2003] 1 WLR 770 on jurisdictional grounds.

   5. In our view, the  Adjudicator's  reliance  on  the   Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in Ullah & Do was misplaced, as the judgment of the House  of
      Lords in the same case has confirmed:  see [2004]  UKHL  26,  17  June
      2004.  However, the issue of whether or not that reliance  constituted
      an  error  of  law  at  the  time  the  Adjudicator  promulgated   his
      determination is not important in this case, since it  had no material
      effect on his decision to dismiss the Article 8 grounds of appeal.  In
      our view, that decision was fully justified for other reasons he gave.

   6. Mr Thompson considered a further Article 8 argument based on the Court
      of Appeal judgment in Shala [2003] EWCA Civ 2334.  The  Appellant  had
      first been refused asylum in August 2000, removal directions being set
      for Kosovo.  Over a period of some three years, there had subsequently
      been nine  adjournments  of  the  appeal  against  the  November  2001
      decision so that the Secretary of State could reconsider and amend the
      removal directions.  It was  submitted  that  during  this  period  of
      delay, attributable solely to the Respondent, the  Appellant  and  his
      wife had established a significant private life in the United  Kingdom
      with which it would be disproportionate to interfere.

   7. The Adjudicator rejected this argument largely because  there  was  no
      evidence that the Appellant had been deprived  by  the  delay  of  the
      opportunity to make an  in-country application akin to  that  involved
      in the Shala case.

   8. The Adjudicator gave separate consideration to an  argument  based  on
      legitimate expectation, but rejected it in the following terms:

            "46.  Counsel also mentioned 'a legitimate expectation'.  As  I
                 understood it, that doctrine only arises where there  is  a
                 promulgated Government Policy, which is not followed by the
                 Department concerned. There is no  such  Government  Policy
                 that I can ascertain, in the present case.  Counsel  argued
                 that the breach of the    intimation  given  by  the  Leeds
                 office over the telephone, that papers would be  issued  to
                 appellant, gave rise to such  a  'legitimate  expectation'.
                 There is no evidence that the person in  the  Leeds  branch
                 who gave the indication that  documents  would  be  issued,
                 mentioned in paragraph 7 of the solicitor's statement,  was
                 a person of sufficient seniority, or possessing  sufficient
                 authority to give such an indication. The  indications  are
                 that the responsible person considering the case,  who  had
                 been  dealing  with  the  solicitor  previously  over   the
                 telephone, was away sick at the time of that indication.  I
                 accept Counsel's assertion that there is an internal minute
                 compiled by his instructing solicitor of the effect of that
                 telephone conversation (that documents would be issued) but
                 that  does  note  mean  that  the  person   concerned   had
                 sufficient authority to give that indication.   I  conclude
                 that  no  'legitimate  expectation'  can  arise  from  that
                 telephone conversation."

  9. The Adjudicator turned next  to  Counsel's  argument  based  on  there
     having been an "abuse of process".  This he rejected  by  saying  that
     there was no process on which to base such an argument.   In  support,
     he cited a starred Tribunal determination MNM 01/TH/02423* [2000] INLR
     576 holding that immigration and asylum  appeal  proceedings  did  not
     engage Article 6 of the ECHR.

 10. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal raised four arguments which  may
     be summarised as (i) Article 8  (the  Shala  point);   (ii)  abuse  of
     process;  (iii) legitimate expectation;  and (iv) issue estoppel.

 11. Permission to appeal to the Tribunal was  refused  on  (i)  the  Shala
     grounds in particular.

 12. Before us, Mr Buley for the Appellant did not pursue (iv) - the fourth
     grounds of appeal based on "issue estoppel" - except insofar  as  this
     equated to the concept of "abuse of process".  That left as  the  only
     surviving grounds:

      (ii)       abuse of process/issue estoppel;
      iii) legitimate expectation.

 13. These two grounds had to be examined, maintained Mr Buley, against the
     following background:  that the Appellant's  original  appeal  against
     the November 2001 decision had been allowed, that there was  a  course
     of conduct prior to and after the  appeal in  that  the  Secretary  of
     State had not taken opportunities to correct his decision, that  there
     had been a delay of 1� years, and  that  an  authorised  official  had
     given a promise that leave would be issued.

Jurisdiction

 14. The decision in this case was made on 23 June 2003, hence  the  appeal
     against it arises under the  2002 Act.  Mr Buley confirmed that he did
     not seek to rely on any human  rights  grounds.   He  based  his  case
     squarely on s84(1)(a) of this Act;  the decision,  he  maintained,  is
     not "in accordance with the law".

 15. The appeal being under the 2002 Act also means that  our  jurisdiction
     is confined to that of a material error of law, see CA [2004] EWCA Civ
     1165.
Legitimate expectation

 16. Mr Buley's argument on legitimate expectation was  twofold.   Firstly,
     he submitted that the Adjudicator was plainly wrong to  consider  that
     this doctrine could only arise out of a failure to follow  promulgated
     policy;  a specific promise or practice could suffice;  in  this  case
     there was both.  Secondly, to the extent that the Adjudicator  did  go
     on to grapple with legitimate expectation issues, he erred in  failing
     to find that there was a relevant practice and a relevant promise.

 17. The practice was the settled policy of the Respondent  to  grant  some
     form of leave to  remain  to  asylum  appellants  whose  appeals  were
     allowed by Adjudicators.  The promise was that made to  the  Appellant
     in December 2002, via his solicitors, that he  would  be  issued  with
     status papers within a few days.  The grounds observed:

           "'...  During  one  particular  conversation   the   appellant's
           solicitor, Mr David Foroo, was told  that  papers  were  in  the
           process of being issued for the grant of  status  and  would  be
           [sic]  reach  the  appellant  in  the  next   few   days.   That
           conversation was evidenced before the [current] Adjudicator that
           it did in fact take place ... ."

 18. On the facts of this case, the Adjudicator was wrong to doubt that the
     person who made the promise  lacked  sufficient  authority,  since  no
     evidence had been adduced to show that the Home  Office  official  did
     not have the requisite authority.

 19. The Adjudicator also erred, contended Mr Buley, in failing to consider
     the  proportionality  or  otherwise  of  not  giving  effect  to  that
     legitimate expectation.  Applying the proportionality test as set  out
     in cases such as R v Secretary of State for Education  and  Employment
     ex parte Begbie [2000] 1 WLR 115, the Respondent could  not  show  any
     overriding policy justification for resiling from his promise.  On the
     exceptional facts of this case, there would be  no  detriment  to  any
     deterrent effect on  other  immigrants  if  this  Appellant  were  now
     permitted to stay.  It was important, added Mr Buley, to  recall  that
     at the time this  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  he  had  a
     legitimate claim to enter for asylum reasons.

 20. Mr Elliott, for the Secretary of State, submitted that the Home Office
     had  not  sought  to  appeal  against   the   original   Adjudicator's
     determination   allowing   the   Appellant's   appeal   because   that
     determination did not deal with the substantive aspect of the  appeal.
     There was no basis for the legitimate expectation argument  since  the
     original Adjudicator had not decided anything substantive and the Home
     Office official who spoke to the Appellant's  solicitors  plainly  did
     not have authority to make any such  representation  as  regards  this
     case.

 21. We accept the Adjudicator was wrong to  think  that  the  doctrine  of
     legitimate  expectation  could  only  arise  in  the  context   of   a
     (promulgated) governmental policy.  However, we do not  consider  this
     resulted in any material error on his part, partly because he  did  in
     any event consider some  legitimate  expectation  issues  outside  the
     policy context,  but  mainly  because  we  do  not  accept  that   the
     Appellant had a legitimate expectation.

 22. We see nothing in Mr Buley's attempt to identify a relevant  practice.
     It is true that it  is  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  act  on  a
     determination by an Adjudicator which allows an appeal.   But  how  he
     acts depends on what  the  Adjudicator  decides.   The  fact  that  an
     Adjudicator allows an appeal does not automatically  entail  that  the
     Secretary of State must act on it by granting leave to remain.  It may
     often, indeed normally, happen in asylum or human  rights  cases  that
     some form of leave to remain is granted, but a decision still  has  to
     be made as to what action is appropriate.  Here the appeal did no more
     than reject the lawfulness  of  the  country  of  destination  in  the
     removal directions.  It said nothing about the merits of the claims or
     about removeability to any other country.  There was  nothing  in  the
     decision to require or even to suggest that it should be given  effect
     to by the grant of some form of leave to remain as opposed to  another
     decision to remove him elsewhere.  So there is no practice to help the
     Appellant.

 23. Mr Elliott was not able to cast a great deal of light on what was done
     with the Appellant's file immediately after the  original  Adjudicator
     had allowed the appeal.  It would appear it went to  the  Home  Office
     branch in Leeds tasked with implementing decisions to grant leave, but
     plainly that entailed looking to see if  a  grant  of  leave  was  the
     appropriate action to take as a result of the decision on the  appeal.
     It went to that office because that is where "allowed appeals" go.

 24. That leads us to what was said by  the  official  in  that  office  in
     relation to the Appellant's case.  The solicitor's statement does  not
     properly describe a promise being given that leave  would  be  issued.
     The solicitor knew the outcome of the appeal, which was  that  it  had
     been allowed because of  the  supposed  unlawfulness  of  the  removal
     directions and not because of any substantive merits in the claim.  He
     made his phone calls to Leeds in the self-generated  expectation  that
     the Secretary of State would either grant some permission to stay,  or
     appeal.  After some months of chasing the Immigration Service and  the
     Home Office, he spoke to the Home Office Presenting Officers Unit on a
     number of occasions who referred him to Leeds on 18 December 2002.  He
     spoke to an unnamed official;  he does not say what the  official  was
     asked or was told about the  inquiry  or  whether  it  had  any  legal
     significance to the case.  He says "they [sic] informed me  that  they
     would issue Mr [G] with papers in the  next  few  days".   The  person
     dealing with that file appears to have been away ill, as the solicitor
     knew.  He continued to press Leeds but got no adequate response.  On 9
     January 2003, he was told that the file had gone to  the  Home  Office
     Presenting Officers Unit and they said it had gone to  Croydon,  where
     he was told that the case  was  under  consideration.   Eventually,  a
     fresh appealable decision was issued, which led to  the  determination
     which we are now considering.

 25. We have no difficulty in accepting that the solicitor  was  told  that
     leave would be issued because that was the  usual  process  for  cases
     sent to Leeds.  That is where "allowed appeals" were  apparently  sent
     for consequential action to be taken,  which  would  normally  be  the
     grant of leave.  We deduce that when the file was later examined there
     by the person dealing with it, it was realised that  this  was  not  a
     normal case and that it was thus properly dealt with as an  unfinished
     case.  Within a short  time  after  the  telephone  conversation,  the
     solicitor knew that the case was still or  again  under  consideration
     and had left Leeds.

 26. We do not  accept  that  this  conversation,  in  the  context  of  an
     understandable if slow administrative process, could have  given  rise
     to any soundly based expectation that a grant of leave  would  follow.
     A conventional response was given to a normal telephone  inquiry.   It
     ought to have been clear to the solicitor that any statement from  the
     official was subject to the implied caveat that leave would follow  if
     that were appropriate.  It could not have been  reasonably  considered
     to be a representation that leave would follow, whether  or  not  that
     was the appropriate consequence of the  Adjudicator's  decisions.   In
     our  view,  no  such  expectation  could  arise  in  the  case  of   a
     conversation of this sort with a particular individual in the  absence
     of (i) a clear statement as to the purpose and expected consequence of
     any answer to the inquiry;  (ii) a clear answer in  consequence;   and
     (iii) either acting to one's detriment on a clear answer  as  to  what
     would happen, or some other factor which would make it  unfair  to  go
     back on the supposed promise, or to go back on  it  without  affording
     any opportunity to say why that should  not  happen.   The  degree  of
     unfairness required for the former is significantly higher.  There  is
     nothing to suggest that the  conversation  had  any  such  clarity  or
     explicit purpose to it.  There is nothing to suggest that any  greater
     thought lay behind the official's answer than  the  normal  assumption
     that a grant would happen simply because that was  what  was  normally
     done with files sent to this particular office in Leeds.

 27. Even assuming that an official said that leave would  be  granted  and
     those other requirements were fulfilled, we agree with the Adjudicator
     that there is no evidence that any promise was made  by  someone  with
     authority to make it. Mr Buley has contended that "it  is  clear  that
     the respondent allowed its agent to behave in such a way as would give
     an ostensible authority  even  if  the  requisite  authority  did  not
     exist".  An agent cannot hold himself out as having authority which he
     does not have and so bind his principal.  The principal must have held
     him out as the agent.   However,  as  the  Adjudicator  observed,  the
     solicitor was told that the person dealing with the  Appellant's  case
     was on sick leave.  There is no evidence that  the  official  had  any
     authority to promise or had been  held  out  as  having  authority  to
     promise a grant of leave, let alone where it was  not  the  inevitable
     consequence of the Adjudicator's decision.

 28. Even if there had been an expectation, there would be no  "legitimacy"
     to any expectation so created.  The only  legitimate  expectation  was
     that  the  consequence  would  emerge  which  gave   effect   to   the
     Adjudicator's determination;  this was that no grant  of  leave  would
     follow immediately but only that  the  question  of  more  appropriate
     removal directions would finally be addressed.  If  the  determination
     of the original Adjudicator gave rise to any legitimate expectation on
     the part of the Appellant, it can only have been that there would be a
     decision with proper removal directions.  It certainly could not  have
     engendered an expectation that the Appellant would  be  treated  as  a
     refugee, or be granted leave to  remain  on  some  other  basis;   the
     original Adjudicator made no findings to suggest that.

 29. The surrounding course of conduct (what Mr Buley described as "nothing
     being done") could not amount to the giving of  a  promise  either  by
     itself or together with what the  official  said.   But  even  on  the
     assumption that the Appellant's solicitors justifiably considered that
     a promise had been made, it was open to them, as  soon  as  it  became
     clear to them that leave was not going to be granted, to seek a remedy
     against the Secretary of State by way of Judicial  Review.   They  did
     not do this.  We do not accept Mr Buley's  argument  that  the  appeal
     lodged against the fresh decision to  give  removal  directions,  this
     time to Serbia  and  Montenegro,  was  an  available  and  appropriate
     alternative remedy, since appeal against that decision was statutorily
     confined to grounds, all of which are concerned with the lawfulness of
     the fresh decision, not  with  the  failure  to  act  on  the  earlier
     decision in a particular way.

 30. It would have required far stronger  circumstances  than  exist  here,
     where the relevant representation endured in effect for perhaps a  few
     days before the solicitors were told that the  case  was  again  under
     consideration, to give rise to a substantive  legitimate  expectation,
     breach of which could be an abuse of power.  There was no evidence  of
     anything either which could have persuaded the Secretary of  State  to
     adhere to that expectation, if all that the  representation  generated
     was a requirement that the Appellant be given the chance  to  say  why
     the representation should be adhered to.

 31. Given that we do not accept that there was any legitimate  expectation
     of a grant of leave, it is not necessary for us to address Mr  Buley's
     further arguments  going  to  the  issue  of  the  proportionality  or
     otherwise of failing to give effect to a legitimate expectation by way
     of a grant of leave.

Abuse of process/issue estoppel

 32. This ground of appeal relied on the fact that Mrs Goldfarb's  decision
     in March 2002 to allow the Appellant's appeal was made  against  after
     the Respondent had persisted with removal directions to Kosovo despite
     nine adjournments granted by the appellate authorities with a view  to
     the Respondent considering issuing fresh removal directions to  Serbia
     and Montenegro.  She must therefore have assumed, it was  urged,  that
     the effect of her determination was that the Respondent had  lost  the
     opportunity to argue that the Appellant  should  be  removed  at  all.
     Both the Appellant and his solicitors believed her determination would
     lead to the granting of some status, presumably exceptional  leave  to
     remain.

 33. This sequence of events was  an  abuse  of  process,  said  Mr  Buley,
     because subsequent proceedings (before Mr Thompson) had  seen  matters
     raised which could have been litigated earlier (before Mrs  Goldfarb).
      The Respondent could have ensured that the Appellant's refugee  claim
     was determined  by  the  simple  expedient  of  amending  the  removal
     directions:  it had failed to take nine opportunities to do so.   This
     abuse was made all the more serious by the fact  that  in  the  asylum
     context, the passage of time can alter the outcome of the  litigation,
     so that the Respondent may effectively achieve  a  benefit  to  itself
     deliberately or accidentally.  He cited in support Yat Tung Investment
     Company Limited v Dao Heng Bank Limited [1975] AC581 and R v  Governor
     of Pentonville Prison ex parte Tarling [1979] 1 WLR 1417.

 34. Mr Buley only wished to rely on issue estoppel insofar as  it  equated
     to an abuse of process.  There was any other form of issue estoppel in
     this case, because there was no final  decision  on  any  issue  by  a
     competent court, which the second Adjudicator was later considering.

 35. The concept of abuse of process has a restricted  application  in  the
     field of immigration and asylum appeals.  This is not  ordinary  civil
     litigation, and in the interests of finality, is made effective within
      the discrete statutory framework which provides for rights of  appeal
     against specified immigration decisions, but  does  not  regulate  the
     power of the Secretary of State to withdraw decisions or to  make  new
     ones.   Indeed,  the  statutory  framework  expressly  recognises  the
     ability of persons to make fresh applications or claims  and  provides
     for the Secretary of State to respond in one or more ways.  The system
     recognises the changeability of circumstances.  It is  true  that  the
     1999 Act introduced the notion of the "one-stop shop",  but  this  did
     not and does not impact on the power of the Secretary of State to make
     a fresh decision.

 36. There is no equivalent to pleadings, or claim and counterclaim in  the
     statutory  appellate  framework.   The  Secretary   of   State   makes
     sequential decisions which   can  lead  to  sequential  appeals.   The
     requirement for an Appellant to bring forward all bases which  he  and
     his family have for staying does not require him to anticipate removal
     to where no-one proposed to remove him.  The notion that a decision is
     variable according to informal but not appealable expressions of  view
     by an Adjudicator, a notion which underpins the argument here, and  if
     not so varied is incapable later of  finding  expression  in  a  fresh
     decision, does not find support from the statutory framework.

 37. It is no surprise that the immigration and asylum appeals system  does
     not parallel ordinary civil litigation.  It is inherent  to  decision-
     making on immigration  and  asylum  applications  that  there  may  be
     sequential  decisions,  as  matters  change  or  as  knowledge  of  an
     individual's  origin is gained  and  much  of  what  Adjudicators  are
     enjoined to do by statute is to make a prospective assessment of risk.

 38. The Adjudicator was right  to  observe  that  immigration  and  asylum
     proceedings  do  not  come  within  the   meaning   of   the    phrase
     "determination of civil rights" so as to engage Article 6 of the ECHR.
      But that was not decisive of the issue of whether, in the context  of
     the immigration and asylum appeal system, there had in any  case  been
     an abuse of process.  However, once again, we  do  not  consider  that
     this error on the part of the Adjudicator was a material one.

 39. It may be that the conduct of the Respondent in this case, in  failing
     to amend the removal directions notwithstanding nine adjournments made
     so that he could consider doing so, was derelict given that he  issued
     a fresh decision later.  But there are also reasons for supposing that
     he was right to resist those indications, which we deal with later.

 40. We  do  not  know  more  about  the  circumstances  surrounding  those
     adjournments than what is stated by Mrs Goldfarb at  paragraph  23  of
     her determination:



           "It appears  that  this  case  has  been  before  the  appellate
           authorities no less than on nine occasions in  order,  in  part,
           for the error made by the Respondent  to  be  dealt  with.   The
           Respondent had, in fact, withdrawn a previous decision  refusing
           asylum by a letter of refusal dated 7 August  2001  and  removal
           directions were also made  at  that  time  for  removal  to  FRY
           Kosovo."

 41. Mrs Goldfarb went ahead and determined the appeal on the basis of  the
     Mrs Goldfarb went ahead and determined the appeal on the basis of  the
     unamended directions.  Given that nine previous adjournments  had  not
     persuaded the Respondent to change anything, that was plainly not just
     a course open to her but was what should have been done much  earlier.
     Under the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003,  Rule
     30(1) and (2) provided:

             "The Appellate Authority may, subject  to  the   provision  of
             these Rules, regulate the procedure to be followed in relation
             to the conduct of any appeal.  (2)  The  overriding  objective
             shall be to secure the just, timely and effective disposal  of
             appeals and, in order to further that objective, the appellate
             authorities may give directions which control the  conduct  of
             any appeal."

 42. Indeed, we find it difficult to  understand  why  the  Adjudicator  or
     Adjudicators who were involved in adjourning the appeal against the  1
     November 2001 decision on no less than nine occasions did not  get  on
     with deciding the appeal, rather than adjourning.  There was no  power
     for the appellate authorities to compel  the  Secretary  of  State  to
     amend or reconsider his removal directions and, so  far  as  we  know,
     there was no promise to amend them.  The task for  an  Adjudicator  is
     not to decide whether another decision of the Secretary of State would
     better reflect the facts and to adjourn so that he  can  do  what  the
     Adjudicator thinks the Secretary of State should  do,  but  which  the
     Adjudicator fails to hold in an appealable determination is  what  the
     Secretary of State should do.  The Adjudicator's task is to get on and
     decide the appeal against the decision.  This  was  a  misuse  by  the
     Adjudicators of the power to adjourn cases.  There is no evidence that
     these were even sought by the Secretary of  State.   The  Adjudicators
     should have done much earlier what Mrs Goldfarb eventually  did.   The
     Secretary of State could then appeal or  make  another  decision.   He
     cannot appeal informal indications.

 43. The Adjudicators may or may not have been right that the Secretary  of
     State could amend removal directions and amend  thereby  the  decision
     under  appeal:   what  was  the  precise  relevance  of  the   removal
     directions  to  the  appeal?   Would  an  amendment   necessitate   or
     constitute a fresh appealable decision?  But  Mrs  Goldfarb  certainly
     erred in law in supposing that she could allow the appeal on the basis
     of the unlawfulness of the removal  directions  by  reference  to  the
     Immigration Act 1971.  Her decision reflected the Tribunal's  decision
     in Zecaj but that was overturned by the Court of Appeal,  [2002]  EWCA
     Civ 1919:  no appeal lay against an asylum decision on the mere  basis
     that the country  of  proposed  removal  fell  outside  the  scope  of
     paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 44.  If  the  Secretary  of  State  was  dissatisfied  with  the  eventual
     determination of the Adjudicator, made on the basis of the decision to
     give directions for removal to FRY (Kosovo), it would have  been  open
     to him to seek to appeal to the  Tribunal  or,  alternatively,  as  he
     eventually did, to issue a further decision.  Thus refusing to adjourn
     would not have left the parties without a remedy against the  eventual
     decision.

 45. We do not accept that Mrs Goldfarb said anything to suggest  that  the
     effect of her determination was that the Respondent, to use Mr Buley's
     words, "had lost the opportunity to argue that the appellant should be
     removed".  She reached no findings or conclusions whatsoever regarding
     whether removal in consequence  of  the  refusal  decision  would   be
     contrary to the Refugee Convention.  Her assessment  was  confined  to
     setting out paragraphs 9 and 10 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act
     1971 and then finding that the Appellant did not come under any of the
     categories authorised by these provisions  for  lawful  removal.   She
     ended:

             "I consider that the present removal directions are not legal,
             they cannot  be  enforced,  the  respondent  has  had  a  very
             considerable amount of time to deal with  this  case  lawfully
             and they [sic] have failed to do so."

 46. We also add that since it was plain in this case that the Secretary of
     State  had  made  removal  directions  to  the  correct   country   of
     nationality, it is hard to see why the specification of removal to one
     part of  that  country  rather  than  to  another  part  could  itself
     invalidate the removal directions.  It  may  have  been  a  matter  on
     which, in the light of the Appellant's fears at the  time  as  regards
     Serbia, there was scope for a Secretary of State undertaking,  but  it
     remained the case that the removal directions were in accordance  with
     paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 47. It might have been open to the Appellant to seek  Judicial  Review  of
     the Secretary of State's decision to issue directions which  reflected
     the determination, were it an abuse of power.  The Appellant  did  not
     do so;  he instituted these proceedings against that decision.  It  is
     necessary for the IAA then to deal with this appeal, which  of  course
     is not what is said to be an abuse of process.  The fresh Secretary of
     State decision is not an abuse of IAA processes of itself, for it does
     not engage them;  that is done by the appeal.

 48. The Secretary of State could have amended his decision, in the eyes of
     the Adjudicator:  the statutory basis for that is however unclear,  as
     is the status of such an  amendment.   But  he  could  issue  a  fresh
     decision rather  than  amend  an  existing  decision,  thereby  giving
     further rights of appeal.  This is  a  necessary  power,  because  the
     effect of a determination may mean that another country of removal has
     to be considered either after  nationality  has  been  determined,  or
     after a claimed nationality  has  been  rejected.   The  decision  and
     appeal-making structure does not envisage that the Secretary of  State
     bring forward in his decision all countries  to  which  an  individual
     might be removable, nor does the individual have to anticipate all  of
     those in his one-stop appeal.  If there is an entitlement to amend, it
     is not an obligation and does not preclude an  Adjudicator's  decision
     on the case put forward.

 49. For the above reasons, we reject Mr Buley's argument that a matter was
     raised in subsequent proceedings  which  could  or  should  have  been
     dealt with in earlier proceedings.

 50. For the above  reasons, this appeal is dismissed.  It is reported  for
     what we say  about  the  adjournments,  the  decision-making  process,
     legitimate expectation and abuse of process.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT




-----------------------
      1


