
Ar
|Heard at Field House       |     |                               |
|On: 17 November 2004       |     |[IS   IS (Concession made by   |
|Dictated 17 November 2004  |     |rep    representative) Sierra  |
|Notified: 18 January 2005  |     |Leone [2005] UKI UKIAT 00009   |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                   Before:


                     Mr Richard Chalkley, Vice President
                               Mr R Baines JP
                                 Ms E Singer



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Mr E Fripp, of Counsel, instructed by Remar & Co.,  appeared  on  behalf  of
the appellant; Ms  L Saunders, a Senior,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
appeared on behalf of the respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on  8   August
      1958.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 15  August  1988  and  was
      given six months leave to enter as a visitor.  She was given leave  to
      enter until 31 October 1991 and again, in  January  1993,  for  twelve
      months on the basis of marriage.  On 10 January 1994, she applied  for
      leave to remain on the basis of her marriage to a British citizen, but
      this was refused on 2 April 1997.

2.    The appellant  appeals,  with  leave  of  the  Tribunal,  against  the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Mr B. Andonian,  who  in  a  determination
      promulgated on 27 February 2004, following a hearing at  Taylor  House
      on 13 February 2004, dismissed her appeal against the decision of  the
      respondent, taken on 6 November 2002, to make a deportation  order  by
      virtue of Section 5(3), Immigration Act, 1971.

3.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator the  appellant  was  represented
      by a "Mr Mayne".   The  Adjudicator  has  described  him  as  'Counsel
      appearing on behalf of the appellant'.   However,  for  reasons  which
      become clear, it is not known whether Mr Mayne was  in  fact  counsel.
      However, the Adjudicator clearly believed that Mr Mayne  was  counsel.
      As Mr. Andonian records in paragraph 3 of his determination, Mr  Mayne
      conceded the appeal on behalf of the  appellant  and  then  asked  the
      Adjudicator 'to deal with the matter on the paper'.  He  reminded  the
      Adjudicator that the appellant had  been  in  this  country  for  over
      fourteen years but made  no  further  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant. Mr. Andonian did not treat counsel's  comments  as  meaning
      that the appellant was withdrawing her appeal. He went on to  consider
      the appeal and dismissed it.

4.     The  appellant   subsequently   changed   representatives   and   new
      representatives and submitted the following grounds:

             'I am appealing against the decision  of  the  Adjudicator  to
             dismiss my appeal on the following grounds:


             The Adjudicator erred in law.  The Adjudicator continued  with
             the appeal, despite the obvious lack of proper  representation
             as is manifest from the remarks made  by  the  Adjudicator  in
             respect of the person purporting to be counsel  instructed  by
             Afrifa. In fact  the  representative  was  not  instructed  by
             Afrifa but he is a legal advisor registered by the  OISC.   It
             is submitted that the Adjudicator should  have  adjourned  the
             hearing as the  appellant  had  no  effective  representation,
             submitted to the Adjudicator on her  behalf  as  is  shown  in
             paragraph 7 where he stated that: "It is a great  pity  but  I
             received no representations  whatsoever  on  this  appellant's
             behalf  by her counsel", and in paragraph 8 where  he  further
             stated  that  "I  know  very  little  about  this  appellant's
             personal circumstances and her connections with the UK and  it
             is  a  great  pity  that  the  appellant's  counsel  made   no
             representations before me".

             It is  further  submitted  that  due  to  the  fact  that  the
             appellant  was  not  properly  represented,  certain   factors
             supporting the length of her connections in the UK,  were  not
             considered, such as her husband who is a resident in  the  UK.
             Paragraph 364 states that all relevant factors such  as  those
             mentioned   by  the   Adjudicator   should   be   taken   into
             consideration before a decision to deport is reached.   It  is
             however, submitted that these factors  were  not  taken  fully
             into  account  as  the  Adjudicator  had  very  little  or  no
             knowledge  of  the  applicant's  circumstances  as  shown   in
             paragraph 12 where the Adjudicator stated  that  she  has  'No
             particular connections with UK except her  residency  of  some
             fourteen years'.

             It is submitted that there was  no  evidence  to  support  the
             contention of the Adjudicator that the  appellant  is  of  bad
             character.  She has no criminal record and it is  regrettable,
             that the appellant's representative failed to point  this  out
             to the Adjudicator.    It is submitted  that  the  Adjudicator
             failed to follow the  guidelines  in  MNM.    In  the  refusal
             letter,  the  appellant's  credibility  was  raised,   it   is
             submitted  that  the  Adjudicator   failed   to   direct   the
             appellant's representative to deal with those questions raised
             but instead formed the opinion that the appellant was  of  bad
             character.


             It is finally submitted that if given leave to  appeal,  there
             is a good prospect of  success,  thus  the  appeal  should  be
             allowed.'

5.    In granting leave, the Vice President said:

             'It is with deep regret  that  I  feel  constrained  to  grant
             permission to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.   The  claimant  was
             plainly represented by someone who was  hopelessly  inadequate
             to the task of representing her. Virtually no  representations
             were made to the Adjudicator that were of  any  assistance  to
             him  and  he  complained  of  that  fact  himself.    In   the
             circumstances it is possible that there are  certain  matters,
             which may very well be uncontroversial, that should have  been
             placed before the Adjudicator but were not or should have been
             elicited  from  the  complainant  but  did  not.  I   am   not
             criticising him for failing to do this because it is always  a
             very difficult and delicate task to deal with a case  where  a
             person, particularly in a position of the  claimant  here,  is
             manifestly being inadequately represented.  I do not  consider
             that remittal is necessary, it  may  very  well  be  that  the
             Tribunal can deal with the relevant facts and  issues  of  law
             that may arise in this case.  permission  is  granted  on  all
             grounds.'

6.    Mr Fripp handed to us a skeleton argument. We have carefully read  it.
      It notes  that  leave  was  granted  on  the  single  point  that  the
      Adjudicator had himself criticised the apparent level of  professional
      competence of the individual who purported to represent the  appellant
      before him and the appellant had gone on to complain  with  foundation
      to the Tribunal, that  she  had,  in  essence,  been  denied  justice,
      because of poor representation. The skeleton argument points out  that
      the appellant was represented by a 'Mr Mayne of counsel',  but  no-one
      of that name appears in Havers Directory for 2003-2004.  The  skeleton
      argument also asserts that  no  'Mr  Mayne'  appears  to  the  General
      Council of the Bar to have been practising  during  2002.  However  we
      have received no evidence on that point. The  skeleton  argument  then
      suggests that the appeal should be allowed under Article 8, since  the
      appellant has been resident in the United  Kingdom  for  some  sixteen
      years and has developed a private life.

7.     We  pointed  out  to  Mr  Fripp  that  we  have  some  difficulty  in
      understanding where it was alleged that the  Adjudicator  had  made  a
      material error of law.   He referred us to both  CA  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      1165 and to E; R [2004] EWCA Civ 69 and told us that he did  not  have
      copies for us.   He suggested that  the  appellant  was  not  properly
      represented before the Adjudicator as such and was therefore denied  a
      fair hearing.  Mr. Andonian should not  have  adjourned  the  hearing,
      but, suggested Mr. Fripp, he should have carried out enquiries of  the
      representative, given his misgivings. The unfairness comes about  from
      the failure of the appellant to be accorded the right to put her  case
      properly. Mr. Andonian, he submitted, ought to have had regard to  the
      obvious difficulties. Mr Fripp relied on his skeleton argument. He did
      not refer us to any particular   parts of the two cases he quoted.

8.    Responding  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Miss  Saunders
      suggested that the grounds disclosed no error of law on  the  part  of
      the Adjudicator. the appellant instructed her  representative  at  the
      hearing and the Adjudicator was fully entitled to proceed as he did to
      consider the claim fully and dismiss it.  She invited  us  to  dismiss
      the appeal.

9.    Mr Fripp advised us that he had no further submissions to make and  he
      asked us for a copy of the form completed by 'Mr Mayne' under  Section
      84 of the Immigration and Asylum Act, 1999.  We advised Mr Fripp  that
      we did not believe that he was entitled to that  document.   It  is  a
      document submitted by advocates for the purposes  of  the  Immigration
      Appellate Authority. It is not a public document.  In  any  event,  we
      advised him that unfortunately the form ('the Section  84  form')  did
      not appear on the file. We reserved our determination.

10.   The whole thrust of the application for leave to appeal  asserts  that
      the appellant was not properly  represented  before  the  Adjudicator.
      Certainly, as is, sadly, often  the  case,  the  Adjudicator  was  not
      assisted by the advocate who appeared on behalf of the appellant,  and
      he  makes  that  clear.  In  paragraph  3  of  the  determination  the
      Adjudicator said :



             'Before me counsel for the appellant conceded  the  appeal  on
             behalf of the appellant. The appellant was  present  in  court
             with her counsel.  I was asked to deal with the matters on the
             papers and was reminded that the appellant had  been  in  this
             country for over fourteen years. No further  submissions  were
             made on the appellant's behalf.'

11.   He went on to say:

             '4.  Insofar as the decision to make a deportation  order,  by
                 virtue of Section 4(5)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  is
                 concerned, I have considered all the papers before me and I
                 consider that counsel for the appellant  had  not  properly
                 understood the Immigration Rules because on the one hand he
                 said that he conceded the appeal against  deportation,  and
                 yet on the other he had asked for the matter  to  be  dealt
                 with on the papers and also reminded me that the  appellant
                 had been here for fourteen years and further  asked  me  to
                 deal with the matter on a compassionate basis and allow her
                 leave to remain.


             5.   Insofar as deportation is concerned, paragraph 364 of  HC
                 395 of the Immigration Rules  states  that  in  considering
                 whether deportation is the right course of  action  on  the
                 merits, the public interest would be balanced  against  any
                 compassionate circumstances  of  the  case.  On  the  basis
                 therefore that the appellant's  counsel  had  confused  the
                 issue and did not know before conceding the appeal  on  his
                 client's behalf objective evidence would have to take  into
                 account  other  interests  and  balance  that  against  the
                 compassionate circumstances, which if he had known about he
                 would not have conceded the appeal.  It is incumbent on  me
                 to consider paragraph 364 and also all other considerations
                 in this case to conclude whether it would be right in those
                 circumstances for the Secretary of  State  to  deport  this
                 appellant.'

12.   He went on to comment that he felt it was a great  pity  that  he  had
      received  no  representations  on  the  appellant's  behalf  from  her
      counsel.

13.   It is clear from the determination that  Mr.  Andonian  believed  that
      the appellant was represented by counsel. In his  written  submissions
      to us, Mr Fripp has sought to give evidence that there is no 'Mr Mayne
      of counsel', according to telephone  enquiries  made  to  the  General
      Council of the Bar and no 'Mr Mayne' appears to the General Council of
      the Bar to have held a practising certificate during 2002. With  great
      respect, it may well be that the usher who  recorded  the  appellant's
      advocate's name on the record of proceedings may well have  misspelled
      it. Indeed, the usher may well have taken it upon himself to  describe
      'Mr Mayne' as counsel. He may simply have assumed that  Mr  Mayne  (if
      that indeed was how he spelled his name) was counsel. It  does  appear
      from the file, that the Section 84 form has become lost. It is not  in
      the Tribunal's file, although we have no doubt that Mr Andonian  would
      have seen a Section 84 form for, without having seen  it,  'Mr  Mayne'
      would not have been permitted to address the Adjudicator.

14.   Unfortunately the  standard  of  preparation  and  advocacy  of  those
      appearing  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  before  Adjudicators  (and
      occasionally the Tribunal) is not uniformly high.    It  is,  however,
      an appellant's right to have the advocate of  their  choice  appearing
      for them.

15.   It has not been suggested on behalf of the appellant that  'Mr  Mayne'
      acted in any way contrary  to  his  instructions.  The  appellant  was
      present at the hearing before the Adjudicator and if her advocate  did
      act contrary to her instructions, we would have expected to have  been
      told.

16.   Mr. Andonian quite properly decided not to treat the appeal as  having
      been withdrawn, but instead decided it on the basis  of  the  evidence
      that he had before him. No criticism has been made in the  grounds  of
      application for permission to appeal of the way in which he dealt with
      the evidence before him.

17.   We take the view  that  this  experienced  Adjudicator  was  perfectly
      entitled to do as he did.  He quite rightly considered the  matter  on
      the basis of the evidence before him.  He was entitled to assume  that
      the  advocate  appearing  before  him  was  fully  instructed  by  the
      appellant and that he was acting in accordance  with  instructions  he
      had received from the appellant.

18.   The fact that an appellant is poorly represented, or that  their  case
      has been poorly prepared cannot, in our view, be a reason  to  require
      an Adjudicator to adjourn the hearing, or as Mr  Fripp  suggested,  to
      make enquiries as to whether or not the advocate was  properly  acting
      in accordance with instructions.   Sadly  a  small,  but  significant,
      proportion of appellants  appearing  before  Adjudicators  are  poorly
      represented and, on occasions, by members of both sides of  the  legal
      profession.

19.   We do not accept the suggestion  that  this  Adjudicator  should  have
      done anything other than he did.  The appellant was perfectly entitled
      to instruct whomsoever she wanted on her behalf.  The  fact  that  she
      had not instructed a practice  of  solicitors  was  not  a  matter  of
      concern for the Adjudicator.



20.   As the Court of Appeal have clarified in CA, unless a  material  error
      of law can be detected in an Adjudicator's determination, the Tribunal
      cannot interfere with  it.   That  is  the  case  here.   This  appeal
      therefore falls to be dismissed.

21.   Appeal dismissed.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President
                                                          1st December, 2004


-----------------------
      1


