

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On  13 January 2005        |        |TG (CONSIDERING POLICIES)   |
|                           |        |Nigeria [2005] UKIAT 00024  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.28 January 2005.....................                             |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr C J Hodgkinson                                                 |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|aka                                                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr S Sayeed, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Fursdon Knapper, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home
                       Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was born on 28 June 1967  and  so
is now 37 years old.  He appeals the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr  P  M  S
Mitchell, who, in a determination promulgated on  27  July  2004,  dismissed
his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  that  he  was  not
entitled to refugee status and that removing him was  not  contrary  to  his
rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

The Adjudicator had before him witness statements  from  the  appellant  and
also from (   ) who is described as his partner and mother of a  boy  called
(   ).  These show that it is the  appellant's  case  that  he  entered  the
United Kingdom in June 1994 and started  his  relationship  with  (    )  in
January 1995.  Her statement showed that the appellant is  not  the  natural
father of her son, (   ), who was aged 14 years in July 2004 but he  is  the
natural father of the couple's other two children, (   ) then aged 4  and  (
 ) then aged 9 months.  The statements show that they  live  together  as  a
family and enjoy family life.  However it is clear from the statement  of  (
 ) that she would not go to Nigeria with the appellant in the event  of  his
return there.  She has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and
says "I could not go back with him now as  I  have  too  many  ties  in  the
United Kingdom".  She went on to say that  she  would  be  worried  for  the
children in Nigeria.

There is no evidence  here  of  exceptional,  emotional  dependency  or  any
unusual or compelling reason why the appellant should not be separated  from
the children if their mother chose not to accompany him to Nigeria.

The appellant sought permission to appeal.  The determination is  criticised
because of "a clear paucity of factual findings on the material  aspects  of
the appellant's claim".  This was  recognised  by  the  Vice  President  who
considered the application for permission to appeal but the application  was
refused because the Vice President could see no arguable case  that  further
findings of fact would have resulted in the appeal being allowed.

We wish to make it quite clear that by accepting parts  of  the  appellant's
case for the purposes of argument before us we are not  making  any  binding
findings of fact.

That decision was appealed by statutory review and reversed by Elias  J  who
said:

  "I  agree  with  the  finding  that  the  removal  is  proportionate  and
  justifiable, save for one  concern.   The  Adjudicator  has  not  made  a
  clearing finding of fact in particular with regard  to  the  relationship
  between the applicant and (    ).   The  nature  and  character  of  that
  relationship could affect the proportionality  assessment.   Particularly
  if (   ) had been in the United Kingdom for longer than 7 years  so  that
  the 7 year concession policy was applicable.  I think that the  applicant
  should be entitled at least to argue this point".

Mr Saunders submitted that, properly understood, Elias J's decision had  the
effect of limiting the appeal to  the  points  raised  by  Elias  J  in  his
"reasons".  We do not agree with that.  The  learned  judge  said  that  the
Adjudicator "has not made a clear finding of fact in particular with  regard
to the relationship between the applicant  and  (    )."   The  relationship
between the applicant and (   ) is  an  important  example  of  the  general
deficiency in the determination.  We decided that Mr Sayeed was entitled  to
argue all of his grounds of appeal.

Mr Sayeed  then  rightly  criticised  the  determination  for  its  lack  of
findings.  There is no avoiding the fact that the determination  would  have
been very much better if the Adjudicator had made clear findings  about  the
appellant's claimed relationship  with  his  partner  and  children  in  the
United Kingdom.  Mr Sayeed submitted that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted
before a different Adjudicator to make findings on these important issues.

However, although the determination is plainly  unsatisfactory,  we  do  not
accept that there is a material error  of  law  unless  there  was  evidence
before the Adjudicator which, if accepted, could have led  him  properly  to
the conclusion that removal was contrary to  the  appellant's  rights  under
Article 8.  The Adjudicator, and the Vice President, considered the  leading
Tribunal decision then known as [2004]  UKIAT  00024  M  (Croatia)*.   Since
then we have the benefit of speech of Lord Bingham in the House of Lords  in
R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Lord Bingham said at paragraph  20


  "decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of immigration  control
  will be proportionate in all save a small minority in exceptional  cases,
  identifiable only on a case by case basis."

Mr Sayeed could not point us to anything about the relationship between  the
appellant and (   ) which would show that the appellant's  removal  was  one
of the exceptional cases contemplated by Lord Bingham other than the  length
of time that (   ) was said to have lived in the  United  Kingdom.   Further
there was no suggestion that anything flowed from the length  of  time  that
was not the obvious and natural consequence of its passage.   There  was  no
suggestion that any special dependency or other relationship had  developed.
In short we did not see any arguable  case  that  the  delay  made  this  an
"exceptional case".

This is important because the Secretary  of  State  has  publicly  committed
himself to a policy that, in broad terms, he will not  normally  remove  the
parents of a child who has been settled in the United Kingdom for more  than
7 years.  The lurking concern is the effect the Secretary of State's  policy
on this decision.  We understand the argument that says that  the  Secretary
of State cannot be heard to say on the one hand that a person's  removal  is
necessary for the proper purpose of  enforcing  immigration  control  whilst
saying at the same time that the person could not be removed because it  was
his policy not to remove the father of children who had been in  the  United
Kingdom for 7 years or more.

Mr Sayeed referred us to the case of [2004]  UKIAT  00008  N  (Kenya)  where
that argument had prevailed.   The  decision  in  N  (Kenya)  is  much  less
helpful to Mr Sayeed than it first appeared.   The  claimant  there  clearly
made a very good impression.  The Tribunal had  seen  a  full  copy  of  the
"published concession".  The Tribunal found the claimant  had  "a  blameless
character" and, most importantly, the Presenting Officer conceded that  none
of the adverse factors described in  the  published  concession  applied  in
that case.  There the Tribunal was faced with a person  whose  circumstances
clearly and unequivocally came within the terms  of  the  published  policy.
It was established as long ago as 1996 in the case of  SSHD  v  Abdi  [1996]
Imm AR 148 that a decision of the Secretary of State that  was  clearly  not
in accordance with his published policy would not be in accordance with  the
law.  The decision in N (Kenya) was not intended  to,  and  does  not,  mean
that a person  whose  circumstances  on  a  superficial  reading  appear  to
satisfy the terms of the policy  will  necessarily  be  able  to  show  that
removal is disproportionate.  Nor do we  accept  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision to make this policy as any kind of  admission,  or  even  evidence,
that the removal of a parent of child who has been  in  the  United  Kingdom
for more  than  7  years  is  normally  disproportionate.   We  go  further.
Normally, it would not be disproportionate;  otherwise  there  would  be  no
need for a special policy to achieve the end of  keeping  families  together
in the United Kingdom.

The fact the Secretary of State  has  implemented  a  policy  that  attaches
weight to 7 years is of little importance in assessing proportionality.   It
may be relevant in assessing the lawfulness of the decision but this is  not
a case where the Adjudicator could have found  that  the  appellant  clearly
satisfied the terms of  the  policy.   We  say  this  with  some  confidence
because it seemed that no  one  has  ever  shown  the  Adjudicator,  or  the
Tribunal, a copy of the policy.  However, it is plain from  the  information
that is before us, particularly in the case of N (Kenya),  that  the  policy
operates only when certain conditions in addition  to  the  length  of  stay
apply.  These include the appellant's immigration  history  and  whether  or
not he has a criminal record.   These  points  were  not  taken  before  the
Adjudicator or before us.  Indeed there would have been little advantage  in
raising them here.  Often the Secretary of State is uniquely placed to  know
about these things and the proper course is for the  appellant  to  make  an
application to the Secretary of State for permission  to  remain  under  the
policy.

It follows that although the  determination  is  unsatisfactory  because  it
does not engage with the various claims made by  the  appellant  we  do  not
find any material error here because we are not able to find in  the  papers
the makings of any case  that  could  lead  the  Adjudicator  to  find  that
removal of the appellant would  be  one  of  the  exceptional  circumstances
contemplated by Lord Bingham that made removal disproportionate.

The appellant was given a chance of arguing this point, and the  effects  of
the policy, before us and has not been able to take  advantage  of  it.   We
were told nothing that was not  before  the  Adjudicator  and  the  material
before the Adjudicator is not good enough.

It will only be in the most unusual circumstances that the Tribunal will  be
able to decide that removal would  be  contrary  to  the  policy.   This  is
because in operating the policy the Secretary of State makes clear  that  he
considers a range of factors beyond the child's length of residence  in  the
United Kingdom.  Further, these are often factors that  may  be  contentious
and about which the Secretary of State is likely to have special  knowledge.


We must make it quite plain  that  our  decision  does  not  mean  that  the
appellant's circumstances do not come within the  terms  of  the  policy  or
that the appellant cannot make an application.  Indeed, there  seems  to  be
every reason why he should make an application if he could  use  the  policy
to his advantage.  However, we are quite satisfied that there  is  no  basis
here which would lead an Adjudicator  to  the  conclusion  that  removal  is
disproportionate and in the circumstances we dismiss this appeal.


                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                             18 January 2005
APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION












