
H-SS-V3

|                            |JK (FGM - sufficiency of protection)  |
|                            |Kenya[2005] UKIAT 00080               |
|Heard at Field House        |        |                            |
|On 19 November 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date Determination notified:                                       |
|                                                                   |
|1st April 2005                                                     |
|                                                                   |
|                            |        |                            |
|                            |Before: |                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr.  Richard Chalkley, Vice President                              |
|Professor B L Gomes da Costa JP                                    |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|                                                                   |
|                            |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                            |        |                            |
|                            |and     |                            |
|                            |        |                            |
|                                                                   |
|(                )                                                 |
|                            |        |RESPONDENT                  |
|                            |        |                            |
|                            |        |                            |


      Ms L Bavage, a Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared on  behalf  of
      the Appellant and Mr S Symonds, a representative  from  Refugee  Legal
      Centre, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

2.    The Respondent is a citizen of Kenya who was born on 4th January 1978
    and who claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom  during  August  or
    September 2002, in possession of a forged passport which  was  supplied
    to her by an agent.  The Respondent maintains that her agent then  gave
    her a passport stamped  with  a  valid  working  visa  for  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent was subsequently caught  working  in  apparent
    breach of the terms of the visa on  20th  October  2003.   She  claimed
    asylum when arrested.

3.    The Appellant appeals,  with  leave  of  the  Tribunal,  against  the
    determination of an Adjudicator, Ms C Jarvis, who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 22nd March 2004, following a hearing at Taylor House  on
    5th March 2004,  allowed  an  appeal  by  the  Respondent  against  the
    decision of the Appellant, taken on 14th November 2003, to  direct  her
    removal after refusing asylum.   The  Adjudicator  allowed  the  appeal
    under the 1951 United Nations Convention on  the  Status  of  Refugees,
    having found that the Appellant was a member  of  a  particular  social
    group and that there was a lack of sufficiency of  protection  for  the
    Respondent in Kenya.  She also found that the Respondent's removal from
    the United Kingdom would breach the Respondent's rights under Article 3
    of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

The basis of the claim

4.    The Respondent was born in Muranga, central  province  of  Kenya  and
    lived there until coming to the United Kingdom.  She has one brother, (
                ), who was born in 1982.   Her  mother  remains  living  in
    Muranga, but her father died in 1998.  The Respondent claims to  be  of
    Christian faith and when she left school in 1994, she helped her mother
    selling farm produce.

5.    In 1999, the Respondent began a  relationship  with  a  man  named  (
          ), who  was  also  from  Muranga.   When  the  Respondent  became
    pregnant, the couple began living together and regarded each  other  as
    husband and wife, although they  never  participated  in  any  marriage
    ceremony.  The Respondent gave birth to a child of the relationship,  (
               ), born on 16 October 2001.  When the Respondent came to the
    United Kingdom, she left her daughter in the  care  of  her  mother  in
    Muranga.    The   relationship   between   the   Respondent    and    (
    )became estranged and, from time to time, she claims that she went back
    to live with her  mother.   After  the  birth  of  (              ),  (
        )changed and began to drink alcohol.  When he was  drunk  he  would
    beat the Respondent.  He began smoking a drug similar to  cannabis  and
    wore his hair in dreadlocks.  He washed it with leaves instead of  soap
    and began using an unusual  greeting.   The  Respondent  realised  that
    these were all things done by members of  the  Mungiki  sect.   By  the
    beginning  of  2002,  the   Respondent   came   to   believe   that   (
    )was deeply involved with the Mungiki sect.   He  began  spending  time
    with people whom she knew to be members of the  sect.   The  Respondent
    did not directly discuss this with Francis, as  she  believed  that  he
    would simply have laughed at her and ignored her.

6.    In March 2002, (             )told the Respondent that he  could  not
    continue to live with a woman who had not been circumcised  and  talked
    of having her circumcised.  The Respondent  was  against  circumcision,
    not only because it was a dangerous thing to do, which might cause  her
    to be unable to enjoy sexual  intercourse,  but  also  because  it  was
    against her religious beliefs.

7.    One day in April 2002, (             )came to the  family  home  with
    two women who were carrying a surgeon's knife, disinfectant and  bucket
    of cold water.  The Respondent claims that  she  was  forced  onto  the
    floor and that the women began to circumcise her, by cutting  her  left
    labia with a knife.  She cried and screamed in protest.  She managed to
    persuade them to allow her to have a break.  Blood was oozing from  the
    wound.  Once she was on her feet, the Respondent made for the door  and
    then ran to the home of a  friend  called  (              ),  about  15
    minutes away.  She had to keep stopping because of the  pain,  but  her
    mind was focused on getting away to safety.

8.    The Respondent believes that (             )did not chase her because
    he believed that she would return.  She had always retuned  to  him  in
    the past after he had ill-treated her.  She had done  so,  because  she
    had nowhere else to go and because (             )supported her and her
    daughter financially.  The Respondent remained at  her  friend's  house
    for some three days, by which time the  bleeding  from  the  wound  had
    almost ceased.  The Respondent believed that (             )might  find
    her and so she went to stay with an aunt in Nairobi.  She learned  that
    (             ) had told her mother what  had  happened  and  that  her
    mother had gone to the Respondent's home and taken (              )  to
    stay with her.

9.    During 2002, the Respondent returned to Muranga to visit her daughter
    and mother on several  occasions,  although  she  never  stayed  there.
    These were brief visits and she was careful not be seen, as she did not
    want Francs to know she was there.  Once the Respondent  had  recovered
    her health, she collected (             )  and  took  her  to  Nairobi,
    where they lived with a friend and the Respondent started to  look  for
    work.  This proved to be not as easy as the Respondent had imagined and
    so she returned (              )  to  her  mother's  home,  whilst  the
    Respondent returned back  to  Nairobi,  moving  from  house  to  house,
    staying with friends and seeking employment.

10.   The Respondent did not report any of the assaults upon her by Frances
    to  the   police,   because   domestic   violence,   including   forced
    circumcision, is not seen by the police as their responsibility to deal
    with.  The Respondent maintained that the Mungiki sect members forcibly
    circumcised their women and female children and are powerful throughout
    Kenya including Nairobi.  Members of the government are also supporters
    of the sect.  The Respondent believes that  (              )would  have
    found her in Nairobi through his friends from the sect who lived there.
     At the end of September 2002, the Respondent travelled to  the  United
    Kingdom on false documents.

The grounds of appeal

11.   There were two challenges to the  Adjudicator's  determination.   The
    first was that the Adjudicator erred in  finding  that  the  Respondent
    falls  within  the  1950  Convention  definition  of  "social   group".
    Reliance was placed on the Tribunal decision of M [2004]  UKIAT  00022.
    The  second  challenge  was  to  the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  the
    Respondent would not be able  to  avail  herself  of  state  protection
    against the Mungiki.  It was asserted that the  Adjudicator's  findings
    conflicted with the objective evidence, which showed that the  practise
    of female genital mutilation is outlawed by the Kenyan authorities  and
    that there is protection given by both the courts and the  authorities.



Representatives submissions

12.   Ms Bavage submitted that the Adjudicator had erred  in  finding  that
    the Respondent was a member of a particular social group.  At paragraph
    65 of her determination she said:-

         "I find that the [Respondent] is a member of a  particular  social
         group of Kikuyu women in Kenya, who have  not  been  subjected  to
         full FGM and who, being opposed to FGM, wished to  preserve  their
         bodies from further mutilation."

          And at paragraph 57, in relation to  sufficiency  of  protection,
she said:

         "On the totality of the evidence, I find that  there  is  evidence
         that there is active support for the Mungiki on the part  of  some
         members of Parliament and a level of infiltration by Mungiki  into
         government through its members taking posts in central  and  local
         government offices.  I do find that the influence of  the  Mungiki
         and the governmental support for it and its beliefs  and  actions,
         are such as to show that the  government  is  to  be  regarded  as
         reluctant to act against the  Mungiki,  in  effect  condoning  its
         actions, or is unable to do so."

13.   Mr Symonds interrupted, by way of clarification and to indicate  that
    he accepted the first challenge and that the definition  given  by  the
    Adjudicator in paragraph 65, does not amount  to  a  particular  social
    group.

14.   Ms Bavage submitted that the  Adjudicator's  alternative  finding  in
    paragraph 67 of the determination, that the Respondent was a member  of
    a particular social group, namely "women in Kenya" would also be wrong,
    because not all women in Kenya fear  female  genital  mutilation.   The
    Adjudicator erred in assessing the objective  evidence.   According  to
    the CIPU Report, female  genital  mutilation  is  widely  condemned  by
    international  health  experts  as  damaging  to  both   physical   and
    psychological health.  It is practised by  certain  ethnic  groups  and
    remains widespread, particularly in rural areas.   It  is  said  to  be
    usually performed at an early age and according  to  estimates  38%  of
    women nationwide have undergone FGM.   President  Moi  has  issued  two
    decrees banning FGM and the government prohibits government  controlled
    hospitals and clinics from practising it.  In December 2001,  President
    Moi outlawed the circumcision of women under the  age  of  17  and  had
    introduced prison terms and penalties up to  50,000  Kenyan  shillings.
    However, in some rural communities  FGM  is  still  practised,  despite
    efforts by the government, churches and civic groups to stamp it out.

15.   Ms Bavage suggested that paragraphs 6.50 to 6.55 of the  CIPU  report
    clearly demonstrate that  changes  are  taking  place  in  relation  to
    attitudes towards women in Kenya and, she  submitted,  that  Kenya  was
    clearly distinguishable from Pakistan, where attitudes and the law were
    discriminatory towards women.  The  Respondent's  fear  was  of  future
    circumcision, but that  could  not,  submitted  Ms  Bavage,  bring  the
    Respondent within the definition of a member  of  a  particular  social
    group.  In addition, there was a clear sufficiency  of  protection  for
    her in Kenya and it was quite clear that she could internally  relocate
    as she had done, successfully, between April 2002 and  September  2002,
    when she left the country.   The  Respondent  had  already  spent  five
    months in Nairobi and was not discovered, despite undertaking visits to
    see her mother  in  Muranga.   (              )had  not  been  able  to
    relocate the Respondent, always assuming of course that he  was  trying
    to.  Ms Bavage suggested that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Respondent to relocate and that she had successfully attempted it.  She
    might not necessarily have access to land and access to  her  daughter,
    but she had been living with her aunt and friends in Nairobi and  there
    was no requirement that she should necessarily have access  to  housing
    or to employment.  The objective material  quite  clearly  showed  that
    there was a sufficiency of protection in any event and there was family
    support for her.  Ms Bavage invited us to allow the appeal.

16.   Mr Symonds submitted that the Adjudicator's findings in  relation  to
    internal flight had not  been  challenged  and  that,  so  far  as  the
    objective  material  was  concerned,  the  Adjudicator  had   correctly
    directed herself on the objective evidence at paragraph 30 to 46 of the
    determination.  Despite attempts  on  behalf  of  the  government,  the
    practise of female genital mutilation in Kenya is  widespread  and,  he
    submitted, it had not been  established  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Adjudicator had misdirected herself.   Mr.  Symonds  suggested  that  a
    second challenge was unsustainable,  but  he  submitted,  even  if  the
    Tribunal found that the Respondent was not a  member  of  a  particular
    social group of Kikuyu women in Kenya who had been subjected to FGM and
    who, being opposed to FGM, wished to preserve their bodies from further
    mutilation, then there had been no challenge to the alternative finding
    by the Adjudicator that the Respondent was a  member  of  a  particular
    social group, namely women in Kenya.  He submitted that the Tribunal is
    not permitted to look at the  alternative  finding  since  it  had  not
    specifically been challenged.  He addressed us at some length and asked
    us to bear in mind that the proper starting point  was  the  fact  that
    this Respondent had suffered domestic violence. It could  not  be  said
    that there was any adequacy of protection, because of societal views in
    relation to women in general.  The Adjudicator had properly  noted  the
    objective evidence and the efforts made by the Kenyan state to  prevent
    such abuses, but nonetheless FGM continues.  As the Adjudicator herself
    noted, there was no evidence before the Adjudicator of  any  punishment
    having been meted out to those responsible for FGM.

17.   We had the benefit of having received, albeit rather late in the day,
    a typed skeleton argument prepared by Mr Symonds dated 14 November.  We
    confirm that we have very carefully read and considered that along with
    the arguments he made at the hearing.  Ms Bavage, responding on  behalf
    of  the  Respondent,  submitted  that  the  first  challenge   to   the
    Adjudicator's determination quite clearly relates to the definition  of
    a particular social group.  It is clear from paragraph 74 and  75  that
    the Adjudicator believed that the Appellant's asylum  claim  and  human
    rights claim stood or fell together.  She referred us to the Tribunal's
    decision in M [2004] UKIAT 00022, which also related to a young  female
    citizen of Kenya.  Her father joined the Mungiki sect and insisted that
    both the Appellant and her sister should be circumcised, although  they
    actually refused.  The Adjudicator identified the  Appellant  to  be  a
    member of a particular social group which he  identified  as  women  in
    Kenya and particularly Kikuyu women under the age of 65.   However  the
    Tribunal were not satisfied that within the society in Kenya there is a
    social group of either Kenyan or Kikuyu women under the age of 65.  The
    risk did not arise from the Appellant being a woman or a Kikuyu  woman,
    but from being a member of or  closely  related  to  a  member  of  the
    Mungiki movement.  The risk to her arose from the fact that her  father
    wanted her to undergo FGM.

18.   Ms Bavage suggested that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection.
    There was a law which protected women  and  the  Amnesty  International
    report reproduced at pages 90 to 94 of the Respondent's bundle provides
    clear evidence that the law is applied.  The section  headed  "Violence
    against Women"  made  reference  to  a  court  having  sentenced  three
    suspects to two years probation for subjecting a 15 year  old  girl  to
    the practice.  Ms. Bavage submitted that the objective evidence clearly
    showed that the number of rapes being reported was increasing and  that
    attitudes generally towards women were changing.  She asked us to allow
    the appeal.  We reserved our determination.

Conclusions

19.   Dealing with the first challenge to the Adjudicator's  determination,
    we agree with Ms Bavage that the thrust of this challenge is  that  the
    Adjudicator erred in finding that the Appellant falls within  the  1950
    Convention by reason of being a member of a  particular  social  group.
    While reference is made to what the Adjudicator said in  paragraph  65,
    the whole thrust of the challenge seeks  to  show  that  the  Appellant
    cannot bring herself within the definition  of  being  a  member  of  a
    particular social group.

20.   What the Adjudicator went on to say at paragraph 67 was this:-

         "In the alternative, and perhaps rather more simply, I would  find
         the Appellant to be a member of the social group 'Women in Kenya'.
          This definition is based on the background evidence  which  shows
         discrimination against women  in  relation  to  domestic  violence
         (amongst other areas, for example  property  rights),  both  at  a
         general societal  level  and  in  terms  of  legislation  and  the
         attitude of the government, in relation to women, which appears to
         be akin to that found by the court in the case of Shah  and  Islam
         in relation to Pakistan.  In so finding, I include FGM as  a  form
         of 'domestic violence' in respect of which  women  are  unable  to
         achieve a sufficiency of protection by reason of the inability and
         unwillingness of the government to provide it."

21.   However, nowhere in her determination does this Adjudicator  actually
    consider whether there is a risk to the Respondent.  She merely assumes
    that  there  is  a  risk.     The  Adjudicator  has   not   given   any
    consideration to the likelihood of the Respondent  being  subjected  to
    any further attacks.  She has simply focused on the  issue  of  whether
    the claim engages the 1951 Convention on the basis that the claimant is
    a member of a particular social group.  We find that we do not need  to
    consider that matter (although if we had, we would have found that  she
    was wrong, following M [2004] UKIAT 00022), because we find that  there
    are two errors of law in this adjudicator's approach to  the  analysis,
    as set out by the House of Lords in Shah and Islam [1999] Imm  AR  283.
    The first error was for the adjudicator not to  have  made  any  proper
    finding on the issue of serious harm and thereby misdirect herself  and
    the second error on her part was to assess the  objective  evidence  as
    establishing that there was a general lack of protection for  women  in
    Kenya.

The issue of the risk of serious harm

22.   The evidence before her was that this Respondent had been the  victim
    of    an attempt by her former lover and two women to  circumcise  her,
    the implication being that Francis, the Respondent's former lover,  had
    now become a member of the Mungiki sect and, as a  result,  wanted  his
    common law wife to be circumcised.  The Adjudicator has not  given  any
    consideration to the likelihood of the Respondent  being  subjected  to
    any further attacks.  The Respondent has left the  relationship.   Were
    she to return now, there  was  no  evidence  to  even  suggest  that  (
        )would be interested in her in any way at all, let alone would  now
    wish to have her circumcised.  We noted  that  there  was  no  evidence
    before the Adjudicator that (             )had ever attempted to locate
    the Respondent after she ran away  from  him  and  the  two  women  who
    accompanied him.  They are no longer in any relationship;  that  ceased
    in   April   2002.    This   Respondent   has   been   apart   from   (
    )since either August or September, 2002 and it  was  only  because  the
    Respondent and (             )were at the time living together  as  man
    and wife, that he wanted her to be circumcised in the first place.

23.   Nor was there any evidence that the Mungiki sect as such, as  opposed
    to (             )and  his  two  associates  in  particular,  have  any
    interest in this Respondent at all.  It was, in our view, perverse  and
    illogical for the Adjudicator to have simply found the Respondent to be
    a member of  a  particular  social  group,  without  first  considering
    whether or not there was a real risk to this Respondent on  her  return
    to Kenya.  That, with very great respect  to  the  Adjudicator,  is  an
    error of law.  Only having established if there is a real risk, can the
    decision maker go on to find if the claim engages the Convention.  This
    Respondent is not at risk of FGM because she has left her partner.




The issue of sufficiency of protection

24.   The second error of law on the part of the  Adjudicator  was  in  her
    treatment of the issue  of  state  protection.   At  paragraph  58  the
    Adjudicator said:-

         "In these  circumstances  I  find  that  the  subjection  of  this
         Appellant to FGM would amount to persecution at the hands of a non-
         state agent, the  Mungiki,  from  whom  the  state  is  unable  or
         unwilling to protect her (see e.g. the judgment of  the  House  of
         Lords in Horvath).  I find that if she  were  to  be  returned  to
         Kenya, she would be at serious risk of being subjected to FGM."

25.   It was asserted  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Adjudicator's findings clearly conflict with  the  objective  material,
    which shows that the practise of FGM  is  illegal  and  that  there  is
    protection, given by both the courts and the authorities,  which  would
    be adequate to afford a safeguard to the Appellant.

26.   We now consider the issue of whether the  Kenyan  authorities  afford
    effective  protection  to  women  and  girls  against  Female   Genital
    Mutilation (FGM).  We have had regard to not  only  the  Kenya  Country
    Assessment of April 2003, but also the  bundle  of  objective  material
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant.  We have already referred to  the
    Amnesty International report, which  covered  events  from  January  to
    December 2003 and note that it referred  to  security  forces  clashing
    with members of the proscribed  Mungiki  group.   We  noted  also  that
    violence against women  by  state  officials  and  private  individuals
    continued to be widespread.  A reference was made to the 2001  Domestic
    Violence and Family Protection bill not having been enacted and it also
    spoke of  measures  being  taken  by  government  and  non-governmental
    agencies to end FGM, but despite these measures, the practise  remained
    widespread.  We have already made reference to the prosecution of three
    suspects for subjecting a 15 year old girl to FGM  (at  paragraph  18).
    That section of the US State Department Report,  contained  within  the
    Appellant's  bundle,  noted  that  the  law  prohibits  female  genital
    mutilation for girls under the age of  18  and  forced  female  genital
    mutilation on girls and women of any age.  It was,  however,  described
    as being a widespread practice in rural areas.  FGM is said to  usually
    be performed at an early age.  The government has prohibited government
    controlled  hospitals  and  clinics  from   practising   it.    Various
    communities were said to have instituted "no cut" initiation rights for
    girls as an alternative to  FGM.   According  to  the  Family  Planning
    Association of Kenya, its "no  cut"  programme  contributed  to  a  13%
    decline in the prevalence of FGM in one district.

27.   We have also noted that in 2002, a  group  of  girls  (the  objective
    material does not mention how many) sought refuge  at  the  Centre  for
    Human Rights and Democracy (CHRD) in Eldoret to escape undergoing  FGM.
    They were among of group of  350  girls  who  had  participated  in  an
    alternative right of passage in  2001  and  were  being  threatened  by
    family members with FGM.  CHRD secured a court injunction  against  the
    girl's parents preventing them from forcing the girls to  undergo  FGM.
    It appeared to us, therefore, that there was very clear evidence in the
    Appellant's own bundle which showed that  FGM  was  outlawed  and  that
    protection was given by the courts.

28.  As a result of our consideration of all the objective material, we are
    satisfied that, even if this particular Respondent were at risk of  FGM
    from her former partner, there is a sufficiency of protection available
    to her.  That is not necessarily to say that there would  always  be  a
    sufficiency of protection available to all women and girls who fear FGM
    in Kenya.  We can imagine that there may  be  some  women,  married  to
    Mungiki sect members, who cannot relocate and who might be either  part
    of a particular social group, following P  &  Another  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1640, or at  risk  of  an
    Article 3 breach and for whom, given  their  particular  circumstances,
    there would not be a sufficiency of protection.

29.   We turn next to consider whether, even if the Adjudicator  was  wrong
    to conclude that there was an insufficiency of protection for women  in
    general,  her  conclusion  was  still  justified  in  relation  to  the
    particular situation of the Respondent.  However,  the  Respondent  did
    not state  that  she  took  any  steps  to  seek  protection  from  the
    authorities  against  threats  and  violence  aimed   at   her   by   (
    )and  his  associates.   Given  this  fact,  we  cannot  see  that  the
    Adjudicator could have found protection to be insufficient in her case,
    except  on  the  basis  of  her  erroneous  generalisation  about   the
    sufficiency of protection for women in general.

The issue of internal relocation

30.   Even if the Adjudicator were considered not  to  have  erred  in  her
    assessment of  serious  harm  and  sufficiency  of  protection  in  the
    Respondent's home area,  the  Respondent  would  still  not  have  been
    entitled to recognition as a refugee, or to protection under Article 3,
    unless she was able to demonstrate that there was  no  viable  internal
    flight alternative available to her in Kenya.   However,  here  too  we
    find that the Adjudicator materially erred in law.  This Respondent was
    able to live and work without  difficulty  in  Nairobi  for  some  five
    months, between April 2002 and September 2002, during  which  time  she
    returned "on several occasions to Muranga to  visit  her  daughter  and
    mother". There is no evidence that during this time (              )was
    looking for the Respondent.  It seemed clear to us that even if we were
    wrong in our earlier findings, there appeared to be no reason  why  the
    Respondent should not return to Kenya and live in a different  part  of
    the country.  There was no credible evidence before us that it would be
    unduly harsh for her to do so.

31.   We find that the adjudicator made a material error of law in  failing
    to make a proper finding on the issue of serious harm. In view of  what
    we have said earlier in this determination (see paragraphs 22  and  23)
    we do not believe that on her return to Kenya, this Respondent will  be
    at risk of any persecutory harm or at risk of a breach of her Article 3
    rights.  We find also that the  adjudicator  made  a  further  material
    error  of  law  in  her  assessment  of  the  objective   evidence   as
    establishing that there was a general lack of protection for  women  in
    Kenya.  On the evidence that was before us that this  Respondent  would
    be able to avail herself of protection against  the  Mungiki  sect  (an
    organisation proscribed by the Kenyan government) and would be able  to
    avail herself of state protection against  threats  of  FGM,  which  is
    illegal in Kenya although we do recognise that there may be other women
    who, because of their particular circumstances may not be able to avail
    themselves  of  protection.   Alternatively  we  see  no  risk  to  the
    Respondent returning to Kenya and relocating  to  an  area  other  than
    Muranga; it would not be unduly harsh for her to do so.

31.   For all these reasons the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.





                                                            RICHARD CHALKLEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

