
ar


IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
                                      AT (Return to Eritrea - Article 3)
Eritrea [2005] UKIAT 00043


                      Date of Hearing  : 28 October 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             25 January 2005

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                Mr R A McKee
                        Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives: Mr R Solomon of Counsel  instructed  by  Zaides  Solicitors
for  the  appellant  (hereafter  claimant);   Mr  C  Buckley,  Home   Office
Presenting Officer, for the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  claimant  is  a  national  of  Eritrea.  She  appeals  against  a
      determination of Adjudicator, Mr P A Spencer, promulgated on 19  April
      2004, dismissing her appeal on asylum  grounds  of  appeal  against  a
      decision refusing to grant leave to enter.


2.    There is a curious history to the promulgation of this  determination.
        The Adjudicator originally promulgated it on 19  June  2003  and  in
      that determination, whilst dismissing the appeal  on  asylum  grounds,
      allowed it on Article  3  grounds.   The  Home  Office  then  appealed
      stating that this was a typographical error. It was then remitted back
      to the same Adjudicator by  a Tribunal  chaired  by  Mr  Parkes  on  6
      August 2003 for correction of a possible typing  error.  Acting  under
      Rule 59 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003
      the Adjudicator then  repromulgated his original determination with  a
      correction  stating  that  "I  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds". Thus the appeal with which we are  concerned  is  against  a
      repromulgated determination dated 19 April 2004 dismissing the  appeal
      on asylum and human rights grounds.

3.    Since Mr Solomon conceded that the  claimant  would  not  be  able  to
      demonstrate that in respect of any real risk she faced it would be  on
      account of a Refugee Convention reason or ground, the  only  remaining
      issue in this appeal is  whether  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  law  in
      concluding that the claimant faced a real risk of  treatment  contrary
      to Article 3.

4.    The Vice President who granted permission to  appeal  noted  that  the
      claimant's Article 3  claim  was  allowed  by   the  Adjudicator  "...
      largely because of a UNHCR recommendation, to be reviewed in mid-2004,
      following the return from Malta of about 220 Eritreans in  2002,  some
      of whom were of draft age or failed asylum seekers".


5.    This analysis of the reason why the Adjudicator allowed the Article  3
       grounds of appeal appears mistaken,  since  the  Adjudicator  nowhere
      refers to the UNHCR recommendation.  Furthermore, the  Vice  President
      appears not  to  have  had  his  attention  drawn  to  the  fact  that
      permission was being sought against the  repromulgated  determination,
      which had dismissed (not allowed) the Article  3  grounds  of  appeal.
      Nonetheless, it is only  right, now the appeal is before us,  that  we
      consider as far as possible the  grounds  of  appeal  as  they  stand.




6.    As Mr  Solomon and Mr  Buckley acknowledged, neither  party  had  been
      able to obtain the expected  mid-2004  UNHCR  review.  However,   both
      sought to adduce materials which were not before the  Adjudicator,  in
      particular  those  to  hand  since  the  Adjudicator  promulgated  his
      determination on  19  April  2004.   Following  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgment in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165, we  can  only  take  these  post-
      promulgation materials into account if we are first satisfied there is
      a material error of law in her determination.


7.    For reasons given below we are  satisfied  that  he  did  not  make  a
      material error of law.


8.    Whilst he accepted the claimant's account of her  adverse  experiences
      in Ethiopia, removal directions had only been proposed in  respect  of
      Eritrea.  Hence the claimant was only entitled to succeed on Article 3
      (or asylum) grounds if she could show that  removal  to  that  country
      would expose her to a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3.


9.    Insofar as the  claimant's  position  as  a  potential  draftee  into
      military service  was concerned, the Adjudicator did not consider that
      in her case this would give rise to any real risk.  The  claimant  had
      claimed to have been inducted into military  service  whilst  still  a
      minor. However, bearing in mind objective evidence showing that only a
      small number of  children under 18  had  reportedly  entered  military
      service, the Adjudicator did not find it credible  that  the  claimant
      had ever been taken into the army or undergone military training.  Nor
      did he accept that the claimant was  in  effect  stateless.  He  noted
      Amnesty International concern that anyone deported to Eritrea who  was
      suspected of opposition to the government or  having  evaded  military
      service or deserted from the  army  would  be  arrested  and  possibly
      subjected to torture or ill-treatment. He concluded such  concern  was
      not relevant in this case:

           '... this in my view  does not apply to  the  appellant  because
           she has not been required to perform military service'.


10.   The grounds of appeal on behalf  of  the  claimant  contended  firstly
      that having accepted that the claimant was still a minor who had  fled
      military service by virtue  of  not  completing  it,  the  Adjudicator
      should have allowed the Article 3 grounds of appeal.   Secondly,  they
      contended that by virtue of her history  of  having  been  raped,  the
      claimant would be particularly at risk on being drafted into the  army
      in Eritrea. They referred to US State Department Report references  to
      sexual harassment  and  ages  of  women  in  the  army.  Thirdly  they
      submitted that the Adjudicator should have found she would be at  risk
      simply as a failed asylum seeker.  A fourth ground we extract from the
      draft of the ground is that the claimant would be at heightened  risk,
      being a returnee of mixed ethnicity.


11.   We have no hesitation in rejecting the  first  of  these  grounds.  It
      presupposes that the  Adjudicator  found  the  claimant's  account  of
      having undertaken  (and only  partially  completed)  military  service
      credible. He did not.  No  reasons  are  given  in  the   grounds  for
      challenging the Adjudicator's adverse  credibility  findings  on  this
      aspect of the claimant's account.


12.   As for the second ground, it only has  potential  application  if  the
      claimant would face a real risk of being  conscripted.   However,  the
      Adjudicator, as we have seen, found she would not  face  such  a  risk
      because she has not yet been required to perform military service.


13.   We can see no basis for interfering with this  finding  of  fact.   We
      accept that it remains that, as a person soon to  become  of  eligible
      age to perform military service, it is necessary to  consider  whether
      such women face a real risk of serious harm.


14.   In considering this issue, Mr Solomon urged us to rely on the  country
      guideline case of MA (Female draft evader)  Eritrea  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
      00098.  This decision was authority, he contended, for the proposition
      that all women of  (or  near)  conscription  age  would  be  at  risk.
      However, in our view, the President in this decision  was  careful  to
      confine his findings to (female) persons who  would  be  perceived  as
      draft evaders or deserters. It cannot be said of the claimant in  this
      case that she would be perceived as a draft evader or deserter, since,
      as the Adjudicator properly observed, she has yet  to  reach  eligible
      age for conscription purposes.


15.   Mr  Solomon  contended  that,  even  if  the  claimant  would  not  be
      perceived as a draft evader or deserter, she would face a real risk of
      serious harm since it was reasonably likely she would at some stage be
      conscripted.   We  would  accept  that  this  is  not  something   the
      Adjudicator addressed in specific fashion. However, we  do  not  think
      that this failure gave rise to any material error of law.  Even though
      the objective country materials do highlight incidents of mistreatment
      of women in the  army in Eritrea, they do not  identify  a  consistent
      pattern of gross, mass or flagrant violations of the human  rights  of
      female conscriptees. It is also a relevant factor,  in  assessing  the
      extent of risk, to bear in mind that  it  would  appear  that  only  a
      relatively small  percentage of women of conscriptable age are in fact
      called up (the highest figure we can   find  for   persons  (male  and
      female) who are conscripted is 10% of the population).   We  recognise
      that the claimant in this case has a history of sexual  abuse  at  the
      hands of Ethiopian authorities,  but  we  do  not  consider  there  is
      sufficient evidence to show that that would increase any risk  to  her
      of maltreatment by the Eritrean authorities.


16.   Hence, we consider that the Adjudicator did not err in his  conclusion
      as to risk arising  in  respect  of  the  claimant's  eligibility  for
      military service.


17.   That still leaves the issue of whether the Adjudicator   was  entitled
      to allow the appeal on the basis that the claimant  would face a  real
      risk of serious harm as a failed asylum seeker.


18.   Mr Solomon sought to argue that the Adjudicator reached  unsustainable
      conclusions. This was demonstrated in his view by the findings of  the
      Tribunal in the  Tribunal guideline case, MA.  However,  we  were  not
      persuaded by his arguments. Our reasons can for convenience be set out
      by quoting directly from the recent Tribunal country guideline case of
      SE Eritrea [2004] UKIAT 00295.


19.   This determination was not before the parties in the case  before  us.
      However, it seems to us that the reasoning set out in it is  as  valid
      in respect of the  state of the objective evidence  as it  was  before
      us as it was before the Tribunal in that case. We note  in  particular
      the  concluding observation  in  this  decision  that  the  considered
      Tribunal position, both before and after MA, has been and remains that
      failed asylum seekers per se are not at risk.


             '18. We are bound to say  we have  great  difficulty  with  Mr
                 Linstead's submission on this matter. In the  first  place,
                 when  the  Adjudicator  promulgated  his  determination  (5
                 November 2003) MA had not been decided. By  virtue  of  the
                 case judgment in CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165, save where  there
                 is a material error of law, we are  not  entitled  to  take
                 into account  Tribunal  guidelines  on  country  conditions
                 which were not in existence at  the  time  the  Adjudicator
                 promulgated is determination. When  the  Adjudicator  dealt
                 with  this  appeal  it  could  not  be  said  that  he  was
                 compelled,  either  by  the  Tribunal  guidelines  or   the
                 objective  evidence   before  him,  to  conclude  that  all
                 returnees were at risk.


             19. Secondly, even if we were entitled to test for legal error
                 in the  Adjudicator's   determination  by  reference  to  a
                 subsequent country guideline case, we do not consider MA is
                 or was ever intended to be authority  for  the  proposition
                 that returnees generally are at risk. At paragraphs  6  and
                 20 the President made very clear that  the  "real question"
                 he sought to address in this determination  was   "...  the
                 sort of treatment which she would receive  as  someone  who
                 would be identified as a draft evader".  We  do  not  think
                 that the resolve to  confine  the  issue  to  female  draft
                 evaders could have been made any clearer than that.


             20.  As already noted,  the  objective  materials  before  the
                 Adjudicator when he dealt with this case, albeit  they  did
                 contain references to and commentary on  the   2002  events
                 affecting some 220 Maltese  returnees,  did  not  compel  a
                 conclusion that returnees generally were at  risk.  Nor  at
                 that time was there any  Tribunal or court guidance stating
                 that returnees generally were at risk.  Mr  Linstead  asked
                 us to consider two documents which  were   not  before  the
                 Adjudicator or indeed before the Tribunal in MA,  the  CIPU
                 April 2004 Report and the Amnesty International  report May
                 2004.  However, once again by virtue of the Court of Appeal
                 judgment in CA [2004]    EWCA Civ 1165, save where there is
                 a material error of law, we are not entitled to  take  such
                 items of evidence into account, since the came  into  being
                 after the  Adjudicator   promulgated  is  determination  (5
                 November 2003).


             21.  However in order to furnish guidance on  this  issue,  we
                 will go on to consider whether, even had we taken   account
                 of these very recent items of evidence, we would have  fund
                 returnees generally to be at risk.


             22.  Our conclusion is that these materials do not establish a
                 risk for  returnees  generally.  In  the  first  place  the
                 problems relating to Maltese returnees were clearly  linked
                 closely with the perception by  the   Eritrean  authorities
                 that they were draft evaders or  omit  deserters.  The  May
                 2004 AI Report refers to the Malta deportees as


                    "mostly armed deserters or  conscription  evaders"  (see
                    p.23)


             23.  Secondly, even within the group of Maltese returnees, the
                 authorities plainly differentiated on the basis of both sex
                 and age: the May AI Report notes that women,  children  and
                 those over the conscription age limit of forty  years  were
                 released after some weeks in  Adi Abeto prison.


             24.  Thirdly, whatever may have been  the  degree  of  adverse
                 treatment meted out to the Maltese returnees in 2002, there
                 have  been  no  similar   large   scale   incidents   since
                 particularly  given  that  the  UNHCR  has   clearly   been
                 monitoring the situation very  closely,  we  consider  this
                 lack of repetition very significant. It is true there  have
                 been incidents involving returnees since,  but  these  have
                 been very few and in each case they have  only  involved  a
                 very small number of individuals.  Furthermore,  they  have
                 largely   been   confined   to   returnees   with   foreign
                 citizenships. Thus at p.22 of the May 2004 AI report  there
                 are  references  to  five  cases  of  difficulties   facing
                 Eritreans with foreign citizenships.


             25.  Fourthly, we find it important to  take  account  of  the
                 precise wording the   UNHCR  position  on  the   Return  of
                 Rejected Asylum  Seekers to Eritrea" dated 20 January 2004.
                  This letter does state that, in the light of the  problems
                 faced by the Maltese returnees "it cannot be excluded  that
                 future deportees would face a similar risk", and it goes on
                 to recommend that "states refrain from all  forced  returns
                 of rejected  asylum  seekers  to  Eritrea  and  grant  them
                 complementary forms of protection  instead".   However,  it
                 falls short of stating that  all  returnees  face  a  well-
                 founded fear of persecution;   it  leaves  that  issue  for
                 assessment  based  on  the  need  of  asylum  seekers   for
                 international protection. Furthermore "protection is itself
                 is clearly viewed by UNHCR   as  a  broader  category  than
                 protection under the 1951 Convention or under Article 3  of
                 the ECHR. In addition, the language of this Position  paper
                 is that of mere possibility ("...  it  cannot  be  excluded
                 that ...").   It is not that of real  possibility  or  real
                 risk.


             26.  For reasons already  given  we  do  not  think  that  the
                 contents of the May 2004 AI  Report  justify  a  conclusion
                 that returnees generally are at risk. We would note further
                 that  even  in  this  report  the   position   of   Amnesty
                 International  is not unequivocally that all returnees  are
                 at risk. It does appear at pp.25-26 to suggest that  anyone
                 the authorities  learnt was a failed asylum seeker would be
                 at  risk, but the formulation of the list of categories  to
                 be at more risk is otherwise more limited.
             27.  Accordingly, (1) we do not  consider  that  the  Tribunal
                 decision   in  MA  was  intended  to  establish  that   all
                 returnees to   Eritrea  are  at  risk;   (2)  the  Tribunal
                 position on this  issue  before  and  after  this  decision
                 remains that the mere fact of being a returnee  to  Eritrea
                 does not mean that someone will face a real risk of serious
                 harm.


             28.  For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.'


20.   We consider these  conclusions  also  have  force  in  this  case.  In
      respect of the facts of the case before us, we note that the  claimant
      is a woman and that the  adverse treatment by the Eritrean authorities
       of the Maltese returnees was almost entirely  confined  to  men.   We
      would also note that we see no reason to consider that  this  claimant
      would be returned in the  context of a large-scale return.


21.   As regards Mr Solomon's further submission, that  the  claimant  would
      be at risk by virtue of her mixed ethnicity, we do not find that there
      is any adequate support in the  objective country  materials  for  the
      view that persons of mixed ethnicity face a real risk of serious harm.
       We note that the Adjudicator found that  the  claimant's  father  had
      particularly strong ancestral links with  Eritrea.  In addition,  even
      on the claimant's own account she had  been  inducted  into  the  army
      without any apparent concerns being expressed or  demonstrated  as  to
      her mixed ethnicity.


22.   For the above reasons we consider that it was open to the  Adjudicator
      to dismiss the appeal on Article 3  grounds on the basis of a view  as
      to the position of returnees generally.  The  Adjudicator's  view  was
      properly based on the objective evidence and  accorded  with  Tribunal
      guidance.


23.   The appeal of the claimant in respect of the Adjudicator's   dismissal
      of the asylum and Article 3 grounds of appeal is dismissed.









H.H. STOREY
VICE PRESIDENT

-----------------------
      1


