

                      ST (Minor - Age dispute) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT
                                                                   00048 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                           Date of Hearing: 25 November 2004
                                     Determination prepared: 3 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             27 January 2005
                                   Before:

                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                               Mr R. Hamilton
                               Mr N. Kumar JP

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:           Mr M. Aslan, legal representative from
                       Simmons, solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


  1. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  who  appeals  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Ms S. Henderson,  promulgated  on  16
     December 2003, following a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  in  which  she
     dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
     of State to refuse both his asylum and human rights claims.

  2. The appellant claimed to have been born on 1 September 1987.   If  so,
     he is now 17 years old and still a minor.  He arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom on 2 March 2003 at which time he would have been fifteen years
     old. He claimed asylum on arrival.  He was admitted for the purpose of
     examining his claim.  On 20 May 2003, the Secretary of  State  refused
     his application and made a formal decision refusing him leave to enter
     the United Kingdom.  This gave rise to a right of appeal under section
     82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  the
     appellant exercised, within time, on 6 June 2003.

  3. In a statement that formed  part  of  his  application  the  appellant
     stated that he is of Pashtun ethnicity and a  Sunni  Muslim.   He  was
     born and bred in Jalalabad  and  remained  there  until  he  left  the
     country on 5 March 2003. He claimed that his father was a brigadier in
     the army during the Najibullah government and that, after its fall, he
     became actively involved with the Hizb-e-Islami movement.  In  October
     2001, the Taliban arrested the appellant's  brother,  whose  body  was
     returned to them some days later.  They were told he was killed on the
     battlefield.   Within  a  week,   the   appellant's   other   brother,
                , was also taken by the Taliban but escaped.  The appellant
     did not see him again until he arrived in the United Kingdom.

  4. On 1March 2003, after the fall of the Taliban  regime,  the  appellant
     claimed that he and his father were arrested and accused of supporting
     the Taliban and Hizb-e-Islami.  Although the  appellant  was  at  this
     time aged only 15, he claims that he was beaten whilst  in  detention.
     On 4 March 2003, the appellant stated that a guard  entered  his  cell
     and assisted him to escape.  After leaving the  compound,  he  met  up
     with an uncle who made arrangements for him to leave  Jalalabad.   The
     appellant travelled to the United Kingdom  by  bus  and  by  air.   On
     arrival     he     was      re-united      with      his      brothers
          (who has been granted 4 years exceptional leave  to  remain)  and
                                 (who  was  granted  one  year's  leave  to
     remain).   The appellant now lives with them in the United Kingdom.

  5. The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was a minor whose date  of
     birth was probably 1 September 1987.  This was  not  accepted  by  the
     Secretary of State because, on arrival, his date  of  birth  had  been
     recorded as 1 January 1978.  If so, he would  now  be  aged  26.   The
     Adjudicator noted that the copy of the appellant's  birth  certificate
     produced by him appeared to have been altered.  It was  apparent  that
     the evidence about the date of his birth was confused.   Although  the
     Adjudicator accepted the appellant's evidence as to his date of birth,
     ("However I am just persuaded on the basis of the documents, that  the
     appellant is a minor  as  claimed...)",  he  also  accepted  that  the
     Secretary of State genuinely formed the view that the appellant looked
     over 18.

  6. In paragraph 22 of the determination the Adjudicator accepted that the
     appellant might have been detained  with  his  father,  mistreated  in
     detention and then released by means of  a  bribe.   He  rejected  the
     appellant's claim that his detention was for reasons  of  any  actual,
     perceived   or  imputed  political  opinion.   He  also  rejected  the
     appellant's account of any personal  involvement  with  Hizb-e-Islami.
     In paragraph 22 of the  determination  the  Adjudicator  rejected  the
     appellant's claim that he was perceived to be an opponent by virtue of
     his  father's  involvement  with  the   regime   of   Dr   Najibullah.
     Accordingly, he rejected the claim that the appellant was at  risk  of
     persecution in Jalalabad.  He dismissed the asylum claim.

  7. The Adjudicator went on  to  consider  the  appellant's  human  rights
     claims under the ECHR notwithstanding the fact that she had found  the
     appellant to be a minor.  In  considering  the  Article  3  claim  the
     Adjudicator found that the appellant was at risk of  ill-treatment  at
     the hands of his cousin if he were to return to Jalalabad.  That risk,
     however, did not arise on return to Kabul where the Secretary of State
     proposed to return him.  Accordingly,  she  dismissed  the  Article  3
     claim.  On considering the position under Article 8,  the  Adjudicator
     decided that the appellant's  brothers  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
     before the fall of the Taliban and in circumstances that had radically
     altered in the intervening years.  She was not  satisfied  they  could
     not accompany the appellant back to Kabul if he were removed. For that
     reason, she found there was no interference with the appellant's right
     to respect for his family life.  She did not then go  on  to  consider
     the issue of proportionality.

  8. The appellant has appealed to the Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal are
     restricted to challenges made to the Adjudicator's  treatment  of  the
     human rights issues, said to have arisen under Articles 3 and 8 of the
     ECHR.  The Adjudicator had decided that there was no  cogent  evidence
     that his brothers could not  accompany  the  appellant  on  return  to
     Kabul.  It is to be  noted,  of  course,  that  when  the  Adjudicator
     considered the appeal,  neither  had  settled  status  in  the  United
     Kingdom and each had only the remnant of his  leave  to  remain.   The
     grounds of appeal, however, asserted that the Adjudicator  had  failed
     to consider proportionality in making her assessment  of  whether  the
     brothers could return with the appellant.  It  seems  to  us  that  in
     accordance with the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  Nhundu  &  Chiwera
     (01/TH/0613), the Adjudicator is required to carry out a step by  step
     approach and to consider whether family life exists and, if  it  does,
     whether the appellant's removal would result in an  interference  with
     that  family  life  and,  if  it  does,  to  consider   whether   that
     interference is proportionate  when  balancing  the  effect  upon  the
     appellant with the need to enforce effective immigration control.   On
     this analysis, the interference with  family  life  comes  before  the
     assessment of proportionality.  The Adjudicator found that  there  was
     no bar to the appellant's brothers accompanying him on his  return  to
     Kabul.  The Secretary of State had never recognised them as  refugees.
     Their exceptional leave to remain  could  not  be  equated  with  such
     recognition.  They had no settled status in the United  Kingdom.   The
     circumstances in which they had come to the United Kingdom alleging  a
     fear of persecution at the hands of the Taliban,  no  longer  afforded
     grounds for surrogate protection given the  changed  circumstances  in
     Afghanistan.  The Adjudicator  was,  therefore,  entitled  to  make  a
     finding that the brothers  could  accompany  the  appellant  and  that
     family life would not, therefore, suffer an interference.

  9. The grounds go on to assert  that the determination  was  perverse  in
     that, having found that he was a minor, the  Adjudicator  went  on  to
     find that he was a "fit young man" and therefore  able  to  return  to
     Kabul.  There is nothing in this ground of appeal.  The  reference  to
     the appellant being a "young man" did not mean  that  the  Adjudicator
     had forgotten he was  a  minor  or  that  a  "young   man"  inevitably
     connotes an adult.  It does not.

 10. Notwithstanding the grounds of appeal, the Adjudicator's treatment  of
     the appeal calls for comment.  The appellant was found  to  have  been
     born on 1 September 1987.  When he arrived  in  United  Kingdom  on  2
     March 2003, he was then aged 15.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  his
     decision on 2 May 2003 once again, when he was aged 15.

 11. At the hearing, the Adjudicator found that the appellant was  a  minor
     and then aged 16.  Nevertheless, she went on to consider  whether  the
     appellant was at risk of a violation of his human rights by reason  of
     his return as a minor. An appellant will fail to establish a violation
     of his human rights if there is no imminent prospect of return.   This
     will occur in a case where leave to remain is granted for a number  of
     years.  So much is clear from  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  L
     (Ethiopia) [2003] UKIAT 00016 in which the  Tribunal,  chaired  by  Dr
     H.H. Storey said:


           "62...The judgment in [Saad, Diriye and Osorio  [2001] EWCA  Civ
           2008 [2002] INLR 34] clearly  holds  that  the  existing  appeal
           structure governing appeals against refusal of  asylum  entitles
           Appellants to a decision in relation to refugee status. In  each
           case  the  decision  facing  the  appellate  authority  is   the
           hypothetical one of whether removal would  be  contrary  to  the
           Convention at the time of the hearing - i.e. on the basis of the
           refugee status of the Appellant at that time. Accordingly,  even
           if there are practical obstacles in the form of a refusal by the
           authorities of the receiving state to re-admit an Appellant, the
           appeal  on  asylum  grounds  nevertheless  requires  substantive
           consideration on the hypothetical basis of whether - if returned
           - an Appellant would face a real risk of persecution.


           63. However, we cannot see that the same  principle  applies  in
           respect of human rights grounds of appeal. The decision appealed
           against is one and the same but, in contrast the position  under
           the Refugee Convention, success in a human  rights  appeal  does
           not in itself result in any status  at  international  law,  nor
           indeed in domestic  law.  Furthermore  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
           considers that practicalities  in  relation  to  return  are  of
           central importance. If the threat of  removal  is  not  imminent
           then  there  can  be  no  violation  of  the   Convention:   see
           Vijayanathan and Pushparajah v France (1993) 15 EHRR 62."


      Where, however, the leave already granted has expired, or is about  to
      expire, the Adjudicator  will  have  to  consider  the  effect  of  an
      imminent return upon the appellant.

 12. The issue arises in this appeal whether the  Adjudicator  should  have
     gone on to consider whether the appellant  was  at  imminent  risk  of
     return as a minor, aged 16.   When  the  Adjudicator  considered  this
     appeal in November 2003, the appellant had  about  two  years  of  his
     minority to run.  It is true that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
     granted the appellant exceptional leave to remain until his eighteenth
     birthday but that was because the Secretary of State had not  accepted
     that the appellant was a minor.  Nevertheless, the Adjudicator had  to
     consider the position as she had  found  the  facts  to  be.   In  our
     judgment, she could not assume that the Secretary of State would  fail
     to apply his own policies insofar as those  policies  dealt  with  the
     treatment of minors.  Broadly speaking,  the  policy  states  that  an
     unaccompanied minor will not be returned  unless  there  are  adequate
     reception facilities.  Thus, the Adjudicator should have assumed there
     would be no return of an unaccompanied minor  and  therefore,  in  the
     context of this appeal, no imminent removal.   Alternatively,  if  the
     appellant was to be returned with his brothers (or one of  them),  the
     problem  of  an  unaccompanied  minor   without   adequate   reception
     facilities would not arise.

 13. In our judgment, this  is  exactly  what  the  Adjudicator  did.   She
     considered what prevented the appellant's brothers  from  accompanying
     him and decided there was nothing.  It followed that the appellant was
     not at risk on return.   Nor  did  the  Adjudicator  assume  that  the
     Secretary of State would breach his own policies.  Had there  been  no
     family members in a position to accompany him, the  Adjudicator  could
     and should  have  assumed  there  would  be  no  return  unless  other
     reception facilities were in place.  The Secretary of State could  not
     be expected at this stage to adduce evidence of  reception  facilities
     in the (hypothetical) event of an unaccompanied return of a minor.

 14. We do not consider the position is any different because the Secretary
     of State did not accept that the appellant was 16.  He was not obliged
     to do so. Indeed, it is  apparent  from  the  determination  that  the
     Adjudicator found the  Secretary  of  State  reasonably  believed  the
     appellant to be an adult.  In the course of  the  hearing  before  the
     Tribunal, Mr Deller, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,
     did not concede that the appellant was a minor or that  the  Secretary
     of State was bound by the Adjudicator's decision on that  issue.   The
     Secretary of State cannot be bound by an Adjudicator's decision as  to
     the appellant's age in an appeal the appellant has  lost  because  the
     Secretary of State, as the "successful" party, has no right of  appeal
     on a finding with which he disagrees.  Nor, if that appellant appeals,
     is the Secretary of State obliged to put in a respondent's  notice  if
     he does not accept a finding of the Adjudicator on any issue, such  as
     a dispute as to the appellant's age.  Nevertheless, Mr Deller accepted
     that the Secretary of State was obliged  to  pay  due  regard  to  the
     Adjudicator's reasoning.  It seems to us that the Secretary  of  State
     was  at  least  obliged  to  take  into  account   the   Adjudicator's
     determination as a material factor when reaching his own  decision  as
     to how to proceed following the determination.  A  failure  to  do  so
     might lead to the decision being reviewed by the Administrative Court.

 15. Thus, where there is no Presenting Officer before the  Adjudicator  or
     where (as in the present case) the Presenting Officer  does  not  feel
     able to concede at the hearing that the  appellant  is  a  minor,  the
     Adjudicator should  not  assume  that  the  Secretary  of  State  will
     disregard the Adjudicator's assessment of age and return the appellant
     to the country of his nationality in breach of his policy.  We  accept
     that the Secretary of State has the power to do so but,  if  he  makes
     the attempt, the appellant is not without a remedy.  If the  appellant
     establishes that he is a minor, (and in this task he will be supported
     by the Adjudicator's findings and his underlying reasons), he will  be
     able to challenge a decision by the Secretary of State to  return  him
     in breach of the Secretary of State's own policies. That challenge  is
     before the Administrative Court  and  not  the  Adjudicator,  but  the
     existence of that right of challenge is sufficient to satisfy us  that
     the appellant is not at risk of a violation of his human rights merely
     because the Secretary of State does not  accept  the  appellant  is  a
     minor or is unable or unwilling to give an undertaking not  to  return
     the appellant before his eighteenth birthday.

 16. In dismissing the appeal, the Adjudicator should make clear the  basis
     on which he is doing so.   He  is,  of  course,  obliged  to  do  this
     pursuant to his duty to give adequate reasons.  It  will  thus  become
     clear that he is dismissing the human rights claim because there is no
     imminent risk of return  or  no  risk  of  return  in  breach  of  the
     Secretary of State's policy on the return of minors.  If there  is  no
     risk of imminent return,  there  will  be  no  need  to  consider  the
     potential risk to private or family life of a return at a future date.
      Such an exercise would be speculative.

 17. For the reasons we have given, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                        Approved for electronic distribution
