
JH
|                           |        |MO (Libya - jurisdiction)   |
|                           |        |Libya [2005] UKIAT 00017    |
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 11 October 2004         |        |                            |
|Prepared 11 October 2004   |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 January 2005                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mrs M L Roe                                                       |
|Mr M S W Hoyle                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The Secretary of State appeals  to  the  Tribunal  with  permission
        against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr P F Hague, in which
        he allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereafter referred  to  as
        the claimant) against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  15
        January 2002 refusing asylum.


     2. The hearing before us took place on 11 October 2004.  Mr  Hollings-
        Tennant appeared on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  and  Mr  A
        Rosemarine for Noden & Co Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
        claimant.

     3. At  the  outset,  Mr  Rosemarine  argued  four  preliminary  points
        concerning  jurisdiction,  and  a  further  point   concerning   an
        application to adduce evidence.

     4. The first point was that permission to appeal could not be  granted
        in respect of an application which did not contain a declaration of
        truth. He pointed to the fact that the application  was  signed  by
        someone on behalf of a Victoria Jones, who was  believed  to  be  a
        Presenting Officer. He contended that a Declaration  of  Truth  was
        required and it was common to both sides to  believe  that  it  was
        required as there was to be found above the signature and quotation
        marks the statement "I believe the facts stated in this application
        are true". The Home Office were seeking to say that another  person
        could purport to sign this declaration on behalf  of  someone  else
        who drew up the grounds and  that  would  totally  deny  the  whole
        purpose of it being a statement of truth.

     5. Mr Rosemarine considered that it did not have to be  a  person  who
        had  been  at  the  hearing  but  while  the  claim  was  that  the
        Adjudicator had failed to consider an issue,  the  person  who  had
        written the application was  not  present  and  the  force  of  the
        application was diminished to a degree. The person  who  formulated
        the application had not stated it to be true and did not say he had
        her authority and there  was  no  certificate  either.  The  person
        signing it had to believe that what they signed was true and  there
        was no evidence that the Presenting Officer had  indicated  to  him
        that he could sign. The declaration was similar to an oath.

     6. Mr Hollings-Tennant regarded the point as a novel one. He confirmed
        that Miss Jones was a Presenting Officer. Rule 17 of the  Procedure
        Rules did not state that it was not possible to sign on  behalf  of
        someone else.

     7. Mr Rosemarine's second point was that the Vice  President  who  had
        granted  permission  had  expressly  done  so  in  respect   of   a
        determination of Mr D M Brunnen. There was no  indication  that  Mr
        Hague's determination had been considered. There was nothing in the
        Grant of Permission to indicate that Mr Hague's  determination  had
        been considered at all.  It  was  accepted  that  a  copy  of  that
        determination was attached to the application for  permission,  but
        that could be purely administrative. The lack of reasons also meant
        that there was nothing to  link  the  Grant  of  Permission  to  Mr
        Hague's determination and nothing to show that the  Vice  President
        had considered Mr Hague's determination and indeed there was reason
        to suggest that he had not.

     8. In relation to this point Mr Hollings-Tennant stated  that  he  had
        not seen this  as  an  issue  but  pointed  out  that  the  correct
        respondent's  name  had  been  employed  and   also   the   correct
        nationality  was  identified.  He  referred  us  to  Rule  18.  The
        determination of Mr Hague was attached to  the  challenge  to  that
        determination.

     9. Mr Rosemarine's third point was that it was necessary for there  to
        be reasons when permission for appeal was granted and all that  was
        stated in the Grant of Permission was that the  Grounds  of  Appeal
        were arguable and the Vice President gave permission to appeal. The
        reasons were necessary in order to enable the disappointed party to
        know why permission had been granted and whether or not  there  was
        an error of law. The grant went contrary to Rule 18  (vii)  of  the
        Procedure Rules which required the  determination  of  a  Grant  of
        Permission to indicate the grounds upon which permission to  appeal
        was granted.

    10. The next point raised by Mr Rosemarine was that on the surface  the
        only ground challenged by  the  Secretary  of  State  was  patently
        false. The grounds were entirely based on the  point  beginning  at
        paragraph 4 of the application concerning the contention  that  the
        Adjudicator had failed to consider  background  evidence  from  the
        Libya bulletin of 25 March 2003. He also made the point that  these
        matters were not meant to be submissions but rather  matters  which
        were believed to be true. In fact the point argued was  false,  and
        the Tribunal was referred to  paragraph  18  of  the  Adjudicator's
        determination where he clearly referred to the matters set  out  at
        paragraph 4 on the grounds. The Procedure Rules required  that  the
        grounds showed that the appeal  would  succeed  and  ground  4  was
        patently false and so there was no way in which  the  appeal  could
        succeed and hence the Vice President did not have  jurisdiction  to
        grant permission.

    11. Mr Hollings-Tennant argued that  the  author  of  the  grounds  was
        looking at the Adjudicator's  failure  to  consider  the  objective
        evidence concerning failed asylum seekers  and  he  had  not  fully
        considered the point as  he  had  found  the  claimant  not  to  be
        credible and this was the point in  the  grounds  at  paragraph  5.
        There was a lack of clear findings of fact with regard to  risk  to
        asylum seekers per se and why the claimant  did  not  face  a  real
        risk.

    12. Mr Rosemarine contended that the Home Office was now raising a  new
        issue about risk  to  failed  asylum  seekers  and  that  was  only
        mentioned at paragraph 5 of the  grounds  in  connection  with  the
        piece of evidence which it was said the Adjudicator had  failed  to
        consider. The Home Office was seeking to suggest  that  credibility
        had been refuted but in fact some of the claim  had  been  accepted
        with regard to wholesale persecution of members of  the  claimant's
        family, and the brother's evidence had been accepted. There was  no
        suggestion that the findings of fact were unsustainable.

    13. The final point raised by Mr Rosemarine  concerned  an  application
        for a further witness who was here today. Mr  Hollings-Tennant  had
        said he had not been told of this and he  had  given  Mr  Hollings-
        Tennant a witness statement. As to why the  evidence  was  so  late
        this was because the Solicitor in charge of the case had  left  and
        someone else had taken over the file. This  was  no  fault  of  the
        claimant and there had been an oversight as to why the witness  was
        not called before the original hearing and the matter had not  been
        raised at all as it was thought that the evidence at  the  original
        hearing was enough and funding was now enormously restricted so  it
        had not been possible to call all  the  witnesses  that  one  might
        wish.

    14. In this regard, Mr Hollings-Tennant made the point that the witness
        statement had not been served in accordance with  directions.  They
        were different dates on different versions of the statement. In any
        event, it was on the basis that the  claimant  was  credible  which
        went  contrary  to  the  Adjudicator's  views,  and  there  was  no
        respondent's notice.

    15. We adjourned to give consideration to the various points raised and
        then informed the parties of our conclusions on them.  It  will  be
        convenient if we take them in the same order as they were raised by
        Mr Rosemarine.

    16. The first point concerned the fact that the grounds of appeal  were
        signed on behalf of Victoria Jones who is a Presenting Officer  who
        it may be taken was the person who drafted the grounds  of  appeal.
        Paragraph 17 of the Procedure Rules deals  with  issues  concerning
        the form and contents of an application notice for the Tribunal. It
        is convenient if we set out the terms of Rule 17 in full.

        17 (1)   An application notice for permission to appeal must
                        be in the appropriate prescribed form and must:-

                        a) State the appellant's name and address; and,


                        b) State whether  the  appellant  has  authorised  a
                           representative to act for him in the appeal  and,
                           if  so,  give  the  representative's   name   and
                           address.

              (2)   The application notice must state all  the  grounds  of


                   appeal and give reasons in support of those
                  grounds.

                      (3)   The grounds of appeal must:-


                        c)  identify  the  alleged  errors  of  law  in  the
                           Adjudicator's determination; and,


                        d)  explain  why  such  errors   made   a   material
                           difference to the decision.

                (4)   The application notice must be signed by the
                   respondant or his representative, and dated.


                (5)   If an application notice is signed by the appellant's


                    representative,  the  representative  must  certify   in


                   the application notice that he has completed the
                   application notice in accordance with the
                   appellant's instructions.

                (6)      There must be attached to the application notice a


                        clear and complete copy of the Adjudicator's
                        determination together with a copy of any other
                    material relied on.

      17.      Rule 18 of the Procedure Rules states as follows:-

             18     (1)         An application for permission to appeal
                    to the Tribunal must be decided by a legally
                    qualified member of the Tribunal without a
                    hearing.


              (2)    The Tribunal is not required to consider any grounds
                   of appeal other than those included in the
                   application.

                      (3)    The Tribunal may grant or refuse permission  to

                    appeal.

              (4)    The Tribunal may grant permission to appeal only if
                    it is satisfied that:-

                      a) The appeal would have a real prospect of  success;
                         or,


                      b) There is some  other  compelling  reason  why  the
                         appeal should be heard.


                      (5)  Where the Tribunal grants permission  to  appeal,
          it
                 may limit the permission to one or more of the grounds  of
                 appeal specified in the application.


                    (6)   The Tribunal's  determination  must  include  its
      reasons,
                          which may be in summary form.

                     (7)   Where the Tribunal grants permission to appeal:-

                        a) Its determination must indicate the grounds  upon
                           which permission to appeal is granted; and,


                        b)  The  appellate  authority  must  serve  on   the
                           respondent, together with  the  determination,  a
                           copy of the application notice and the  documents
                           which were attached to it.


   18.           It can be seen from Rule 17 and  in  particular  from  Rule
   17(iv)
        that there is a requirement that the application notice  be  signed
        by the appellant or his representative and dated. That was  clearly
        done in this case. We do not think it can properly be  denied  that
        whoever it was (the handwriting is somewhat unclear) it  is  signed
        on behalf of Miss Jones and in their capacity as the  Secretary  of
        State's representative, and indeed that is stated in the box below.
        The statement in quotation marks `I believe that the  facts  stated
        in  this  application  are  true'  does  not  form  part   of   the
        requirements of Rule 17. It is certainly a matter concerning  which
        a slightly different form is to be found in the draft form attached
        to the Procedure Rules in that the representative  undertakes  that
        they are giving the application in accordance with the  appellant's
        instructions and that the appellant believes the  facts  stated  in
        the application are true, but as we say  that  does  not  form  any
        formal part of the requirements of the Procedure Rules. Even if  it
        did, we can see no reason why the signature could not  be  provided
        on behalf of the Presenting Officer whose name is given undertaking
        to that effect. The  suggestion  that  what  is  required  here  is
        something in  the  nature  of  an  oath  we  find  to  be  entirely
        unwarranted  in  the  wording  of  the  rules  or  indeed  in   our
        understanding of how they operate in practice.

  19. One can imagine the number of possibilities in which this kind of
        requirement if it were one, would prove entirely unworkable. For
        example, Miss Jones might have been taken ill and unable to sign
        the form at the time when it had to be submitted, and bearing in
        mind the very tight time limits that exist in this jurisdiction, it
        would be absurd if someone else was not able to sign on her behalf.
        Another possibility might, in the case of a claimant, who was
        appealing to the Tribunal, be that Counsel who drafted the grounds
        of appeal but was for whatever practical reason, unable to sign
        them. It would be absurd if the form could not then be signed on
        Counsel's behalf by a member of the firm of Solicitors instructing
        him or her. We can see no merit to this challenge to the form in
        which permission was sought in this case and do not consider that
        it any sense invalidates the Tribunal's jurisdiction to hear the
        appeal.


   20     The second point concerns the error by the Vice President in
        granting permission in naming the wrong Adjudicator. As Mr Hollings-
        Tennant pointed out, the Vice President named the correct claimant
        and  also his nationality and clearly cited the proper appeal
        number at the top right hand part of the Grant of Permission form.
        It is also the case, as Mr Rosemarine acknowledged, that the copy
        of the Adjudicator's determination was attached to the grounds of
        appeal in relation to which permission was granted. It seems to us
        entirely clear in the circumstances that the error of name of the
        Adjudicator was the only matter that could give cause for any
        doubt, and all the other matters to which we have referred above
        make it sufficiently clear that the Vice President was considering
        the determination of Mr Hague. We again see no merit in this point.




  21.      Mr Rosemarine in his third point raises the brief terms in which
        permission was granted. It is  clear  from  Rule  18(vi)  that  the
        Tribunal's determination must include its reasons which may  be  in
        summary form, and from 18(vii) we see that the Tribunal in granting
        permission must indicate  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  to
        appeal is granted.

  22.      With regard to this point we make the following comments.
        Firstly, by way of partial explanation, is the  fact  that,  as  we
        believe is tolerably well-known, Vice Presidents have to consider a
        very significant number of applications within a very short  period
        of time. Inevitably, this means that the kind of detail  which,  in
        an ideal world might be given in grants or refusals of  permission,
        cannot always be provided. Clearly such matters could not excuse  a
        failure to comply with the requirements of the rules and we are  in
        no sense suggesting that any such failures could be excused by time
        constraints. It is simply by way of explanation for the element  of
        terseness that may be found from time  to  time  in  the  grant  or
        refusal of permission. Particularly, this  is  so  in  relation  to
        grants of permission. In this case, we are entirely satisfied  that
        the Vice President did not fall  into  error  in  setting  out  his
        reasons for the decision in the manner in which he did.  The  grant
        of permission is clearly made by  reference  to  the  Secretary  of
        State's grounds of  appeal.  Those  grounds  are  attached  to  the
        determination  and  consist  of  five  points  only   occupying   a
        relatively short amount of space. We see no disadvantage to someone
        such as the claimant in this case in the reasons  not  being  spelt
        out in the grant of permission, since  he  or  his  representatives
        only have to read the brief  grounds  of  appeal  in  order  to  be
        entirely clear in relation to what matters it was  that  permission
        was granted in. Indeed, Mr Rosemarine, for example, does not appear
        to have been handicapped in his submissions before us by a lack  of
        understanding as to what the issues before the  Tribunal  were.  We
        therefore see no merit to this submission.


  23.      The next point concerns the claim that the matter in relation
        to which it is contended that the Secretary of State believed to be
        true is a falsehood, that being the claim that the Adjudicator  did
        not give consideration to a report which it  is  contended  he  did
        consider. It is  however,  important,  as  we  pointed  out  to  Mr
        Rosemarine in argument, to bear in mind the second part  of  ground
        five. There it is submitted that the appellant would not be at risk
        on return to Libya as the Country Evidence shows that all  rejected
        asylum seekers are interviewed  yet  so  far  there  have  been  no
        reported repercussions arising from  this  practice  and  therefore
        such  treatment  could  not  be   defined   as   ill-treatment   or
        persecution. It is the  case,  therefore,  as  Mr  Hollings-Tennant
        argued, that  the  Adjudicator  in  effect,  failed  to  apply  the
        objective evidence to the findings he had made. He had  found  that
        the claimant had told him untruths specifically, with regard to the
        claim  that  he  had  been  detained  and  tortured  and  yet   the
        Adjudicator found that he was  at  risk  on  return  which  it  was
        contended was not a conclusion to which he was entitled to come. As
        we also pointed out to Mr Rosemarine, it is not the case  that  the
        grounds of appeal have to be correct ultimately,  but  rather  that
        they give rise to  an  arguable  issue  which  the  Vice  President
        clearly considered was the case and for what it  is  worth  we  are
        entirely in agreement with the view that he can be  taken  to  have
        expressed on that point. Accordingly, we do not accept that  ground
        four of the grounds of appeal is patently false,  but  rather  that
        what was said about it in ground four has to be read together  with
        ground five as indicating an arguable error of law.


  24.      We were therefore not with Mr Rosemarine on any of the
        preliminary matters that he raised with regard to jurisdiction.

  25.      As regards the request for an adjournment, it is clearly the
        case that standard directions concerning  the  time  prior  to  the
        hearing in which evidence must be submitted or  requests  for  oral
        evidence made had not been complied with at the time when on the  7
        October 2004 an application was made to put in a letter of  support
        from Libya Watch and excerpts from a book and also  permission  was
        sought for Mr Abdul Malek  of  Libya  Watch  to  give  evidence.  A
        further fax was sent on 8 October 2004 providing an amended version
        of the Libya Watch Report. We note that  the  same  representatives
        and indeed counsel have been involved in this matter since  it  was
        heard by the Adjudicator in July 2003 with the determination  being
        promulgated in August of that year. We also note that the  date  of
        the Libya Watch Report is  6  May  2004  and  Mrs  Thatcher's  book
        "Statecraft" to which it was proposed to refer was published in the
        year 2000. We see very little merit to Mr Rosemarine's  explanation
        as to the reasons why it was sought so late in the day to put  this
        evidence in, and we do not consider that it complies in  any  sense
        with the requirements in Ladd v  Marshall.  In  any  event,  as  Mr
        Hollings-Tennant pointed out, the Libya Watch Report appears to  be
        based upon an acceptance of the claimant's credibility which was of
        course in significant respects rejected by the Adjudicator  and  we
        see little, if anything  in  that  Report  which  goes  beyond  the
        objective evidence which was already to be found in Mr Rosemarine's
        bundle. Accordingly, we stated that  that  evidence  would  not  be
        allowed in.


  26.      Thereafter, Mr Hollings-Tennant produced two determinations
        of the Tribunal in E Libya and KK Failed Asylum Seeker - Libya  and
        Mr Rosemarine objected to the late production of these but we  gave
        him the opportunity to read them and consider them.

  27.      When we re-convened, Mr Rosemarine contended that the
        Adjudicator had accepted  that  the  respondent  was  detained  and
        tortured.  We  pointed  out  that  that  went   contrary   to   the
        Adjudicator's finding at  paragraph  16  of  his  determination  as
        follows:

           "He may have been questioned in the past but was  not  detained;
           he has not been tortured."

  28.      It occurred to us, however, that  there  might  be  a  difficulty


        with  regard  to  the  Adjudicator's  apparent  acceptance  of  the
        evidence         of         the         appellant's         brother
                                         .         statement is to be found
        at pages 12-14 of the bundle before the Adjudicator. We  note  from
        that at paragraph 7 that he stated that some time in 1999,  someone
        told him that his brother                    had been arrested  and
        detained by the Libyan government. There is a further reference  at
        paragraph 9 that he sincerely believes that if he had not flown  in
        1997 he would have been arrested and tortured just like his brother
                       and his other brothers and father were arrested  and
        detained. It is clear from paragraph 10(iv)  of  the  Adjudicator's
        determination that the statement was  before  the  Adjudicator  and
        that                                 also   gave   evidence.    The
        Adjudicator noted at paragraph 14  of  the  determination  that  he
        found
              to be a  credible  witness  and  referred  to  him  as  being
        moderate in his evidence and speaking only of things prior  to  his
        own departure in 1997 and acknowledging ignorance of  matters  that
        might have been within his knowledge and which he could  have  been
        expected to give answer to had he been  a  rehearsed  witness.  The
        Adjudicator did not however, refer to the specific matters which we
        have                          quoted                           from
         statement of the 20 June 2003. Certainly, in  that  statement,  he
        was not speaking only of things prior to his own departure in 1997,
        and  there  is  no  indication  in  the  determination   that   the
        Adjudicator gave any thought to the extent to which the  statements
        to     which     we     have     referred     to      above      in
                      statements might have provided corroboration for  the
        claimant's account.


  29.      Mr Rosemarine sought to persuade us that we could dismiss
        the appeal outright without needing to remit for an  Adjudicator  to
        consider the particular aspects  of                               's
        evidence on which the Adjudicator had not made findings. He took  us
        to the objective evidence in his bundle and distinguished E  and  KK
        on the basis that the  claimant's  family  was  connected  with  the
        opposition and as a  consequence,  he  was  at  risk  on  return  of
        detention and therefore of significant ill-treatment.

  30.     Despite Mr Rosemarine's submissions on this matter, we do not
        consider that the appeal can properly be dismissed on the  facts  as
        found by the Adjudicator. The Adjudicator disbelieved,  as  we  have
        noted above, the claim by the claimant that he had been detained and
        ill-treated. He accepted no more than that it was  likely  that  his
        family had had political and  opposition  involvement  and  that  he
        himself had been questioned in the past. It  would  appear  that  no
        more had happened to him, on the Adjudicator's findings,  than  that
        since the arrest of his brothers in 1992 he and another brother  and
        his father had been periodically taken in for  questioning  and  the
        house searched. We do not consider on the objective evidence as  put
        before us by Mr Rosemarine or from our reading of E and KK,  that  a
        person with such a history faces a  real  risk  of  persecution  and
        breach of his human rights on return to Libya. If he  were  of  that
        degree of interest to the authorities then he would have experienced
        more than the Adjudicator found him  to  have  experienced  in  that
        period of seven or so years. We do not consider that the  fact  that
        he has been away from Libya for several  years  and  in  the  United
        Kingdom materially affects the risk. Accordingly, we have  concluded
        that the failure by the Adjudicator to  give  consideration  to  and
        make   specific   findings   on   the    particular    aspects    of
               's evidence to which we have referred above entails that this
        appeal must be remitted for consideration afresh by  an  Adjudicator
        other than Mr Hague. To that extent, this appeal is allowed.





                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
