
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02043/2011


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th May 2013                              |On 18th June 2013            |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            ATULVILU THIYAGARAJAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Plowright instructed by Bazeer & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Tanner Senior Homer Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On the  18th  August  2011  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal in this matter was set aside on the  basis  of  an  agreed
        material error of  law.  Directions  were  given  providing  for  a
        substantive hearing on the same date. The scope of that hearing  is
        limited to considering the credibility of the appellants  claim  to
        have been arrested in September 2010 and released on bail  and  any
        risk to her on return if her claim  is  found  to  be  credible  in
        relation to this issue. All other adverse credibility findings  bar
        those relating to the arrest and detention are preserved findings.


     2. The case was listed for a substantive hearing on 7th December  2011
        which had to be vacated as the representatives failed to advise the
        Tribunal that a Tamil interpreter was  required  and  one  was  not
        available. Mr Avery, the Presenting Officer on that  occasion  also
        indicated that the respondent wished to  undertake  enquiries  with
        BHC in Colombo regarding the alleged arrest and appearance at court
        in Sri Lanka.


     3. On 10th  May  2012  a  'for  mention'  hearing  was  arranged.  The
        respondent had written to the Tribunal advising that  to  undertake
        the necessary checks a case  number  relating  to  the  Sri  Lankan
        proceedings was  required.  The  appellant's  representatives,  TTS
        Solicitors, advised that the  details  would  be  provided  and  so
        further case management directions were given.


     4. On 18th July 2012, at the next 'for mention' hearing  the  Tribunal
        was advised the appellant had still not provided the case reference
        number. I was advised a lawyer had been instructed ten  days  prior
        to obtain the information and a reply was expected.


     5. On 12th February  2013  the  current  representatives  advised  the
        Tribunal they were instructed and requested  an  adjournment  which
        was refused. On  19th  February  2013  a  further  case  management
        hearing occurred at which the requested information was, again, not
        provided. Directions were given for the matter to be listed  for  a
        substantive hearing  to  prevent  further  delay.  Directions  were
        provided for the filing of all evidence  the  parties  intended  to
        rely  upon  with  a  provision  for  seeking  a  variation  of  the
        directions, if required. No  application  to  vary  was  made.  The
        hearing on 14th May 2013 proceeded by way of submissions.



Background


     6. The appellant was born on the 21st December 1980 and is  a  citizen
        of Sri Lanka. She left Sri Lanka on 23rd January 2001 using her own
        passport endorsed with a student visa and claimed asylum on arrival
        the same day.


     7. The preserved findings of  Judge  Andonian  can  be  summarised  as
        follows:


          i.  The failure of the appellant to mention a distinct  disability
   led to a                conclusion she had never met Colonel Kittu. [6]


          ii  The appellant claims she last saw Colonel Kittu,  who  it  was
   claimed is the               appellant's mother's cousin,  was  when  she
   was ten years of age in Jaffna.           This was in 1990.  However  the
   country information shows Colonel Kittu             left  Sri  Lanka  for
   London in October 1989 and never returned to that                country.
   [7]


          iii.    There was nothing in the appellant's evidence to  persuade
   the Judge he            could believe her claim her father  was  arrested
   as a member of the LTTE               and taken away and that  she  never
   saw him again. [8]


          iv. The appellant worked as a nurse. She claimed she  was  rounded
   up in 2009              by the army and taken to a  camp  where  she  was
   questioned and beaten.           There was no medical evidence  regarding
   the beatings. She claimed she             was released with  a  temporary
   pass on 20th January 2010 to work in the           chest clinic in Jaffna
   but  if  there  was  any   adverse   interest   in   her   it   was   not
   accepted she would have been released to work in the clinic. [9]


          v.  The appellant claimed she was asked to  attend  a  centre  for
   those recently               arrested on 4th April 2010. When she refused
   to identify people who were           LTTE she claims she was  questioned
   and beaten and released the               following morning. If  she  was
   of adverse interest she would not have been             released.  It  is
   also   noted   she   left   the   country   using   her   own    passport
   without experiencing difficulties. [10] [12]


          vi. Since leaving Sri Lanka the army have visited her home and  ID
   cards of            family members taken and they were told not to  leave
   the  country.  If  the               family  were  of  interest   it   is
   unrealistic they would merely be left alone.           [13]


          vii.    The appellant gave various dates ranging from June 2009 to
   April 2010 for               when her personal problems began.  The  fact
   she was unable to  state  a              more  accurate  date  led  to  a
   conclusion she had not had any problems with           the authorities in
   Sri Lanka. [16]


          viii.   The claim she was released from detention and  allowed  to
   return home to               Jaffna is inconsistent with  the  claim  the
   authorities are interested in her.            [18]


          ix. Stamps in the appellant's passport show she left Sri Lanka  on
   1st                 December 2009 and travelled to  India,  returning  on
   15th December 2009           and so she could not have been in  detention
   at the time she claims to have            been. [19]


          x.  On 3rd  September  2009,  after  the  alleged  arrest  of  her
   husband, the                 appellant travelled to Colombo to  look  for
   him. If she had a fear  she  would               not  have  travelled  to
   Colombo. It is at this time she claims she had a  fear            of  the
   authorities. [20]


          xi. The appellant also visited Colombo on 27th April 2010 and 14th
   July 20102              to apply for a visa to visit Germany.  Her  claim
   to have been so frightened            of the authorities in  Jaffna  that
   she would not even visit relatives is                  inconsistent  with
   her  actions  of  travelling  to  Colombo   to   apply   for   the   visa
   alone on 3rd September 2010 without allegedly seeking the  permission  of
     the authorities. [21]



Discussion



     8. The appellant did not claim in her evidence before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal that there are any outstanding  arrest  warrants  for  her
        [26].  She claims to have 'jumped bail' but  not  to  have  escaped
        from custody [27].


     9. In his submissions Mr Plowright referred to the appellant's witness
        statements in which she set out the nature of  her  claim  and  the
        reason she states she will be at risk  on  return.  In  her  recent
        statement dated 25th  March  2013  [page  150-151  A'  bundle]  she
        repeats her claim to be at risk on return and the disappearance  of
        her husband. It was submitted the appellant has produced a  lot  of
        original documents in the case which support her credibility. It is
        not disputed she is Tamil and there is a letter from a  Sri  Lankan
        lawyer regarding the court case although it is accepted  there  has
        been no reply to enquires made following the error of law  hearing.
        It is accepted  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles  are  relevant  but
        submitted that the  appellant's  account  is  consistent  with  the
        country evidence.


    10. It is correct that a lot of original documents have been  produced.
        These include a copy of a Sri Lankan prison officer's ID  card  and
        other documents relating to the prison service which is said to  be
        that of her husband although whether this is him or his  profession
        is not an element it is claimed  puts  the  appellant  at  risk  on
        return. I have also seen a copy of a letter  of  appointment  as  a
        nurse dated 24th June 2006 addressed to the appellant. There is  no
        finding the appellant is not a nurse but this class of  persons  is
        not at risk per se in Sri Lanka. The Judge of the First-tier  found
        her claim  to  have  been  released  to  undertake  nursing  duties
        incompatible with her claim to be at  risk  from  the  authorities.
        The documents  were  included  in  the  bundle  in  copy  form  and
        considered by the First-tier Tribunal  and  so  in  themselves  the
        originals add nothing materially new to the case.


    11. The key documents in relation to the limited scope of this  hearing
        are  the  letters  relating  to  the  alleged  arrest   and   court
        appearance. The first of these is a letter dated 5th February  2011
        from Hemantha V. Situge who describes himself as an Attorney-at-Law
        in Sri Lanka. The letter is addressed to  TTS  Solicitors  and  has
        been written in reply to a letter from TTS dated 4th February 2011.
        The author of the letter states he represented  the  appellant  who
        was arrested on 3rd September 2010.  She  was  taken  to  a  police
        station and  detained  for  three  days.  She  was  produced  at  a
        Magistrates Court on 6th September 2010 and  remanded  to  a  local
        prison. She re-appeared at the court on 6th December 2010 where the
        advocate represented her.  She was released on a  Rs300,000/-  case
        bail and was required to report at the police station every Monday.
        The letter states the Attorney was aware that  she  had  failed  to
        comply with the bail conditions. Relatives had advised him she  had
        left the country and they were being harassed by police officers.


    12. The respondent wished to investigate the truth of  this  claim  and
        verify the alleged charge and court appearance through the  BHC  in
        Colombo as a number of letters of this type have been seen  in  Sri
        Lankan cases recently. Despite having been given ample  opportunity
        to provide a valid case number to allow such checks to be made none
        has been forthcoming from the appellant. I am  entitled  to  attach
        little weight to the correspondence  relating  to  this  particular
        issue as (1) the failure to provide details which must  be  readily
        available from the court or through a lawyer, if they exist, raises
        the issue that no such details are recorded as no such  proceedings
        actually occurred and (2) it is a preserved finding that stamps  in
        the appellant's passport show she left Sri Lanka  on  1st  December
        2009 and travelled to India, returning on 15th December 2009 and so
        she could not have been in detention at the time she claims to have
        been.


    13. I find the appellant is not credible and has  clearly  manufactured
        her claim. She is a failed asylum seeker who lacks credibility  and
        no more. I find she has failed to substantiate her claim to  be  at
        risk on return to Sri Lanka. Having considered the relevant country
        guidance cases and country information I find she is  not  entitled
        to be recognised as a refugee or person entitled to any other  form
        of international protection as there  is  no  credible  reason  the
        authorities will have an adverse interest in her, either actual  or
        imputed.  No claim under the Immigration Rules or ECHR  that  would
        entitle her to remain in the UK has been substantiated either.


    14. Decision


    15. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated the 17th June 2013









