
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 25 June 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                          Mr Mathews Suresh Gabrial

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell dismissing his appeal against the
    decision of the respondent made on 6 January 2014 to refuse him  asylum
    in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 14 December  1987.   He
    entered the UK in July 2009 from Colombo, utilising his own passport as
    he had the benefit of a student visa which  was  valid  until  31  July
    2010.  Subsequent applications by the appellant to extend the period of
    his leave were rejected, twice in August 2010 and again in March  2011.
    On 12 April 2013 the appellant was found working illegally in a  branch
    of Kentucky Fried  Chicken  ("KFC")  and  was  served  with  the  usual
    documentation as an overstayer who was liable to removal.

3.    The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  were  23  paragraphs  long  and
    contained three grounds.  They were:  (1)  the  judge  erred  by  using
    Section 8 Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  as  the
    starting point in his assessment of credibility and/or has confined his
    assessment  of  credibility  to  Section  8  matters.  (2)  The   judge
    illogically and irrationally rejected the appellant's explanation as to
    the lack of evidence from  his  brother  on  the  grounds  that  it  is
    "extraordinary" and inherently implausible.  (3) The judge  illogically
    and irrationally concluded that the appellant's reasons for  the  delay
    in claiming asylum were "absurd" and "utterly incredible".

4.   Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge put the cart before the horse which was arguably  not  helped  by
    his reference to being "unconvinced"  by  the  appellant's  account  of
    detention.  The issue under Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 was potentially  arguable  that
    the weight and emphasis  to  be  given  to  delay  and  an  appellant's
    behaviour within the meaning of Section 8 will vary from case to case.

5.   The appellant's evidence was that he had been a  tailor  in  Sri  Lanka
    and he is a  Christian  by  religion.   He  confirmed  his  immigration
    history.

6.   He said that in Sri Lanka he had been suspected by the army of being  a
    spy on behalf of the LTTE.  He had been arrested at a bus stop when  he
    was in Vavuniya.  His mobile phone had been taken and examined.  It was
    found that he had been taking photographs of an army camp called Joseph
    Camp.  He was detained from November 2007 until February 2009.  He  was
    tortured during the detention, he did not admit  that  he  was  a  spy.
    Ultimately he was transferred into the custody of the police in Colombo
    and subsequently his father paid a bribe in  the  sum  of  25  lakh  to
    secure his release in February 2009.  The police had been told that  he
    would go abroad.  After his release he went  into  hiding,  obtained  a
    student visa and then travelled to the UK.

7.   He said he was wanted in connection with an attack which took place  in
    2007, his only arrest had been in November 2007.   He  had  joined  the
    LTTE in September 2007.

8.   He said his  father  had  made  all  the  necessary  arrangements  with
    respect to his visa application.  He expressed the view that  the  visa
    agency must have been bribed for the visa to have been issued.  He  had
    not claimed asylum earlier because he had not been aware of the system.
     He had worked for the two years he had been entitled to on  the  basis
    of the student visa he held.  He claimed  that  he  had  used  a  false
    identity card in the name of  Mohamed  Rifaz  in  order  to  leave  the
    country.  Two months after he arrived here his father was instructed to
    sign on at the army camp in Sri Lanka on a monthly basis and to  do  so
    until such time as the appellant himself returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   He
    claimed in oral evidence that he last had contact with  his  parents  a
    month after his arrival here.  He then clarified that the  most  recent
    occasion was when he spoke to his mother two weeks ago.

9.   The judge found that the credibility of the appellant was key  in  this
    appeal.  He found that although the appellant maintained that  he  came
    to this country as a student and wished to study  here,  the  appellant
    had  provided  no  evidence  of  significant  academic  or   vocational
    qualifications that he had achieved from his studies in  the  UK.   The
    judge also noted that  although  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  had
    submitted his visa  application  to  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Colombo with the assistance of an agent, the appellant would have  been
    required to provide appropriate documentation which it must be  assumed
    the High Commission accepted by the High Commission as to  the  genuine
    intent of the appellant and as  to  the  genuineness  of  any  document
    submitted.

10.  The judge also found that it was clear from the evidence provided  that
    the appellant worked  during  the  period  of  the  visa  and  when  he
    concluded his studies.  Although during his studies he referred to  his
    father remitting funds, the judge found that the appellant  was  intent
    to continue to remain in the UK for the first period,  that  is  during
    the currency of his visa in order to benefit his position economically.

11.  The judge then went on to find that  if  the  appellant's  account  was
    true, and he had suffered as he claimed during a period  of  detention,
    it was not credible that he could not reasonably have been expected  to
    make his claim for asylum upon arrival in the  UK  in  July  2009.   He
    found the appellant to be an intelligent individual who would not be  a
    person who would readily accept what he stated to be the views of other
    Sri Lankan Tamils, namely that members  of  their  community  would  be
    returned to Sri Lanka if they claimed asylum.  He did not  accept  that
    the appellant failed to claim asylum on  that  basis.   When  his  visa
    period came to an end he somehow obtained an identity card in the  name
    of another individual and then gained employment with KFC where he  was
    subsequently detained  by  officers.   The  appellant  made  no  effort
    whatsoever to claim asylum at that time.  There was no  suggestion  for
    example that he sought proper legal advice at  any  stage.   The  judge
    found it utterly incredible that a person with a genuine fear of return
    to a country, who  had  been  present  in  another  country  where  the
    possibility of an asylum claim was readily available, would not at  the
    very least have obtained proper advice, rather than relying, some years
    later on a statement that other countrymen had advised him that  if  he
    made an asylum claim he would be returned.  The judge  found  that  the
    appellant's account was absurd in that respect.  It  was  this  finding
    which led to the challenge in the third ground of appeal.

12.  The judge found that the appellant  knew  exactly  what  he  was  doing
    whilst he was in the UK.  Whilst it is arguable that the appellant  was
    entitled to remain in this country until his  period  of  leave  ended,
    what is unquestionably inappropriate and wrong is  that  the  appellant
    thereafter remained in this  country  and  did  so  in  order  to  take
    employment.  At no stage did he approach the authorities or anyone  for
    legal advice with respect to his position.  He found  it  extraordinary
    that the appellant failed to take the latter step,  particularly,  when
    he claimed that he suffered detention and torture in 2007 and  that  he
    feared any return to his home country.  It is very clear that he wanted
    to remain in this country.  He deceived a major and reputable  employer
    KFC, and did so in order to seek economic betterment.

13.  The judge found in the circumstances  that  the  appellant's  behaviour
    damaged to the severest degree his claim to be  genuine  and  to  be  a
    credible witness in his own cause.  The judge then said  of  course  he
    had considered most carefully the account of the appellant and had done
    so in the light of the  medical  report  which  was  before  him.   The
    medical report, including photographs, undoubtedly confirmed  that  the
    appellant  had  certain  scarring.   However  the  judge  said  he  was
    "unconvinced" by the appellant's account that he was  detained  by  the
    authorities and that it was during such a period of detention  that  he
    suffered as he maintains he did.  I note here that Counsel argued  that
    the judge did not  give  any  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of detention and torture by the authorities.

14.  The judge went on to say that whilst  accepting  corroboration  is  not
    strictly required in claims in this jurisdiction,  he  considered  that
    the family of the appellant could have provided some form  of  evidence
    in support of his claim.  The judge  said  it  is  once  more  somewhat
    extraordinary that his father, who is stated to be under requirement to
    report regularly  to  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka,  is  unable  to
    communicate in any way whatsoever to the appellant or directly to  this
    Tribunal to support the case which his son has put forward.  It is this
    finding that led to the challenge in ground 2 of the grounds.

15.  The judge went on to say that he was not persuaded that  the  appellant
    believes that his father would not take that action because his  father
    is cautious and fearful for himself.   The  judge  said  there  was  no
    reason whatsoever why a form  of  communication  from  the  appellant's
    father for use in this appeal would  necessarily  put  the  appellant's
    father at risk.  If the account of the appellant were true, his  father
    is already reporting to the authorities and is therefore already having
    dealings with them.  There was no indication from  the  appellant  that
    the authorities know where the appellant is and therefore his father is
    also at risk because they would take action against  his  father.   The
    judge did not accept the account relating to the appellant's father and
    did not believe that he is required to  report  or  sign  on  with  the
    authorities as the appellant claims.

16.  As to the scarring of  the  appellant  the  judge  said  he  had  taken
    account of the medical report in assessing credibility.   Having  found
    that the appellant is not to be treated as  a  credible  individual  in
    relation to any substantive aspect of his claim, he did not  find  that
    in the circumstances any scarring which  the  appellant  had  is  as  a
    result of torture or  other  ill-treatment  meted  up  on  him  by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.  He said there are many reasons why  ordinary
    individuals  in  different  countries   have   scars   and   in   these
    circumstances he did not accept them to be evidence of torture.

17.  Having heard submissions from both parties, I find that the  judge  did
    not err in law for the reasons suggested by Counsel.  I do  not  accept
    the  argument  that  the  judge  used  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 as his starting point
    for his credibility findings.  As the judge  rightly  said  credibility
    was  key  in  this  appeal.  The  judge  considered   the   appellant's
    immigration history as he was  entitled  to  do.   He  found  that  the
    appellant had many opportunities since his arrival in this  country  in
    July 2009 to claim asylum but did not do so until four years later when
    he was apprehended for working illegally.  I find that  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider the appellant's behaviour since his arrival in the
    UK in his assessment of the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim  to
    have been the victim of persecution in Sri Lanka.  The judge's  finding
    that his behaviour in the four years prior to claiming asylum seriously
    damaged his credibility to be in fear of his  life  in  Sri  Lanka  was
    properly open to him on the evidence and did not amount to an error  of
    law.

18.  The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  has  scarring  and  that  was
    confirmed in the medical report.  Nevertheless, credibility is a matter
    for the judge and since the judge did not find the appellant's claim to
    be genuine, he did not err in law in finding that the scars were not as
    a result of  torture  or  other  ill-treatment  meted  on  him  by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.  I find that the judge's finding discloses no
    error of law.

19.  I find that it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  reject  the  appellant's
    explanation as to why his father has not been able to communicate  with
    him in order to support his claim.

20.  I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  on  the  evidence  is  perfectly
    sustainable and does not disclose an error of law.

21.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

