
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00469/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th August 2015                  |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     S O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms S Khan, counsel, instructed by Howells
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted the appellant permission to  appeal
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dearden  who  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal under s83(2) Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002") against a decision rejecting her asylum  claim  made
    on 22nd December 2012.

    Background

 2. The appellant, a Nigerian citizen date  of  birth  17th  October  1978,
    arrived in the UK in April 2004 with her son born  1st  March  2003  in
    Nigeria, travelling on a false passport. She gave birth to a second son
    on 30th March 2005 in the UK.  The  father  of  the  second  child  was
    removed to Nigeria sometime in 2009. The appellant  claimed  asylum  on
    28th September 2012, the claim being refused for reasons set out  in  a
    letter dated 22nd December 2012. An appeal on international  protection
    grounds under S83 NIAA 2002 against the decision  dated  22nd  December
    2012 was heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  K  Henderson
    in a decision promulgated on 29th April 2013.

 3. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bird on 23rd May 2013 and by a determination dated 15th July 2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane and Mr C M G Ockelton Vice President  found
    an error of law and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    re-hearing.

 4. By a determination dated 29th October 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge  L
    Mensah  dismissed  the  appeal  brought  on  international   protection
    grounds. Permission to appeal the decision was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan on 22nd January 2014 and by a determination dated
    27th May 2014 UTJ D E Taylor found an error of law and, yet again,  the
    appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

 5. The error of law on both of these occasions was, essentially, a failure
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to engage with the expert reports  and
    specifically in connection with the appellant's claim that she had been
    trafficked. Both First-tier Tribunal Judges were women and there was no
    complaint about any unfairness in the hearing process.

 6. By letter dated 18th August 2014 the appellant's solicitors requested a
    Yoruba interpreter and an 'all female' court - as had  previously  been
    the case in the earlier hearings. That request was refused. Two further
    applications were similarly refused. The application for an all  female
    Court was renewed orally before First-tier Tribunal Judge Dearden  -  a
    male judge. That application was refused and Judge Dearden proceeded to
    hear and dismiss the appeal.

    Error of Law

 7. In his decision Judge Dearden stated

         "[20] I note that this matter has been on going since the Secretary
         of State's decision on 22nd December 2012 and if  I  adjourned  the
         case further delay would have resulted. I told the appellant that I
         had heard in my  twenty  year  judicial  career  many  cases  which
         involved trafficking, FGM, rape or sexual abuse of various sorts. I
         told her that there was nothing that she could tell me which  would
         shock me.  I  considered  the  representations  made  but  did  not
         conclude that it was right and proper in the interests  of  justice
         and in accordance with Rules 4 and 21 of the Asylum and Immigration
         Tribunal (procedure) Rules 2005 to  adjourn  the  case  to  another
         day....In all the circumstances I did not accept that the Appellant
         was a vulnerable person bearing in mind that her evidence was  that
         having been raped she subsequently formed a relationship  with  the
         rapist, gave birth to his second child, and lived with  him  for  a
         period of approximately five years.

         .....

         [41(2)] I specifically point out here that I  have  not  reached  a
         decision on the appellant's credibility and then looked to  see  if
         the experts alter that view. I confirm that I have  considered  all
         the evidence together in the round."

 8. Permission to appeal was also sought on the grounds that Judge  Dearden
    had failed to keep in mind that the appellant was a vulnerable  witness
    throughout her evidence; had failed to understand the  issues  involved
    in trafficking and in particular his statement

         "I do not agree with the remark made by Ms Khan that even one day's
         detention and servitude would meet the minimum  level  of  severity
         sufficient to amount to trafficking and therefore persecution"

    showed a 'shocking lack of awareness. The appellant also relied upon an
    incomplete recording of Ms Stepnitz' report stating that she had said

         "...  for  my  purposes  these  credibility  issues   are   largely
         immaterial to determining whether or not Ms [O] was trafficked  and
         exploited within the UK"

    whereas the report had stated

         "... It is important to note that  while  I  understand  there  are
         credibility concerns raised about Ms [O]'s  experiences  after  her
         escape from the  trafficking  experience.  For  my  purposes  these
         credibility issues are largely immaterial to determining whether or
         not Ms O was  trafficked  into  and  exploited  within  the  United
         Kingdom."

    The appellant relies upon an asserted failure  on  the  part  of  Judge
    Dearden to engage with the expert report; in particular  a  failure  to
    understand what exploitation within a trafficking context  is;  failure
    to understand that intended exploitation  is  sufficient  to  meet  the
    definition of trafficking; a failure to appreciate  that  the  research
    relied upon  by  the  expert  relates  to  internationally  established
    methods of identifying trafficking victims and a failure to  understand
    that the expert's conclusions that  the  appellant's  account  met  the
    internationally established indicators of  trafficking.  The  appellant
    also relied upon the evidence that  although  the  Competent  Authority
    final decision was negative, that decision was reached on a balance  of
    probabilities and not the lower  standard  as  to  be  applied  in  the
    appellant's appeal context.

 9. Judge Kelly, at the very first case management hearing had said that an
    all-female court should be arranged if possible.

10. Although it is not for an appellant or respondent  to  dictate  to  the
    Tribunal the constitution of the judge or judges hearing an appeal,  it
    is incumbent upon the judge who hears the appeal  to  consider  such  a
    request within its proper context. It may well be  that  Judge  Dearden
    has heard many cases and  there  is  nothing  that  could  be  said  in
    evidence that would shock him but that is not the issue; the  issue  is
    whether an appellant would be significantly hampered or intimidated  in
    given  evidence  because  of  his  or  her  particular   and   personal
    characteristics. There is nothing in the determination to indicate that
    Judge Dearden considered this.  Furthermore  the  conclusion  of  Judge
    Dearden in refusing the adjournment that he did not find her account of
    being raped credible was a conclusion that should not have been reached
    without consideration of all of the evidence. His conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not a vulnerable witness prior to  consideration  of  the
    evidence  and  without  any  indication  that  he  had  considered  the
    Vulnerable Witness Guidance could very well have tainted not  only  the
    conduct of the hearing but also his assessment of  the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account.

11. On this basis we are satisfied that there is an error of law such  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside to be remade.
    We are satisfied that there has been  a  fundamental  lack  of  a  fair
    hearing and thus the appeal is remitted to the First  tier  to  be  re-
    heard de novo.

12. We are entirely satisfied that proper consideration  should  have  been
    given to this appellant having an all-female  court  and  that  it  was
    entirely proper that this be the  constitution  of  the  Tribunal  that
    heard her appeal. This is reinforced  by  Ms  Khan's  observation  made
    before us that the appellant herself, despite advice  to  the  contrary
    from her representatives, had said she wanted  an  all-female  Tribunal
    and that without that she was not  able  to  provide  her  evidence  as
    cogently and fully as she wished.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard de  novo  by
    the First tier Tribunal.

    The determination of Judge Dearden is set aside in its entirety,  other
    than as a record of the evidence given, and no findings of fact are  to
    be preserved.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    We consider it appropriate in the circumstances of this case for  there
    to be an order under rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.


[pic]
     Date 18th August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
