
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00551/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 9 April 2013                                 |On 4 June 2013             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                sharon banda

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sharon Banda, was born on  16  October  1989  and  is  a
    female citizen of Zimbabwe.  The appellant had appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Fisher) against a decision of the respondent dated
    30 December 2011 to remove her  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,
    having refused her claim for asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed
    the appellant's appeal in a determination which is  dated  28  February
    2012.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The appellant was  not  represented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor did she have  a  legal  representative  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I was careful to explain the procedures of the  Tribunal  to
    the appellant and to give her every opportunity to put her case to  me.
    The appellant addressed the Tribunal with the assistance of an  Ndebele
    interpreter.

 2. Granting permission, Judge J F W Phillips found that the grounds raised
    by the appellant in her application have no merit.  However, the  judge
    went on to say at [4]:

         "However, whereas it was not mentioned  in  the  grounds  there  is
         arguably a Robinson obvious error of law in the determination.  The
         determination makes no mention at all of Article 8 ECHR it is clear
         that this appellant, who was unrepresented at the  hearing,  raised
         Article 8 in her grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         Whether or not her claim  in  this  respect  stood  any  chance  of
         success it is arguable that it was incumbent upon the judge  to  at
         least consider it and make a finding and that his failure to do  so
         was an arguable error of law.   Permission  to  appeal  is  granted
         restricted to Article 8 ECHR."

 3. The respondent filed a reply on 25 April 2012:

         "The judge has failed to consider Article 8 and this is  an  error.
         However it is not accepted that this is an error which affects  the
         substance of the decision as it is  not  accepted  the  appellant's
         private life in  the  UK  which  would  only  be  established  from
         December 2010 [she arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  15  December
         2010] could be found by any judge to  be  such  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove her.  It is for the appellant  to  prove
         her case and there is no indication in the  determination  that  at
         the hearing the appellant gave any evidence of  private  life  that
         could have led to a positive outcome for her if it was considered."

 4. It is common ground, therefore,  that  (i)  the  appellant  had  raised
    Article 8 ECHR in her grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    (ii) Judge Fisher failed to make any mention of Article 8 ECHR  in  his
    determination.  In her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant
    had written "It applies to me [i.e. the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights] Article 8 ... says everyone has the right to  respect  for  his
    family life.  Although I have only been in the UK for  over  a  year  I
    have established a peaceful life where I can  enjoy  democracy  in  the
    freedom without fear of persecution."

    The appellant told me that she has a friend in the United  Kingdom  but
    no relatives living here.  When she arrived  in  2010,  she  had  lived
    first in Blackheath  and  then  Southampton,  moving  to  Sheffield  in
    December 2011.  She attends a local church there.

 5. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  The  terms  in  which  the
    appellant set out her Article 8 ECHR appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    are barely intelligible.  She refers to family life yet has had and now
    has no family living in the United Kingdom.  It is also unclear in what
    way Article 8  ECHR  might  be  employed  to  protect  the  appellant's
    "peaceful life" or her enjoyment of "democracy and freedom without fear
    of persecution."  The appellant has moved home several times since  she
    first came to the United Kingdom and I  have  no  doubt  that  she  has
    sought to establish friendships and other contacts in her current  home
    area of Sheffield.  I accept also that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    penalised for failing to raise Article 8 ECHR  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Fisher  given  that  she  was  unrepresented  on  that  occasion.
    However, this is a case in which  there  is  nothing  whatever  in  the
    evidence to  indicate  that  this  appellant  has  sufficiently  strong
    private life ties to the United Kingdom to  engage  the  protection  of
    Article 8 ECHR at all.  Indeed, if  Judge  Fisher  had  considered  and
    dismissed Article 8 in the course of a few short sentences,  I  do  not
    considerate likely that  permission would have been granted  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  It is not arguable that Judge Fisher would have
    concluded that the appellant's Article 8 ECHR  appeal  should  succeed.
    The judge erred in law in not dealing with all the  grounds  of  appeal
    submitted by the appellant but it is an error of law  that  should  not
    result in his determination being set aside.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 9 May 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

