
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00337/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 18 November 2014          |
|and 16 October 2014                           |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          MRS Serah Eligadel Ejeku
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Okoro, Solicitor (3/7/2014)
     Mr Holt, Counsel, instructed by Arndale solicitors (16/10/14)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  D  Birrell  promulgated  on  7  March  2014,
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent which  was
    made on 7 January 2014 to remove her from the United  Kingdom  pursuant
    to a decision to refuse to grant her asylum.



The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant married her first husband in 2003 and on 15 November 2004
    they had a daughter.  She suffered serious abuse from  him.   She  left
    him in November 2006 leaving her daughter with a friend in Abuja whilst
    she returned to her mother's house in Lagos and continued to work.  She
    travelled abroad  regularly  buying  goods  to  sell  in  Nigeria  last
    entering the United Kingdom in March and April 2009.   She  obtained  a
    false Portuguese passport and began to work in that identity  but  this
    was discovered and she was sentenced to four months' imprisonment.

 3. In August 2011 she became pregnant with her son  who  was  subsequently
    born on 31 May 2012.  It is her case that the child's father is Mustafa
    Otuyo, who is a married man and a British citizen.

 4. The appellant believes  that  if  returned  to  Nigeria  she  would  be
    sacrificed by her former husband in accordance  with  Nigerian  custom.
    It is also her case that her son is  a  British  citizen  and  as  such
    cannot be removed from the  United  Kingdom;  and  that  therefore  she
    should be allowed leave to remain here to care for him.

The Respondent's Case

 5. The respondent's case is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  31
    December 2013.  She did not accept the appellant's account  of  fearing
    her ex-husband given the inconsistencies in her account  and  with  her
    previous visa applications [15] and noted that the  appellant  appeared
    to have no problems with her husband since 2006 and had left Nigeria in
    2009 during which time she was able to travel abroad,  support  herself
    and her daughter and to continue her  education,  indicating  that  her
    husband was not a threat [17]; she was unable to give  any  information
    about her husband's family  or  even  his  job.   The  respondent  drew
    inferences adverse to the appellant for her  failure  to  claim  asylum
    until after she was arrested in 2011 and faced  with  removal  choosing
    instead of her claiming asylum to live and work illegally.

 6. The respondent considered that even if  the  appellant's  account  were
    true, her fear on return was speculative, did not engage the Convention
    and that there was in place in Nigeria a sufficiency of protection  for
    her or that in the alternative it would be unduly harsh to  expect  her
    to relocate to an area where she would not be at risk from her husband.

 7. The respondent noted that the appellant had when interviewed named  two
    men as the possible fathers of her child,  neither  of  which  was  the
    father named on the birth certificate and absent any other evidence was
    not satisfied that the  child's  father  is  a  British  citizen;  and,
    believing the child to be  a  Nigerian  national  considered  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM   EX.  1.   She
    considered also that the appellant did not meet the  current  paragraph
    276ADE and the child's best interests were to go to  Nigeria  with  her
    given his age and the fact that the appellant had extended family there
    including her mother, grandmother and daughter.  She noted  that  there
    was no evidence that the child had  any  contact  with  the  biological
    father or other  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  thus  his  best
    interests would be served by him going to Nigeria.

The Hearing

 8. When the matter came before Judge  Birrell  on  28  February  2014  the
    appellant was unrepresented.  Judge Birrell  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant as well as Mr Otuyo.  The judge found the appellant to  be  a
    vague, evasive an unconvincing witness by key features of her case [40]
    noting numerous discrepancies in her account.  She also considered that
    Mr Otuyo was not a persuasive or credible witness [52] noting  that  he
    had difficulty even in identifying how many children he has  and  being
    unable to explain why if he had registered the birth, his name appeared
    differently in two places on  the  birth  certificate.   Judge  Birrell
    found;

      i) that the appellant had  had  no  contact  from  her  husband  since
         separation in 2006 and that there is nothing to suggest that he had
         the means and motivation to look for her if she returned  [43]  and
         her claim to be a risk from him was pure speculation;

     ii) that she did not accept that the appellant had lost touch with  her
         child in Nigeria; that the timing of her application for asylum was
         a cynical ploy to extend her stay [45D] that she had  not  met  the
         evidential burden to establish that Mr Otuyo was the father of  the
         child [49] given the significant  number  of  discrepancies  noting
         that when interviewed she had named two men  as  potential  fathers
         neither of whom was Mr Otuyo [50] that her explanation for this was
         not logical [51] and inconsistent

    iii) the appellant's  interest  was  only  in  identifying  the  British
         citizen's father of the child [53];

     iv) as she had rejected the child's link with Mr Otuyo,  he  could  not
         benefit from EX.1[54];

      v) that the appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  or
         paragraph 276ADE [55]; and that it would be  in  the  child's  best
         interests to return to Nigeria with his mother where she  could  be
         reunited with  her  daughter  there  being  nothing  to  suggest  a
         Nigerian upbringing would be contrary to the child's best interests
         [58].

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the judge's conclusion that the appellant's child is not a  British
         citizen was perverse given that he had been genuinely issued with a
         British passport which is not in dispute and the conclusion to  the
         contrary was only a suspicion that the claimed father might not  be
         the biological father, both parents having  confirmed  the  child's
         parentage;

     ii) accordingly the judge had failed properly to apply  paragraph  EX.1
         of Appendix FM;

    iii) that it was the respondent, who had alleged that the child was  not
         a British citizen, to prove this and  had  failed  to  do  so,  the
         judge's conclusion to the contrary being incorrect;

     iv) that in  light  of  the  Immigration  Directive  Instructions  with
         respect to EX.1 that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant a parent of a British child to leave the United  Kingdom.



10. On 20  March  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  granted  permission
    stating:-

       "3.    I do not accept that the  judge  can  be  criticised  for  the
           numerous adverse  credibility  findings  on  the  basis  of  the
           evidence before  her,  which  was  clearly  woefully  vague  and
           contradictory I am persuaded that the judge might have erred  in
           failing to assess the appellant's case on  the  basis  that  her
           child has a British passport.  It may well be that in this  case
           possession of the passport is not an indication  of  nationality
           given the other difficulties but it is a matter  which  findings
           need to be made."

Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?

11. Judge Birrell approached the issue of the child's  citizenship  on  the
    basis that it was for the appellant to prove that  the  father  of  the
    child was Mr Otuyo [43] and that he was a British Citizen.

12. It is not in doubt that the appellant's child has been  issued  with  a
    valid British passport, nor is it disputed that a copy of that passport
    was in the material before Judge Birrell.  She did not,  however,  make
    any reference to it.

13. A British Passport can only have been issued because the  Secretary  of
    State was satisfied that the  appellant  is  the  child  of  a  British
    citizen and been born in the United Kingdom, and it follows  from  this
    that the child's birth certificate had  been  accepted  by  the  proper
    authorities as being correct.   They  would  also  have  to  have  been
    satisfied as to the father's nationality.

14. While a British Passport is not conclusive evidence of citizenship,  it
    is strongly persuasive - see R v SSHD ex part Obi [1997]  1  WLR  1498.
    Here, no issue was taken with the assertion that the appellant's  child
    is the person to whom the passport was issued, and  Judge  Birrell  did
    not consider the passport in reaching her decision. That was a  failure
    to consider relevant evidence.

15. In reality, the respondent's case before Judeg Birrell  would  have  to
    have been that the child's British Passport has been obtained by fraud,
    either in relation to information supplied to the Registrar of  Births,
    or to the Passport Agency, or  both.    The  burden  was  thus  on  the
    respondent to show that the child is not a  British  Citizen.     Judge
    Birrell, however, approached this issue on the basis that  it  was  for
    the appellant to prove that  her  child  is  a  British  Citizen,  thus
    reversing the correct burden of proof. In doing so, she also failed  to
    take into account the fact that a British Passport had been  issued  to
    the child.

16. There appears to have been no positive  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    respondent in support of the  assertion  that  the  passport  had  been
    fraudulently obtained.  Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding that the appellant's son was not a British citizen.

17. I am satisfied that this error was material because although  she  went
    on to consider  pursuant  to  Appendix  FM-EX.1  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to relocate to  Nigeria,  that  analysis
    was undertaken on the basis that the child was not  a  British  citizen
    which is a relevant and material issue.

18. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the determination of Judge Birrell did
    involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside insofar as  it
    relates to the findings  regarding  the  child's  nationality  and  the
    applicability of Appendix FM EX.1.

Remaking the decision

19. When the appeal reconvened on 16 October 2014, I raised  the  issue  of
    both parties to address me on the fact that it appears that this  is  a
    case which, following the decision of the European Court of Justice  in
    Zambrano [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09  it  may  well  be  difficult  for  the
    respondent to argue that it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to go to live in Nigeria with his mother.  Mr  Holt  did  not  seek  to
    persuade me that the grounds of appeal should be amended to include the
    submission that the appellant is entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of
    residence pursuant to Regulation 15A (4A) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 but both parties acknowledged that  the
    decision in Zambrano  must  be  taken  into  account  in  remaking  the
    decision.

20. It was common ground that the sole issue in this case  is  whether  the
    appellant falls within the provisions of EX.1; it  is  not  in  dispute
    that the other provisions of the immigration rules are met.

21. Mr Harrison accepted that he was not  in  a  position  to  provide  any
    evidence to show that although Mrs Ejeku's  child  had  been  issued  a
    British passport, this had been obtained by  fraud  nor  is  there  any
    indication that any investigations had been undertaken.  He accepted he
    was not therefore in a position to submit that  the  child  was  not  a
    British citizen, as is confirmed by his passport.

22. It is apparent from Judge Birrell's findings which were sustained  that
    the appellant is the mother of the child.  It is not in doubt that  the
    child lives with her, or that she cares for the child on a day  to  day
    basis. There is little contact between the child and the father who has
    his own family and Mr Harrison made no submission nor did he  point  to
    any evidence indicative of the fact  that  the  appellant  is  not  the
    child's primary carer.  I am satisfied that the father would  not  take
    care of the child, and that if the appellant  were  to  be  removed  to
    Nigeria,  he  would  have  to  go  with  her.    The  issue  under  the
    immigration rules is, therefore, as both parties accepted, whether that
    would be reasonable.

23. The current guidance issued by the respondent in respect of Appendix FM
    provides:

       "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
       family carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case  must
       always be assessed on the basis it would be unreasonable to expect  a
       British citizen child to leave the EU with  that  parent  or  primary
       carer.  In such cases it will usually be appropriate to  grant  leave
       to the parent or primary carer to enable them to  remain  in  the  UK
       with the child provided there is satisfactory evidence of  a  genuine
       and subsisting parental relationship.

       It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where  the
       conduct of the parent and family care gives rise to considerations as
       such were it is to justify separation, the child could otherwise stay
       with another parent or alternative primary care in the UK or the EU."

24. The child is a British citizen. It is not  submitted  by  either  party
    that he has relatives in the United Kingdom  who  could  care  for  him
    other than his mother who, it is accepted is his primary carer.   I  am
    not satisfied in this  case  that  there  is  any  alternative  to  the
    appellant's child being looked after by her and accordingly, I  am  not
    satisfied in the circumstances nor was it submitted by Mr Harrison that
    there was any basis on which the appellant does  not  fall  within  the
    terms of EX.1 and, it appears, she falls  within  the  relevant  policy
    guidance.

25. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above I allow the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside in part.  The decision that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be in  breach  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  is  not
    entitled to Humanitarian Protection and that her removal would  not  be
    contrary to article 3 of the Human Rights Convention is preserved.

 2. I remake the decision that the appellant does not meet the requirements
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and I allow  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.



Signed        Date: 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

