

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number:
AA/00844/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9th  March 2016                     |On 15th April 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the
      Upper  Tribunal  or  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent  (NA)
      and her children.  This direction applies to both the appellant and to
      the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction could  lead
      to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

   2. This is the Upper Tribunal's decision following a resumed  hearing  of
      this appeal consequent upon the decision of the UT  on  16  July  2015
      (UTJs Renton and Smith) to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and to direct that the UT remake the decision.

   3. Although this is, in form, an appeal by the Secretary of State to  the
      UT against a decision of the FtT allowing the appeal, for  convenience
      I will refer to the parties as they appeared before the FtT.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [ ] 1974.   She
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 14  May  2011  with  her  (then)  two
      children.  (The appellant has subsequently had  two  further  children
      (C1 and C2) with a partner in the UK.)   The  appellant  entered  with
      leave as a visitor valid until 11 April 2013.  On 6 December 2011  she
      claimed asylum.  The basis of  her  claim  was  that  she  feared  her
      husband as a result of committing adultery  in  the  UK.   Her  asylum
      claim was refused on 9 January 2012 and a decision made not  to  grant
      her further leave and to curtail her existing leave as a visitor.   An
      appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  FtT   (Judge
      Kanagaratnam) on 7 March  2012  and  subsequently  the  appellant  was
      refused permission to appeal to the UT.

   5. On 9 April 2013, the appellant made a human rights claim relying  upon
      Article 8 of the ECHR and s.55 of the Borders, Citizen and Immigration
      Act 2009 (the "BCI Act 2009").  That application  was  refused  on  20
      January 2014 and a decision  was  made  to  remove  the  appellant  to
      Pakistan by way of directions as an  over-stayer  under  s.10  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

   6.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on   asylum,
      humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  On  17  March  2014
      Judge Prior dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
      appellant sought permission to appeal that decision but  only  to  the
      extent that Judge Prior dismissed her  appeal  under  Article  8.   An
      essential part of that claim then (and now)  was  the  claimed  impact
      upon the health of the appellant's two youngest children born  in  the
      UK if returned to Pakistan - C1 born on 10 July 2012 and C2 born on  1
      November 2013.  Both children have a genetic metabolic disorder  known
      as Congenital Disorder Glycosylation Type 1a ("CDG1a").

   7. On 4 August 2014, the Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Eshun)  concluded  that
      Judge Prior's decision to dismiss the appeal under Article 8  involved
      the making of an error of law.  The appeal was, consequently, remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal.

   8. On remittal, the appeal was heard by Judge B  Lloyd.   On  22  January
      2015, Judge Lloyd allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

   9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  to
      the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the  Judge  had  failed,  firstly
      properly to consider the public interest and factors  set  out  in  s.
      117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act
      2002") and, secondly properly to apply the approach to the  Article  8
      where  the  claim  is  based  upon  the  impact  of  removal  upon  an
      individual's health.

  10. On 4 March 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V A  Osborne)  granted
      the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

  11. On 16 July 2015, the Upper Tribunal (UTJs Renton  and  Smith)  decided
      that the Secretary of State's grounds were made out and so  set  aside
      Judge Lloyd's decision to allow the appeal  under  Article  8  on  the
      basis that he had erred in law in doing so.  The appeal was  adjourned
      in order that the decision under  Article  8  could  be  remade  at  a
      resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

  12. The appeal was eventually listed for a hearing in order to remake  the
      decision before me on 9 March 2016.

The Hearing

  13. At the hearing before me, Mr Ahmed represented the  appellant  and  Mr
      Richards represented the Secretary of State.

  14. In relation to the evidence before me, there was a  bundle  previously
      before the First-tier Tribunal running to  some  349  pages  including
      medical evidence relating to the appellant and C1 and C2 as well as  a
      number of decisions of the higher courts and  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      relation to the proper approach to Art 8 in health cases.

  15. In addition, without objection from Mr Richards, I admitted under rule
      15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
      2008/2698 as amended) a supplementary bundle of documents 9 pages long
      including updated medical evidence.

  16. In addition, I heard brief oral evidence from  the  appellant  herself
      and also from Ms Suzanna  Cross,  a  Specialist  Metabolic  Paediatric
      Nurse working at University Hospitals Bristol where C1 and C2  receive
      treatment.

The Issues and Submissions

  17. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Ahmed made a number of oral submissions
      before me.  He relied exclusively upon  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and
      placed no reliance upon Article 3.

  18. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State  relied  upon  the
      Secretary of State's written submissions dated 13 October  2015  which
      had been prepared for a previous hearing of the Upper Tribunal.

  19. Mr Ahmed focussed his submissions upon the health of C1  and  C2.   He
      relied upon the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her  written
      statement of 15 January 2015 (at pages 1-2 of  the  FtT  bundle).   He
      also placed reliance upon the medical evidence  in  the  supplementary
      bundle together with that of Ms Cross given orally.

  20. He submitted that the evidence was that C1  and  C2  (age  3�  and  2�
      respectively) suffered from an inherited  metabolic  disorder,  CDG1a.
      He invited me to accept the medical evidence  of  Dr  Chronopoulou,  a
      Paediatric Metabolic Consultant at University Hospitals Bristol in his
      report dated 4 March 2016 (at pages 4-5 of the  supplementary  bundle)
      and Dr Pierre also a Paediatric Metabolic Consultant  at  the  Bristol
      Hospital in her report dated  4  March  2016  (at  pages  6-9  of  the
      supplementary   bundle).    That   evidence,   Mr   Ahmed   submitted,
      demonstrated that the  inherited  condition  of  C1  and  C2  required
      specialist care as was provided at the  Bristol  Hospital.   Mr  Ahmed
      emphasised the specialist nature of the care and  management  required
      for the metabolic disorder suffered by C1 and C2 and  reminded  me  of
      the evidence of Ms Cross that there was  a  need  for  more  extensive
      intensive treatment and care given the complications  that  may  arise
      even   for   conditions   which   might   otherwise   be    relatively
      straightforward if the individual  did  not  suffer  from  CDG1a.   He
      relied on the conclusion of the  two  consultants  that  without  this
      level of intensive medical surveillance and management there  was,  in
      the words of Dr  Pierre:   "risk  of  significant  morbidity  or  even
      death".

  21. Mr Ahmed submitted that given the consequences to C1 and C2  of  their
      inherited disorder in the absence of appropriate specialist  care,  it
      would be disproportionate to  remove  them  to  Pakistan.    Mr  Ahmed
      referred me to, and relied upon, the Court of Appeal's decision in  MM
      (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  279  and  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      decision in Akhalu (Health Claim: ECHR Article 8) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT
      00400 (IAC).  He submitted that the availability of  treatment  was  a
      relevant factor in assessing proportionality.  He  accepted  that,  in
      the light of GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 400 that  C1
      and C2's medical condition was not a 'trump card'.  He invited  me  to
      take into account that the appellant had previously  had  difficulties
      in caring for the children and that there  had  been  social  services
      intervention.  He accepted that I should apply the factors set out  in
      s.117B of the NIA Act 2002, but, he submitted, it must be contrary  to
      the public interest to return C1 and C2 to Pakistan where  they  would
      have no treatment.

  22. Mr Ahmed relied  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  R  (SQ)
      (Pakistan) and Another v UTIAC and Another [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 where,
      in a case concerned with Article 8 and a health claim by a child,  the
      Court of Appeal had remitted the case to the Upper Tribunal where  the
      needed medical treatment had been available albeit that access  to  it
      was not without some difficulty.  Mr Ahmed also pointed  out  that  in
      that case the children had come  to  the  UK  with  health  conditions
      whilst in the current appeal C1 and C2 had been born in  the  UK.   He
      submitted that C1 and C2 should  not  be  blamed  for  their  parent's
      action in coming to the UK and remaining without lawful status.

  23. Mr Ahmed submitted in conclusion that this was one of the few or  rare
      cases where the public interest was outweighed by the impact upon  the
      health of C1 and C2 of return to their own country and amounted  to  a
      breach of Article 8.

  24. In the respondent's written submissions,  adopted  whole-scale  by  Mr
      Richards as the Secretary of State's submissions, it is accepted  that
      C1 and C2 suffer from an incurable genetic disorder, namely CDG1a  and
      that this involves regular medical care and assistance for the rest of
      their lives.  Further, it is accepted that C1 and C2 are in receipt of
      medication and various treatments through care provided  in  the  NHS.
      It is accepted that the prognosis for both children requires  constant
      help and support for life or for the foreseeable future.  Whilst it is
      not expressly conceded that the required level of  medical  assistance
      and care in Pakistan is not available, Mr Richards  did  not  seek  to
      argue that medical care of the type  and  intensity  required  for  C1
      andC2's condition in the UK was available in Pakistan.

  25. The Secretary of State acknowledges that the appellant does  not  seek
      to rely on  Article  3  and  that,  therefore,  the  'high  threshold'
      required in a health case to succeed under Article 3  is  accepted  as
      not met by the appellant.   Likewise, it is  not  suggested  that  the
      appellant can meet any of the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

  26. The Secretary of State submits that the best interests of all four  of
      the appellant's children are to remain with their mother.

  27. As regards  Article  8,  the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the
      appellant has no family or private  life  in  the  UK.   Further,  her
      relationship and the birth of her children occurred  when  her  asylum
      claim had failed and she had no leave to remain.  It is submitted that
      "the facts reveal no engagement of Article 8".

  28. In respect of proportionality, the Secretary of State submits that the
      public interest outweighs the interests of the  family,  including  C1
      and C2.  It is submitted that the appellant  have  family  members  in
      Pakistan who could assist and support her and the two children.  It is
      submitted that the public interest is readily identified in  the  fact
      that neither the appellant nor her children have leave to remain.  The
      family are reliant on benefits for their  support  including  suitable
      present and future reliance on NHS treatment required by C1 and C2.

  29. The respondent cites the case law in MM, GS and  Others,  and  Akhalu.
      The Secretary of State submits that given that  the  family  would  be
      returned to Pakistan together Article 8 family life is not engaged for
      the  purposes  of  a  proportionality  exercise.    As   regards   the
      appellant's private life she has only been  in  the  UK  pursuing  her
      claim for asylum which, has been rejected, and the  relationship  that
      she entered into was forged at a time when neither parties  had  leave
      to remain in the UK and she has shown little evidence of private  life
      outside that of the pursuit of her claim to remain in the UK.  On  the
      basis of the case  law,  the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the
      appellant cannot succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.



The Legal Framework

  30. The appellant relies exclusively upon Article  8  of  the  ECHR  which
      provides as follows:

           "Article 8

           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
              life, his home and his correspondence.

           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
              exercise of this right except such as in accordance with  the
              law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests
              of national security, public  safety  or  the  economic  well
              being of the country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or
              crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or  for  the
              protection of the rights and freedoms of others"

  31. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish that there  are
      substantial grounds for believing that if returned to  Pakistan  there
      is a real risk of a breach of Article  8.   The  burden  is  upon  the
      Secretary of State to justify any interference  with  the  appellant's
      right to respect for her private and family life under Article 8.2.

  32. In applying Article 8, the five stage test set out in the  opinion  of
      Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKUT 27  at  [17]
      is as follows:

        "(1)     Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
              authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
              respect for his private or (as the case maybe) family life?

           2) If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
              gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

           3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

           4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
              in the interests of national security, public safety  or  the
              economic well-being of the country,  for  the  prevention  of
              disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or
              for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

           5) If so, is such interference proportionate to  the  legitimate
              public end sought to be achieved?"

  33. At [20], as regards the issue of proportionality,  Lord  Bingham  said
      this:

        "[it] always involves(s) the striking of a fair balance between the
        rights of the individual and the interests of the  community  which
        is inherent in the whole  of  the  Convention.   The  severity  and
        consequences of the interference will call for a careful assessment
        at this stage. "

  34. In this appeal, the appellant does not  argue  that  she  can  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules.  As a  consequence,  the  appellant  must
      establish that there are  "compelling"  circumstances  such  that  her
      removal would be disproportionate (see Khalid and Singh v SSHD  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 74).

  35. In determining whether there is a breach of Article 8 in this  appeal,
      by virtue of s.117A(2) I must have regard to the factors  set  out  in
      s.117B of the  NIA  Act  2002  in  determining  the  "public  interest
      question", i.e proportionality, under Art 8.2:

        "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
        cases

           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
           public interest.

           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (4) Little weight should be given to-

                 (a) a private life, or

                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  that
                 is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
                 the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.

           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

  36. Further, I must have regard not only to the rights  of  the  appellant
      but also the rights of the appellant's children, particularly  C1  and
      C2 (see Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).

  37. In that regard the 'best interests'  of  C1  and  C2  are  a  "primary
      consideration" (see ZN (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4).  Although  a
      primary  consideration,,  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  not
      necessarily determinative of the issue of proportionality since  those
      interests  can  be  outweighed  by  sufficiently  strong  or   weighty
      considerations of the public interest

  38. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74, the  Supreme  Court  summarised  the
      applicable principles as follows (at [10]):

        "(1)     The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
              proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a child must
              be a primary consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
              primary consideration; and the child's best interests do  not
              of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

           3) Although the best interests of a child can be  outweighed  by
              the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
              consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           4) While different judges might approach  the  question  of  the
              best interests of a child in different ways, it is  important
              to ask oneself the right questions in an  orderly  manner  in
              order to avoid the risk that the best interests  of  a  child
              might be undervalued when other important considerations were
              in play;

           5)  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a   child's
              circumstances and of what is  in  a  child's  best  interests
              before  one  asks  oneself  whether   those   interests   are
              outweighed by the force of other considerations;

           6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful  examination
              of all relevant factors when the interests  of  a  child  are
              involved in an article 8 assessment; and

           7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is
              not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent".

  39. It is not contended by  the  appellant  that  she  can  succeed  under
      Article 3 of the ECHR in this appeal on the basis of the jurisprudence
      dealing with Article 3 claims in  'health'  cases.   Those  are  cases
      where the whole or an integral  part,  of  an  individual's  claim  to
      remain in the UK  is  that  they  will  receive  (substantially)  less
      favourable health care or medical treatment in the  country  to  which
      they will be returned.  Both the case law of the Strasbourg Court  and
      of the domestic courts imposes a "very high" hurdle,  attainable  only
      in wholly exceptional circumstances in such cases (see D v  UK  (1997)
      24 EHRR 423; N v SSHD [2004] 2 AC 296 and N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 39).

  40. In MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279, Moses LJ  identified  the
      essential principle from the case law as follows at [17]:

        "The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not  impose  any
        obligations on the contracting states to provide  those  liable  to
        deportation  with  medical  treatment  lacking   in   their   'home
        countries'.  This principle applies even where the consequence will
        be that the deportee's life will be significantly shortened...."

  41. The case law,  nevertheless,  recognises  that  a  'health'  case  may
      succeed under Article 8 even where it would fail under  Article  3  of
      the ECHR (see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10 at [46]).  The  potential
      health consequences for an individual would engage that aspect of  his
      or her private life  covered  by  the  rubric  of  "the  physical  and
      psychological integrity of [the] person" (see Pretty v  UK  (2002)  35
      EHRR 1 at [61]).

  42. In Razgar, Baroness Hale considered the application of  Article  8  in
      'health' cases.  Having referred to Bensaid at  [56],  at  [459]  Lady
      Hale noted that:

        "Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it  is  not  easy  to
        think of a foreign healthcare case which would fail under Art 3 but
        succeed under Art 8.  There clearly must be a  strong  case  before
        the article is even engaged and then a fair balance must be  struck
        under Art 8(2).  In striking that balance, only the most compelling
        humanitarian  considerations  are  likely  to  prevail   over   the
        legitimate aims of  immigration  control  or  public  safety.   The
        expelling state is required to assess the strength  of  the  threat
        and strike that  balance.   It  is  not  required  to  compare  the
        adequacies of the healthcare available in the two  countries.   The
        question is whether removal to the  foreign  country  will  have  a
        sufficiently adverse affect upon the applicant."

  43. In these cases, whilst the  potential  application  of  Article  8  is
      recognised, nevertheless the courts acknowledge  that  in  a  'health'
      case it will be difficult nevertheless  to  succeed  under  Article  8
      either because of the significant threshold to engage Article 8 or, if
      it is engaged, for the circumstances of the individual to be  such  as
      to outweigh the public interest.

  44. In Akhalu, the Upper Tribunal, having analysed the relevant  case  law
      including Bensaid, MM (Zimbabwe), and GS and EO in the Upper Tribunal,
      concluded at [43]:

        "The correct approach is not to leave out of account  what  is,  by
        any view, a material consideration of  central  importance  to  the
        individual concerned but  to  recognise  that  the  counter-veiling
        public interest in removal will outweigh the consequences with  the
        health of  the  claimant  because  of  a  disparity  of  healthcare
        facilities in all but a very few cases."

  45.  In  Akhalu  the  Upper  Tribunal  endorsed  a  holistic  approach  to
      proportionality such that regard may be  taken  of  the  disparity  in
      health resources but concluded that any such disparity did "not  weigh
      heavily" in an individual's  favour  but  rather  spoke  "cogently  in
      support of the public interest in removal" (see [45]-[46]).

  46. In GS and Others, the Court of Appeal returned to the question of  the
      scope for reliance upon Article 8 in 'health' cases.  In his judgment,
      Laws LJ acknowledged the limited prospect of success under Article  8,
      when an Article 3 claim fails, because of the "no obligation to treat"
      principle recognised in  the  authorities.   At  [86]-[87],   Laws  LJ
      referring to the earlier decision in MM, said this:

           "86.  If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does
                 here), Article 8 cannot prosper without  some  separate  or
                 additional factual element which brings the case within the
                 Article 8  paradigm  -  the  capacity  to  form  and  enjoy
                 relationships - or a state of affairs having some  affinity
                 with the paradigm.  That approach was, as it seems  to  me,
                 applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ and the  Master
                 of the Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA  Civ  279
                 at paragraph 23:

                    "The only cases I  can  foresee  where  the  absence  of
                    adequate medical treatment in the  country  to  which  a
                    person is to be deported will be relevant to Article  8,
                    is where it is an additional factor to be weighed in the
                    balance, with other factors which by  themselves  engage
                    Article 8.  Suppose, in this  case,  the  appellant  had
                    established firm family ties in this country,  then  the
                    availability  of  continuing  medical  treatment   here,
                    coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
                    support, together establish 'private life' under Article
                    8.  That  conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison
                    between medical facilities here and those  in  Zimbabwe.
                    Such a finding would not offend the principle  expressed
                    above that the United Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention
                    obligation to provide medical treatment here when it  is
                    not available in the country to which the  appellant  is
                    to be deported."

          87. With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right.  It
              means that a specific case has to be made  under  Article  8.
              It is to be noted that MM  (Zimbabwe)  also  shows  that  the
              rigour of the D exception for the purpose  of  Article  3  in
              such cases as these applies with no less force when the claim
              is put under Article 8:

                 "17.  The essential principle is that  the  ECHR  does  not
                     impose any obligation on  the  contracting  states  to
                     provide  those  liable  to  deportation  with  medical
                     treatment lacking in  their  "home  countries".   This
                     principle applies even where the consequence  will  be
                     that  the  deportee's  life  will   be   significantly
                     shortened (see Lord Nicholls in  N  v  Home  Secretary
                     [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK  [2008]  47  EHRR
                     885 (paragraph 44)).

                 18.   Although that principle was expressed in those  cases
                     in relation to Article 3, it is a principle which must
                     apply to Article 8.  It makes no sense  to  refuse  to
                     recognise a 'medical care' obligation in  relation  to
                     Article 3,  but  to  acknowledge  it  in  relation  to
                     Article 8."

  47. In his judgment Underhill  LJ  also  dealt  with  Article  8  and  its
      application in 'health' cases.  At [108] with reference to Razgar  and
      Bensaid, Underhill LJ accepted that a decision to remove an individual
      which would prejudice access to medical treatment  "may  in  principle
      engage Article 8" (see also [109]).  Underhill LJ went on to  consider
      how Article 8 could be applied in the light of the "no  obligation  to
      treat" principle.   At [110]-[111] he analysed the case law, including
      the earlier decision in MM, as follows:

           "110. However, that raises the question of how, if article 8  is
                 indeed potentially engaged in cases of this kind,  that  is
                 reconcilable with the principle established in relation  to
                 article 3 that a member state is  under  no  obligation  to
                 permit a person to remain  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
                 medical treatment not available in the country  of  return.
                 In enunciating that principle in N  neither  the  House  of
                 Lords nor the Strasbourg Court  reviewed  its  relationship
                 with the potential engagement of article 8  as  established
                 in Bensaid or Razgar: that is indeed one of the  criticisms
                 made in the judgment of the minority in Strasbourg in  N  -
                 see para. )-126 (pp. 911-2).

            111. It is that  question  which  this  Court  addressed  in  MM
                 (Zimbabwe).  Moses LJ with whom the other  members  of  the
                 Court agreed,  held  that  the  "no  obligation  to  treat"
                 principle must apply equally in the context of  article  8:
                 see paras.  17-18 of his judgment, which Laws LJ  sets  out
                 at para. 89 above.  He then sought to identify what  courts
                 in the United Kingdom have declined to say that  Article  8
                 can never be engaged by the health consequences of  removal
                 from the United Kingdom", referring to Razgar and  also  to
                 AJ (Liberia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                 [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 (another mental health case);  but  he
                 drew attention to statements in both cases emphasising  how
                 exceptional the circumstances would have  to  be  before  a
                 breach were established.  In particular,  he  set  out,  at
                 para. 20, a passage to that effect from the opinion of Lady
                 Hale in Razgar which starts with the observation  that  "it
                 is not easy to think of a foreign health  care  case  which
                 would fail under Article 3 but succeed  under  Article  8".
                 He concluded, at para. 23 with a passage which Laws LJ  has
                 already quoted but which for ease of reference I  will  set
                 out again:

                       "the only cases I can foresee where  the  absence  of
                    adequate medical treatment in the  country  to  which  a
                    person is to be deported will be relevant to Article  8,
                    is where it is an additional factor to be weighed in the
                    balance, with other factors which by  themselves  engage
                    Article 8.  Suppose, in this  case,  the  appellant  had
                    established firm family ties in this country,  then  the
                    availability  of  continuing  medical  treatment   here,
                    coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
                    support, together establish 'private life' under Article
                    8.  That  conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison
                    between medical facilities here and those  in  Zimbabwe.
                    Such a finding would not offend the principle  expressed
                    above that the United Kingdom  is  under  no  Convention
                    obligation to provide medical treatment here when it  is
                    not available in the country to which the  appellant  is
                    to be deported."

                 There are possibly some ambiguities in the details  of  the
                 reasoning in that passage, but I think it is clear that two
                 essential points are being made.   First,  the  absence  or
                 inadequacy  of  medical  treatment,  even   life-preserving
                 treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on at
                 all as a factor engaging article 8: if that  is  all  there
                 is, the claim must fail.   Secondly,  where  article  8  is
                 engaged by other factors, the fact  that  the  claimant  is
                 receiving medical treatment in this country which  may  not
                 be available in the country of return may be  a  factor  in
                 the proportionality exercise; but  that  factor  cannot  be
                 treated as by itself giving rise to  a  breach  since  that
                 would contravene the "no obligation to treat" principle."

  48. At [111], Underhill LJ (with whom Sullivan LJ agreed) identified  that
      a disparity in medical treatment or care could not, in itself,  engage
      Article 8.  However, applying what was said in MM and subsequently  by
      the Upper Tribunal in Akhalu, he  recognised  that  if  other  factors
      engaged Article 8 then the availability of treatment was a  factor  in
      the proportionality exercise but,  importantly,  acknowledged  that  a
      disparity in medical treatment could not in  itself  give  rise  to  a
      breach of Article 8 because of the "no obligation to treat" principle.



  49. Working that approach out at [114], Underhill LJ concluded in relation
      to one of the cases before the Court of Appeal that  the  individual's
      claim under Article 8 based upon interference with private life in the
      UK could not succeed.   Turning  to  the  disparity  in  health  care,
      Underhill LJ concluded:

           "In those circumstances, to strike the Article 8 balance in  his
           favour only because of the consequences for  his  health  if  he
           were treated, however grave, would be in substance to impose  an
           obligation to treat."

  50. Mr Ahmed relied upon the case  of  SQ  (Pakistan)  which  concerned  a
      child.   That  case  concerned  a  child  who   suffered   from   Beta
      Thalassaemia, a very serious genetic condition for which  he  required
      treatment.  The evidence was that, although healthcare  was  available
      in Pakistan, it  was  of  a  significantly  lower  quality  than  that
      available in the UK.  The applicant has failed in his Article 8  claim
      before the First-tier Tribunal and had been refused leave to appeal by
      the Upper Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal was concerned with a judicial
      review challenge (a Cart challenge) to that refusal of  permission  to
      appeal.  The Court of  appeal  concluded  that  the  FtT  had  wrongly
      excluded "health  consideration  and  the  discontinuance  of  the  UK
      treatment" in assessing the child's best interest (see  [24]).   As  a
      consequence, the Court of  Appeal  remitted  the  case  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal for a rehearing.  In doing so,  Maurice  Kay  LJ  (with  whom
      Lewison and Underhill LJJ agreed) said this at [26]-[27]:

           "26.  What  this  case  demonstrates  is  that  in  some  cases,
                 particularly but not only in relation to children,  Article
                 8 may raise issues separate from Article 3.  In  JA  (Ivory
                 Coast) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009
                 EWCA Civ 1353, an adult succeeded under Article 8 (but  not
                 Article 3) in a health  case.   Sedley  LJ  emphasised  (at
                 paragraph 17) that each of the  two  Articles  "has  to  be
                 approached and applied in  its  own  terms".   The  leading
                 authorities of D and N were distinguishable  on  the  basis
                 that,  in  both  of  them,  the  appellants'  presence  and
                 treatment in this country "were owed entirely  to  unlawful
                 entry".  JA's appeal was  allowed  and  her  case  remitted
                 because of the potential significance  of  the  fact  that,
                 following her lawful  entry  and  subsequent  diagnosis  of
                 HIV+, she had been granted  further  exceptional  leave  to
                 remain for treatment.  Although no separate Article 8 issue
                 arose in D or N, it plainly did in JA.

           27.   I do not intend  to  predict  or  seek  to  influence  the
                 outcome of the present case on remittal.  On the one  hand,
                 MQ can prey in aid his lawful entry and  his  status  as  a
                 child with the protection of the ZH approach.  On the other
                 hand, he arrived with his serious medical conditions at  an
                 advance stage and, although not  an  unlawful  entrant,  it
                 will be relevant to consider whether his arrival here was a
                 manifestation of "health tourism".  If it was,  that  would
                 fall to be weighed in the balance.  After all, this country
                 is under no international obligation always to act as  "the
                 hospital of the world".  The difficult question is  whether
                 it would be disproportionate to remove this  child  in  the
                 light of all  the  evidence  in  the  case,  including  the
                 medical evidence which,  at  present,  is  not  as  clearly
                 presented as it could be."

  51. As [27] makes plain, the  Court  of  Appeal,  whilst  recognising  the
      potential application of Article 8 to that applicant, nevertheless was
      not persuaded that the claim was bound either to succeed or to be lost
      (see also [25]).  The matter was properly  to  be  determined  by  the
      Upper Tribunal on the basis of all  the  evidence.   Nevertheless,  SQ
      (Pakistan) illustrates that in a 'health' case,  Article  8  may  have
      (greater) purchase where the applicant is a child.

  52. That approach was followed in the more recent decision of the Court of
      Appeal in AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653.  That case involved
      an individual who had a six year old daughter with spina bifida  which
      resulted in her being very severely  disabled,  with  severe  learning
      difficulties and extremely complex needs (see [1]).  There, also,  the
      Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to the Upper Tribunal to  consider
      the application of Article 8 on the basis that the Upper Tribunal  had
      failed properly to consider  the  child's  best  interests.   At  [9],
      Maurice Kay LJ (with whom Black and Lewison LJJ agreed) said this:

           "What was required was  a  structured  approach  with  the  best
           interests of [M] and her siblings as a primary consideration but
           with careful consideration also of factors  pointing  the  other
           way.  Such factors include but are  not  limited  to  the  over-
           staying of the children and their mother and the  illegal  entry
           and bogus asylum claim of the appellant father.  The  latter  is
           no doubt what the UT had in mind when referring to 'the need  to
           maintain immigration control'.  Moreover, I do not consider that
           it would be inappropriate for the future cost  and  duration  of
           [M's] treatment and care in this country to play a part  in  the
           balancing exercise as matters  relating  to  the  economic  well
           being of this country, given the strains on the public purses."

  53. Again, the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      as the "outcome is not self-evident" (see [9]).

  54. The decisions in SQ and AE represent no more than  an  application  of
      the "best interests" jurisprudence as  summarised  in  Zoumbas  above.
      Whilst the circumstances of a child may (though not must) more readily
      engage Article 8.1,  in  assessing  proportionality  and  taking  into
      account as a "primary consideration" a  child's  best  interests,  the
      public interest remains to be weighed bearing in mind the clear  steer
      of the Strasbourg and domestic courts that, even under Article 8,  the
      public interest reflected in the economic well-being  of  the  country
      remains a powerful and weighty factor in 'health' or 'welfare'  cases.
      As the Court of Appeal in GS and  others  recognised,  the  Convention
      imposes no obligation upon a  contracting  state  to  provide  medical
      treatment or healthcare (including social care  for  the  purposes  of
      this appeal) when it is not available (or not so well provided) in the
      country to which the individual is to be removed and so it  will  only
      be in a "truly exceptional" or "very rare case" where the public  will
      be outweighed  by  the  individual's  circumstances  even  where  that
      individual is a child.

  55. It is noteworthy that in GS and Others Underhill LJ,  having  referred
      to AE (Algeria) and  SQ  (Pakistan)  (in  which  he  was  one  of  the
      constitution of the court), did not consider that the child cases fell
      outside the general approach to 'health' cases under Art 8 (at [109]):



           "The latter two cases concern children, but I do  not  see  that
           that can make any difference in principle."

  56. I now turn to consider the evidence and to make findings  in  relation
      to the legal framework of Article 8.



Discussion and Findings

  57.  I  make  the  following  findings  having  taken  into  account   the
      documentary and other evidence to which I was  referred  and  applying
      the legal principles and framework which I have set out above.

  58. I deal first with the evidence concerning C1  and  C2's  health.   The
      evidence concerning their inherited  metabolic  disorder  was  not  in
      dispute.  The circumstances are helpfully set out in the report of  Dr
      Pierre dated 4 March 2016 (at pages 8-9 of the  supplementary  bundle)
      as follows:

           "C1 DOB 10/07/2012 and C2 DOB 01/11/2013 have an extremely  rare
           inherited  metabolic  disorder  called  Congenital  Disorder  of
           Glycosylation type 1a (CDG1A) or Phosphomannomutase 2 Deficiency
           and are under the care of  the  South  West  Regional  Metabolic
           department.  C1 has been under my care since August 2013 and his
           brother C2 since his birth in November 2013.

           The diagnosis of CDG1a belongs to a  group  of  disorders  where
           there is abnormal linking of sugars on to proteins in  compounds
           in the body called glycoproteins or glycolipids.   Glycoproteins
           and glycolipids are important for  signalling  and  transmitting
           information from one part of the body to another.   Problems  in
           these processes lead to dysfunction in many  organ  systems  and
           patients with CDG1a have multisystem disease which can  lead  to
           serious complications.  Very  few  doctors  have  the  knowledge
           about  this  disorder.  In  England  there  are  six  specialist
           paediatric centres that see about the care of these patients and
           most clinicians are unfamiliar with the disease.  Care  under  a
           specialist team is  needed  to  avoid  complications  which  may
           result in death or significant morbidity.  Specialist  care  for
           CDG1a also includes the multidisciplinary involvement  of  other
           teams  including  renal,  neurology,  cardiology  and  community
           paediatrics.

           C1 already has many problems typically  seen  in  patients  with
           CDG1a including, low muscle tone, developmental delay,  clotting
           problems,  liver  dysfunction,  renal  problems,  squinting  and
           feeding difficulties with poor weight gain.  His brother C2  was
           diagnosed at a few months of age but is likely to  have  similar
           problems.

           Patients  have  specialist  care  in   the   management   and/or
           prevention of the following complications

            . Failure to thrive

            . Stroke like episodes

            . Clotting problems

            . Seizures

            . Life threatening complications during illness

           Failure to thrive.   Patients  have  difficulty  gaining  weight
           which if untreated may lead to malnutrition.   C1  is  currently
           receiving high caloric supplements because of weight loss.  Both
           C1 and  C2's  weight  will  be  closely  regulated.   Persistent
           vomiting  can  develop  requiring  gastroenterology  input.   If
           necessary a  stomach  tube  will  be  inserted  for  nutritional
           support or because swallowing is unsafe.

           Stroke Like Episodes.  The problems with clotting  increase  the
           risk  of  recurrent  strokes  in  these  patients.    Specialist
           management of fluids with  early  supportive  intravenous  fluid
           therapy  and  if  necessary  physiotherapy  prevents   permanent
           dysfunction or death and usually leads  to  full  recovery  over
           days or months.

           Clotting Problems.  Management of the  abnormal  coagulation  is
           also needed for any surgical  procedure  with  collaboration  of
           haematology and surgery.  Infusions of fresh frozen  plasma  may
           be needed to prevent bleeding.  Later patients are  at  risk  of
           deep venous thrombosis so may need anticoagulation.

           Seizures.  Patients may develop seizures  or  epilepsy.   It  is
           very important that they  receive  antiepileptic  medication  to
           manage this.  In a few cases patients may develop such difficult
           to control seizures that a specialist diet called the  ketogenic
           diet is indicated.  This  again  needs  to  be  from  a  trained
           metabolic or trained neurology deititian.

           Life threatening complications during illness.     In particular
           during infancy and early childhood, patients with CDG1a  have  a
           lower physiologic reserve  than  their  peers  and  become  more
           unwell.   This  can  sometimes  lead  to  a  catastrophic  phase
           presenting with  infection,  seizure  or,  hypoalbuminemia  with
           third  spacing.   Aggressive  early  management   with   albumin
           replacement in a specialist hospital is needed.  Early review by
           the specialist team  with  aggressive  management  of  prolonged
           fever, vomiting,  or  diarrhoea  can  help  prevent  the  severe
           illness associated with  this  'infantile  catastrophic  phase".
           Both C1 and C2 have an emergency management plan to be  followed
           if they should  present  to  hospital.   It  also  includes  the
           contact details of the specialist metabolic team to give further
           advice about management."

  59. Dr Pierre concludes her report with a section  headed  "Prognosis"  in
      which she deals with the availability (or  more  accurately,  lack  of
      availability) of the care  required  by  C1  and  C2  in  Pakistan  as
      follows:

           "Prognosis.  As a result of the  complications  that  can  occur
           without specialist knowledge  in  patients  with  CDG1a,  it  is
           important that patients remain  under  specialist  care  all  of
           their life with transition to the adult metabolic services  when
           they are older.   I am very  concerned  that  the  lack  of  the
           availability of this level of intensive medical surveillance and
           specialist management in Pakistan with place C1 and C2  at  risk
           of significant morbidity or even death."

  60. The substance  of  that  report  is  mirrored  in  the  report  of  Dr
      Chronopoulou dated 4 March 2016 (at pages  4-5  of  the  supplementary
      bundle).  In his report Dr Chronopoulou, having set out  C1  and  C2's
      condition and the care required in the UK, states that:

           "This care would not be available to the boys in Pakistan."

  61. Again, later in his report, referring to the specialist care  required
      for their lifetime he states:

           "This specialist care is not available in Pakistan."

  62. In her oral evidence, Ms Cross was asked how the  doctors  were  aware
      that the intensive treatment and continued care required for C1 and C2
      was not available  in  Pakistan.   Her  response  was  that  metabolic
      disorders are rare and that doctors' network on an international scale
      and generally know where teams are.  She said that  in  Pakistan  care
      was definitely not available.  In her evidence she also explained that
      the specialist care by a 'metabolic team' was important because of the
      "greater knowledge of what complications  may  arise"  from  illnesses
      developed by the children.

  63. I also note that there is a witness statement from a caseworker at the
      appellant's  solicitors  dated  7  March  2016  (at  page  1  of   the
      supplementary bundle) which states that she  has  undertaken  research
      over the internet concerning the availability of treatment for CDG  in
      Pakistan and:

           "I was unable to find any treatment that is available for CDG in
           Pakistan".

  64. The medical evidence comes from specialists and experts in their field
      who have dealt with and had the  care  of  C1  and  C2.    I  have  no
      hesitation in accepting it and was not in substance challenged  before
      me.  I accept, therefore, not only the fact that C1  and  C2  have  an
      inherited metabolic disorder known as CDG1a but also that they require
      specialist management and care which  is  not  available  to  them  in
      Pakistan.   They  have  both  experienced   a   variety   of   medical
      difficulties during their short lives which have required treatment by
      a specialised team.  Their need for care is frequent and  regular.   I
      accept that, in its absence, there is a risk of "significant morbidity
      or even death" in the future.

  65. Turning to the appellant's health, she  gave  evidence  that  she  was
      taking medication for depression and that she was visited by  a  woman
      every week or two to provide support.   Mr  Ahmed  referred  me  to  a
      report from Dr Clarke (at pages 3-5 of the FtT bundle) together with a
      number of other  documents  which  indicate  that  the  appellant  has
      suffered mental health problems because of post-natal  depression  and
      received psychiatric support and care.  At one point, a  referral  was
      made to social services and for mental health services  in  July  2012
      (and again in 2013 and 2014) because of the post-natal depression  and
      concern that the appellant was a risk to her children.

  66. Mr Ahmed did not direct my  attention  to  any  up  to  date  evidence
      concerning the appellant's mental health.   There appears to be no up-
      to-date evidence on her mental health contained  in  the  FtT  bundle.
      The supplementary bundle is concerned only with C1 and C2's condition.
       For present purposes, I accept the history I have just described  and
      that the appellant continues to receive  medication  and  support  for
      depression.  There is also some evidence,  but  not  it  would  appear
      formally diagnosed, that the appellant  has  symptoms  "suggestive  of
      PTSD" (see Dr Clark's report at pp3 and 4  of  the  FtT  bundle).   Mr
      Ahmed did not specifically rely upon  the  appellant's  mental  health
      problems, in particular any risk of committing suicide on return, as a
      basis for her claim.

  67. The appellant's psychiatric condition is considered at length  in  the
      decision letter of 20 January 2014 at paras 18-26.  Mr Ahmed  did  not
      suggest that the respondent's decision letter was wrong to  state  (at
      para 22) the position in 2013 (nor did he suggest that it had  changed
      subsequently) as follows:

           "The Home  Office  notes  that  the  latest  Country  of  Origin
           Information  Report  (COIR)  on  Pakistan  (dated  August  2013)
           records that there is treatment  for  mental  health  disorders,
           such as anxiety and depression, and so forth,  as  part  of  the
           primary health care infrastructure; including the  provision  of
           treatment in psychiatric and mental health hospitals."

  68. I see no basis for concluding, particularly given  the  focus  of  the
      appellant's submissions, that there is real risk that she will  commit
      suicide  if  returned  to  Pakistan.    Further,   and   this   stands
      unchallenged by the  appellant,  the  background  evidence  shows  the
      availability of treatments for mental health including  depression  in
      Pakistan.  I do not accept, therefore, that  she  will  be  unable  to
      obtain treatment needed for her own condition.

  69. Turning now to other matters, Mr Ahmed told me about  the  appellant's
      background and a little (but not a great deal) about that of  her  two
      older children.  The appellant has been in the UK since  14  May  2011
      initially with leave as a visitor until 11 April  2013  but  that  was
      curtailed by the decision of 6 January 2012.  Her  leave  consequently
      expired on 8 November 2012 when she became appeal rights exhausted.

  70. The appellant travelled to the UK with her two elder children whom she
      told me, in her oral evidence, were 8 years old and 6 years  old.   In
      the UK she formed a relationship with a Pakistani citizen whom she had
      previously known.  Their children, C1 and C2, were  born  on  10  July
      2012 and 1 November 2013 respectively.  Both have, as I  have  already
      noted, an inherited metabolic disorder,  CDG1a.   Both  children  have
      been in receipt of care and treatment in relation  to  that  condition
      since 2013.

  71. I was not shown (nor am  I  aware  of)  any  evidence  concerning  any
      continuing relationship between the appellant and C1 and  C2's  father
      in the UK.  Certainly in earlier proceedings it was clear that he  and
      the appellant, although they had previously lived together, no  longer
      did so (see para 28 of Judge Lloyd's determination).  The  appellant's
      earlier evidence was that she considered the relationship to  continue
      despite them not living together.  There is also  an  absence  of  any
      current evidence concerning the relationship between  C1  and  C2  and
      their father.  Mr Ahmed did not address  me  on  this  aspect  of  the
      appellant's claim.  Given the earlier evidence, I am content to accept
      that the relationships continue between the appellant, C1 and  C2  and
      their partner/father.

  72. Whilst I accept that the appellant and  her  four  children  (and  her
      partner/their  father)  enjoy  family  life  together,  there  is   no
      suggestion that the children will other than travel with the appellant
      to Pakistan and if he wishes to do so could the father of  C1  and  C2
      given, what I understand to be the position, his lack  of  immigration
      status in the UK. Consequently, the removal of the appellant will  not
      interfere with the family life enjoyed by the family as a whole.

  73. That said, however,  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  established
      private life in the UK during the almost five years of  her  residence
      here despite the fact that  she  has  not  been  here  lawfully  since
      November  2012.   Although  I  was  not  directed  to   any   material
      specifically dealing with the appellant's two older children,  aged  8
      and 6 respectively, Mr Richards did not suggest that they did not have
      private life in the UK and, given their age, they attend school and  I
      am satisfied that they also have private life in the UK which will  be
      interfered with if returned to Pakistan.

  74. C1 and C2 are both very young and their lives are  focussed  on  their
      mother at present.  I was not shown any evidence suggesting  they  had
      any significant private life outside their relationships in the  home.
      However, I further accept, given the absence of treatment for  C1  and
      C2 in Pakistan, that their private life in the UK, taken together with
      the impact upon their health if returned to Pakistan,  amounts  to  an
      interference with their private life.

  75. For these reasons, I am satisfied that Article 8.1 is engaged.

  76. The central issue in this  appeal  is  whether  that  interference  is
      justified under Article 8.2.  There is no doubt that the  interference
      is in accordance with the law and for a  legitimate  aim,  namely  the
      economic well-being of the country or in order to prevent disorder  or
      crime (see Shahzad  (Art  8:  Legitimate  Aim)  Pakistan  [2014]  0085
      (IAC)).  The crucial issue is that of proportionality.

  77. First, Even though the older children have been in the UK for 5 years,
      I accept the respondent's contention that the best  interests  of  all
      four children (ignoring for  present  purposes  the  impact  upon  the
      health of C1 and C2) is to be with the appellant whether she is in the
      UK or, if removed, in Pakistan.  The older children were,  of  course,
      born in Pakistan and are citizens of Pakistan.  It  was  not  advanced
      before me by Mr Ahmed that the older  children  could  not  obtain  an
      adequate education in Pakistan or could not integrate there culturally
      and socially where the appellant has family and their father lives.

  78. Secondly, however, I accept that when regard is had to the  effect  of
      removal on the health of C1 and C2, because of  the  risk  of  serious
      impact upon their health because of the lack of  specialist  care  for
      their genetic condition, it is not in their best  interests  to  leave
      the UK and live in Pakistan.

  79. Thirdly, the appellant and her children have no lawful basis for being
      in the UK.  The leave of the appellant (and as I understand it of  her
      older children also) expired in November 2012.   It  does  not  appear
      that C1 and C2 have ever had leave to remain  in  the  UK  -  although
      given  their  age  that  is  not  something  for  which  they  can  be
      responsible.  Likewise, again as  I  understand  it,  the  appellant's
      partner has no lawful basis for being in the UK.

  80. Fourthly, I accept that the appellant did not come to the UK in  order
      to obtain medical treatment for C1 and C2.  They were, of course, born
      in the UK subsequent to her arrival and there is no evidence that  the
      appellant was aware of the potential for them inheriting the metabolic
      disorder, CDG1a before she came to the UK.

  81. Fifthly, I accept that the immigration status of the appellant  should
      not necessarily reflect upon the children.

  82. Sixthly, it is clear from the case law that  a  breach  of  Article  8
      cannot be established simply on the basis of  a  disparity  in  health
      provided in the UK and in the appellant's own country.  It  will  only
      be in a "very rare" case that the public interest in the economic well-
      being of the country will be outweighed by an  individual's  interest,
      (whether that of a child or adult) where the  central  part  of  their
      claim is the disparity in the provision of those services.

  83. Seventhly, given the immigration status of the appellant and,  indeed,
      the children  including  C1  and  C2,  the  maintenance  of  effective
      immigration control is in the public interest (see  s.117B(1)  of  NIA
      Act 2002).

  84. Eighthly, although I was not told about the linguistic  competence  in
      English of the appellant  and  (at  least)  her  elder  children,  the
      appellant did give her evidence through an interpreter and, therefore,
      to that extent at least the public interest set out in s.117B(2)  that
      it is in the economic well-being of the UK that an  individual  should
      speak English is engaged.

  85. Ninthly, there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  was  financially
      independent.  In any event, in relation to C1 and  C2  (and  also  the
      appellant herself and  her  mental  health  problems)  they  remain  a
      financial burden on the public purse because of  their  need  for  NHS
      care from a specialist unit.  In AE (Algeria) at [9]  Maurice  Kay  LJ
      pointed out that it would not be:

           "inappropriate for the future cost and duration of [the child's]
           treatment and care  in  the  country  to  play  a  part  in  the
           balancing exercise as matters relating  to  the  economic  well-
           being of this country given the strains of the public finances."

  86. The burden an individual may impose  on  the  public  purse  was  also
      recognised as an important  aspect  of  the  public  interest  in  the
      economic well-being of the country by Sir Stanley Burnton in FK and OK
      (Botswana) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 238 at [11].   There  is  no  doubt,
      that C1 and C2's presence in the UK will impose a  significant  burden
      upon public resources in the NHS.  There will  also  be  a  burden  in
      relation to their (and their siblings) educational provision.

  87. As the Court of Appeal  made  clear  in  GS  and  Others  an  holistic
      approach  is  required  in  relation  to   proportionality   but,   in
      determining the issue of proportionality,  the  disparity  in  medical
      treatment between the UK and, in this case, Pakistan can be  a  factor
      but cannot in itself give rise to a breach of Article 8  otherwise  it
      would contravene the "no obligation to treat" principle.

  88. Finally, the appellant's private life is entitled to  "little  weight"
      in the proportionality assessment as it was established whilst she was
      here unlawfully (see s.117B(4)) or whilst her immigration  status  was
      "precarious"  in  that  her  initial  leave  was  as  a  visitor  (see
      s.117B(5)).

  89. Given the fact that the appellant has only been in  the  UK  for  just
      under five years but has had no  lawful  leave  since  November  2012,
      having regard to the best interests  of  her  children  as  a  primary
      consideration, without having regard to the impact upon  C1  and  C2's
      health, there is nothing "compelling" in the appellant's circumstances
      and I am in no doubt that it would be proportionate to remove  her  to
      Pakistan.  It was not suggested by Mr Ahmed that there was any  reason
      why  she  could  not  travel  to  Pakistan  apart  from   the   health
      consequences of C1 and C2.   Her  asylum  claim  based  upon  domestic
      violence from her  husband  and  family  has  not  been  accepted  and
      established as  a  basis  for  her  non-return.   That  is  no  longer
      challenged or relied upon.

  90. As I have already said, the impact upon C1  and  C2  of  returning  to
      Pakistan, given their inherited metabolic disorder of CDG1a is set out
      in the medical reports, in particular that  of  Dr  Pierre  above.   I
      accept that the intensive medical management  and  care  required  for
      that condition is  not  available  in  Pakistan  and,  as  the  expert
      evidence states, then there is the risk of "significant  morbidity  or
      even death" for C1 and C2 on  return.   If,  however,  the  Article  8
      balance was struck in the  appellant's  favour  only  because  of  the
      consequences to the health of C1 and C2 if the appellant were removed,
      however serious those consequences might be, would  be  in  effect  to
      impose an obligation to treat in contravention of the established  and
      consistent case law (see, for example Underhill LJ at [114] in GS  and
      Others).

  91. It is not contended that the impact upon C1 and C2 reaches  the  "high
      threshold" establishing a breach of Article 3 based upon the disparity
      in available health care to C1 and C2.  C1 and C2  are  children,  and
      therefore heighten the humanitarian concerns of  any  decision  maker.
      However, there is no principled difference between cases of adults and
      children as Underhill LJ made plain in GS and Others at [109].  Whilst
      I accept that a case may succeed under Article 8 even though the  high
      threshold for Article 3 is not reached, this is not, in my  judgement,
      one of those rare cases which fall  into  that  exceptional  category.
      The public interest, as I have identified, is strong in  this  appeal.
      The impact upon the NHS resources will be significant  if  C1  and  C2
      remain in the UK requiring, in effect, life-long care.  It remains  an
      underlying premise of the Strasbourg and domestic case  law  that  the
      Convention does not impose upon a state  an  obligation  to  treat  an
      individual simply on the basis of a disparity of treatment even if the
      consequence to the individual may or will  be  life-threatening.   The
      position of the appellant  and  her  children,  C1  and  C2  naturally
      invokes empathy from any reasonable person.    However,  that  is  not
      sufficient to establish a breach of the Convention  (as  is  accepted)
      under Article 3 or in striking  a  fair  balance  between  the  public
      interest and the individuals' circumstances under Art  8.2.   Carrying
      out the required balancing  exercise,  in  my  judgment,  despite  the
      health implications for C1 and C2, the public  interest  outweigh  the
      rights and interests of the appellant and her  children  including  C1
      and C2.

  92. For  these  reasons,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
      established a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

  93. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
      on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds stands.

  94. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
      under Article 8 involved the making of an error of  law  and  was  set
      aside by the decision of the Upper Tribunal dated 10 July 2015.

  95. I remake the  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8  and  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal on that ground also.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















