
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/00505/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st March 2018                        | On 1st May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   mr I O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel, Montague Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 15th September 1986.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on  27th  April  2013  on  a  lorry.   He  was
    detained on arrival in the UK, served with papers as an illegal entrant
    and claimed asylum.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon  a
    fear that if returned to Turkey, he would face mistreatment due to  his
    ethnicity, namely that he was Kurdish.  The Appellant's application for
    asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 21st March 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross on 15th August 2017.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 30th August 2017 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 13th August  2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give due weight to
         externally consistent/relevant evidence.

     ii) That the judge had failed to apply a more generous  application  of
         the benefit of the doubt given the Applicant's vulnerabilities.

    iii) That the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  consider  the  risk  on
         return by association with brothers who were accused of involvement
         with the PKK.

     iv) That the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  drawn  conclusions  about
         plausibility without properly considering all of the evidence.

 4. On 9th November 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly refused permission
    to appeal.  Judge Kelly concluded that the grounds  were  nothing  more
    than a series of disagreements with conclusions that were properly open
    to the Tribunal and for which it provided detailed and cogent  reasons.



 5. Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  24th
    November 2017.  Those grounds appear to mirror  the  original  grounds,
    save that they add an additional ground that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had failed to conduct a proper balancing exercise under Article 8
    ECHR.

 6. On 21st December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Macleman noted that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    had refused permission on the view that the grounds are  no  more  than
    disagreement disclosing no error of law  and  that  that  view  may  be
    difficult to displace.  He did however note that  the  grounds  in  the
    renewed application appeared to be slightly shorter but broadly similar
    and although the apparent defect in the decision is not the subject  of
    any ground and the Appellant should not have his hopes  raised  by  the
    grant of permission, he considered that it was an inconsistency  which,
    once noticed, cannot properly be permitted to pass.

 7. On 13th February 2018 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  In summary the Respondent  submits  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself  appropriately.   The
    Secretary of State assumes that paragraphs 44 to 49 of the decision had
    been inserted into the determination in error as they bear no  relation
    to the Appellant's case.  However,  the  Respondent  submits  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made findings that were open to him and  gave
    adequate reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim to be at  risk  on
    return to  Turkey  and  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  represent  mere
    disagreement with the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Secretary  of
    State  invites  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  rectify  the  error  in   the
    determination and remake the decision dismissing  the  appeal  for  the
    reasons set out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of States appears by her Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr  Nath.   The  Respondent  appears  by  his
    Counsel Mr Chakmakjian.  Mr Chakmakjian is familiar with  this  matter.
    He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of both
    sets of Grounds of Appeal.

The Wrongly Inserted Paragraphs

 9.  The  paragraphs  which  it  is  submitted  are  wrongly  inserted  are
    paragraphs 44 to 49 of the decision.   These  are  entitled  Notice  of
    Decision and are  clearly  wrong  because  they  start  by  stating  in
    paragraph 44 that the Appellant claims his removal from the country  to
    Eritrea  would  be  a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations.
    Thereafter the  paragraphs  are  standard  paragraphs  albeit  that  in
    paragraph 49 the judge makes a finding that  the  Appellant  has  shown
    that he is entitled to humanitarian protection and at paragraph 46 that
    he is entitled to refugee status.  It is clear those paragraphs  should
    not be in the decision nor should paragraph 50.

Submissions/Discussion

10. Mr Chakmakjian submits that there is a material error by the  insertion
    of these paragraphs, which undermines the integrity  of  the  decision.
    This is shown from the judge's analysis of the  proceedings  generally,
    namely that the decision was finely balanced.  He submits the  question
    of whether or not there has been the discharge of the burden of  proof,
    rather than the making of any positive  findings  of  dishonesty,  that
    there is a danger shown within paragraph 42 that the decision has  been
    promulgated incompletely and that the judge has come  to  two  outcomes
    when the decision is looked as a whole and then promulgated the  matter
    and therefore the decision does not stand up to anxious scrutiny.

11. Mr Chakmakjian submits that the judge fell into  error  in  failing  to
    consider or properly consider evidence  external  to  Mr  O's  account,
    which supported his claim of being at real risk upon return  to  Turkey
    and that such evidence  takes  on  particular  significance  given  his
    obvious difficulties in articulating his account  arising  from  mental
    health, post traumatic stress disorder and  the  manner  in  which  the
    interviews were conducted.  He notes that the judge  is  aware  of  the
    psychiatric report but that  the  judge  is  obliged  to  consider  the
    objective  evidence  and  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the
    Appellant's learning  difficulties  and  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD.   He
    submits that the Appellant has given  an  account  of  his  trauma  and
    therefore the PTSD is capable of supporting his  account.   He  submits
    that this is important because of the Appellant's vulnerability and  in
    such  circumstances  the  objective  evidence  takes  on  even  greater
    importance.

12. He refers to the refugee status of the Appellant's  brothers  and  that
    their evidence is relevant in that the brother O's detention  sets  out
    the family difficulties with the PKK and submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has not focused on consistencies in the testimony.

13. He submits that there has been a failure by the judge to  consider  the
    Appellant's rights on return by association with his brothers who  have
    been accused of involvement  with  the  PKK.   He  notes  that  in  the
    Secretary of State's guidance on membership  or  association  with  the
    PKK, that each case must be considered on its individual facts and that
    the Appellant is a relative of members of the PKK and that that  should
    be a starting point.  He submits that the Appellant  has  an  increased
    risk of being returned as a failed asylum seeker and that the risk  has
    increased that he is now likely to face and this has not been  properly
    considered by the judge and that that constitutes a material error.

14. He contends that the First-tier Judge had failed to consider and  apply
    the  benefit  of  the  doubt  in  the  context   of   the   Appellant's
    vulnerabilities and that they disadvantage him in a way that  could  be
    compared and reasonably be expected from a child.  He refers me to  the
    principles set out in AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00016 (IAC).  He submits that the difficulties experienced by  the
    Appellant equate to those to being in a comparable position to a  child
    as is set out in AA.

15. He further  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  drawn
    conclusions  about  plausibility  without  properly   considering   the
    evidence and that the judge has rejected as implausible the Appellant's
    account that he lived in hiding in the mountains  for  five  years  and
    also questions whether it is plausible that  the  PKK  could  find  the
    Appellant.  He submits that although the Appellant's account might seem
    inherently unlikely, the judge had failed to consider this against  the
    fact that as recorded in paragraph 37  Judge  Gulbenkian  had  accepted
    that the Appellant's brothers were able to interact with the PKK.

16. Finally, Mr  Chakmakjian,  whilst  acknowledging  that  the  judge  has
    briefly dealt with the Appellant's private life at paragraph 43 of  the
    determination, he contends that the judge has effectively dismissed the
    appeal on the basis it was not demonstrated that  the  Appellant  would
    not receive treatment for his condition in Turkey and that that is  not
    compliant with the comprehensive balancing exercise that he is  obliged
    to conduct before reaching a conclusion on proportionality.

17. In response Mr Nath starts by taking me to the Notice of Refusal of the
    grant for permission to appeal by Judge Kelly.  He submits that that is
    well-balanced, as indeed is the main thrust of the grant of  permission
    by Judge Macleman.  He submits the  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than
    disagreement.   So  far  as  the  Appellant's  medical   condition   is
    concerned, he takes me  to  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  the  decision,
    indicating that they represent the starting for the judge and that  the
    judge has given  full  and  proper  consideration  to  the  Appellant's
    medical condition.

18. He comments that the  Appellant's  brothers  had  the  opportunity  but
    neither has attended  to  give  evidence  and  there  is  no  reference
    whatsoever as to why this is the case.  He submits that the Appellant's
    reliance on his brother's testimony  should  therefore  be  given  very
    limited weight and that the judge has, at paragraphs 38 and  39,  given
    due and proper consideration to these  issues.   He  acknowledges  that
    every case must  be  looked  at  on  its  own  facts  but  it  is  mere
    speculation to say that the  brother's  cases  affect  the  Appellant's
    situation.

19. So far as the other  issues  are  concerned  he  points  out  that  the
    question of the Appellant's vulnerability and benefit of the doubt  has
    been addressed right at the beginning of the determination.  He submits
    that he does not understand the argument on plausibility, pointing  out
    that the decision is well-balanced and that the  judge  has  considered
    the evidence, so far as the Article 8 claim is concerned, at  paragraph
    48 pointing out that what  else  was  the  judge  to  do,  particularly
    bearing in mind that the brothers had not attended  to  give  evidence.
    He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

20.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

21. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

22. The principle thrust upon which Upper Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  grants
    permission to appeal is the insertion of the paragraphs relating  to  a
    decision in Eritrea.  As indicated  earlier  in  this  decision,  those
    paragraphs are  clearly  inserted  erroneously.   This  is  perhaps  an
    opportunity to remind  all  judges  that  there  is  an  importance  in
    proofreading their draft to ensure  that  paragraphs  are  not  wrongly
    inserted.  That clearly is the case here.  The question is  whether  it
    is material.  I am satisfied that it is not.  What is important  herein
    are the judge's findings which are set out at paragraphs 12 through  to
    43.  Had the judge thereinafter gone on to clearly set out his decision
    at paragraph 51, then he would have been perfectly entitled to  do  so.
    I endorsed the view expressed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  in
    refusing permission to appeal and re-urged upon me both in the Rule  24
    response and by Mr Nath  that  the  grounds  constitute  no  more  than
    disagreement and they therefore disclose no material errors of law.

23. The starting point in arguing against  the  submissions,  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that there  is  a  material  error  of  law,  is  to
    consider paragraphs 13 to 15 of the decision.  This shows clearly  that
    the Tribunal had proper regard to the support to the Appellant's  claim
    provided by medical evidence and as Judge Kelly has noted it was in any
    event, open to the Tribunal to conclude that the evidence, taken  as  a
    whole, did not substantiate the Appellant's  claim  that  the  "unusual
    stress", causing him to be in a state of anxiety,  was  the  result  of
    being tortured in Turkey.

24. So far as the weight  to  be  given  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
    concerned the judge has given full and  proper  consideration  to  this
    matter within his findings and the judge was perfectly entitled to note
    that the Appellant's brothers had failed to attend to give evidence  on
    his behalf.  As again stipulated by Judge  Kelly,  the  bald  assertion
    that the Appellant was likely to attract the adverse attention  of  the
    Turkish authorities, by reason of his association with his brothers, is
    a mere restatement of the Appellant's argument and did not identify any
    error of law in the reasoning of the Tribunal.

25. Further, it is clear that as a matter of law  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was not bound by the assessment  made  by  a  different  Tribunal
    concerning the plausibility of claims made by the  Appellant's  brother
    and that the Tribunal was entitled to have regard to the  discrepancies
    between the account by his brother in his asylum appeal and that of the
    Appellant and the failure of the Appellant's brothers either to provide
    a statement or give  oral  testimony  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

26. Overall the findings of the judge at paragraphs 12 to  43  are  logical
    and well-reasoned and disclose no error of law.  Further, the judge has
    properly addressed himself on the burden of proof and has given due and
    proper reasoning  with  regard  to  his  findings  under  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

27. This is a well-constructed decision (save  for  the  insertion  of  the
    wrong  paragraphs  thereinafter)  and  the   judge's   conclusions   on
    plausibility are  quite  properly  made.   In  such  circumstances  the
    submissions of the Appellant's legal representatives amount to no  more
    than mere disagreement with the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  In such circumstances the decision shows no material  error  of
    law and is sustainable even though there is an insertion of  paragraphs
    that should not be there.  They do not taint the whole  decision.   The
    decision is therefore upheld and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
is maintained.  It is recorded that paragraphs 44 to 49 of the decision  are
struck out.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order  and  the  anonymity  direction  will
remain in place.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

