

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00656/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 25th January 2016                     |               On 2nd February 2016   |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     MW
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Costello of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State  as
       the Respondent and MW as the Appellant.


    2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 23 December 2014.  Her  appeal  against  the
       refusal of asylum and humanitarian protection was dismissed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Miller ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  20
       July 2015. The Judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

    3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do  so
       as MW  has  a  serious  psychiatric  condition  and  so  as  not  to
       compromise her asylum claim given it is based on her sexuality.

The grant of permission


    4. Judge Cruthers granted permission to appeal (7 October 2015) on  the
       grounds that it is arguable that;


          1. "...it was inappropriate for the  judge  to  proceed  when  the
          respondent's representative did not have in his possession a  copy
          of the 356 page bundle for the appellant..."
          2. "the judge has not sufficiently engaged with  the  respondent's
          argument...that there  are  relevant  health  care  facilities  in
          Zambia"  and  "should  have  paid   greater   attention   to   the
          authorities" such as GS (India) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ  0040,  J
          [2005] EWCA Civ 629, and Y (Sri Lanka) & Others  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
          362."
          3. "it is not entirely clear whether the  judge  ...  allowed  the
          appeal by reference to article 3 or  article  8  of  the  European
          Convention on Human Rights (or both)".


Preliminary issue

    5. At the commencement of the hearing I raised with the representatives
       whether there was a "Robinson obvious point" (Robinson  v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department and Immigration and Appeal Tribunal
       [1997] AR 586 CA) on the basis of Demirkaya v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [1999] INLR 441.  That  was  because  the  Judge
       appeared to make no finding as to whether, as alleged, the Appellant
       had been subjected to past persecution in Zambia when  she  and  her
       then girlfriend were raped by soldiers, and the  evidence  that  her
       psychotic condition (which formed the  basis  of  the  human  rights
       appeal being allowed given the likelihood she would  commit  suicide
       if faced with being returned to Zambia) was due to her experience in
       Zambia and sexuality. Her asylum claim, which was dismissed, was  on
       the basis that she feared persecution due to her sexuality, it being
       found that she was in a same sex relationship here.


    6. Both representatives accepted that  there  was  indeed  a  "Robinson
       obvious point". Mr Costello applied for  permission  to  appeal  the
       refusal of asylum out of time on that basis. Mr Tarlow conceded that
       there as a clear material error of law on this point and he did  not
       object to the application.

    7. In the interests of justice I extended time for the application  for
       permission to appeal the refusal of asylum to be made,  granted  the
       application as the Appellant should not be penalised  by  her  legal
       representative's oversight on such a crucial matter, determined that
       there was a material error of law regarding the asylum refusal,  set
       the asylum decision aside,  and  remitted  that  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for rehearing.


Appellant's position regarding the human rights appeal

    8. The Appellant asserted in her reply (26  October  2015)  in  essence
       that the Judge was entitled to proceed as the case had already  been
       adjourned, a bundle had been served, a replacement could  have  been
       requested, adjourning again would be detrimental to the  Appellant's
       mental health, and the Judge made findings open to him regarding her
       mental health. The Appellant said that in fact the hearing had  been
       stood down for 15 or 20 minutes for the Respondent's  representative
       to read the bundle that was provided for him after which  the  Judge
       asked him if he was happy to proceed and he said he was.


    9. It was clear that the appeal had been allowed pursuant to Article  3
       given the finding [62] "that, were the Appellant to  be  removed  to
       Zambia, there would be a real risk of  rapid  deterioration  in  her
       mental health leading to her committing suicide". That was  open  to
       the  Judge  given  the  medical  evidence   referred   to   in   the
       determination at [60] and the Judge reminded himself that such cases
       can only succeed rarely [63].

   10. The Respondent relied on documents  regarding  the  availability  of
       mental health services in Zambia that had  not  been  disclosed  and
       were not available publicly.


Respondent's submissions regarding the human rights appeal

   11. The caseworker had requested information regarding the  availability
       of mental health services in Zambia and this would be  available  on
       request. In any event the threshold to succeed on an Article 3 claim
       is high and there was no indication as to why it  was  met  in  this
       case. This amounted to a material error of law.

Discussion


    Ground 1


   12. I am not satisfied that there was a material error of  law  for  the
       following reasons. I pointed out to the representatives that  during
       the extensive cross-examination, the Judges  record  of  proceedings
       refers to 4 specific references to the Appellant's bundle (pages 36,
       248, 249, and 247). I do not  accept  that  the  Presenting  Officer
       could have asked those questions if he had  not  had  sight  of  the
       bundle. In addition, of the 356 page bundle, pages 4 to 86 were from
       the Respondent's bundle as  were  almost  all  the  medical  reports
       appearing from pages 103 to  279,  and  the  vast  majority  of  the
       remained of the bundle related to  her  evidence  of  the  same  sex
       relationship  she  was  then  (and  still  is)  in.  The  additional
       documents took the case no further forward. No application was  made
       to adjourn the proceedings for  more  extensive  preparation  to  be
       undertaken.  In  those  circumstances  I  am  satisfied   that   the
       Presenting Officer had sufficient access to the bundle and was  able
       to  adequately  present  the  Respondent's  case.  I  am   therefore
       satisfied that the application on that point was misleading.

    Ground 2

   13. It would have been helpful if the Judge had made  reference  to  the
       relevant case law. Not referring  to  is  not  fatal  providing  the
       principles are applied.

   14. The Judge noted the evidence of Dr Catherine King [60 (iv)] that the
       Appellant has a "psychotic illness, a major depressive disorder, and
       PTSD" and is "currently unstable and deteriorating further.  If  she
       was informed that she would be  returned  to  Zambia  it  is  highly
       likely that the existing level of suicide risk would be  increased".
       When combined with the rest of the psychiatric evidence he  referred
       to, the Judge was entitled to find [62] that, "were the Appellant to
       be  removed  to  Zambia,  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of  rapid
       deterioration  in  her  mental  health  leading  to  her  committing
       suicide." It was on that basis that he determined that [66] "I  find
       her case to be exceptional, and that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
       her to be removed to Zambia at the present time."

   15. It is clear from J that a suicide claim  can  succeed,  albeit  with
       significant difficulty. Y (Sri Lanka) notes that if  Claimants  were
       so traumatised by their experiences, and so  subjectively  terrified
       at the prospect of return to the scene of their torment,  that  they
       would not be capable of seeking treatment they  needed  which  could
       ameliorate the real risk of suicide, a forced return would reach the
       high threshold of inhuman treatment prohibited by Article  3.   This
       is not vitiated by GS as that presupposes an ability to access  some
       treatment, albeit the treatment  not  being  effective.  Given  that
       guidance in Y (Sri Lanka) and J, in my judgement, the  human  rights
       finding was open to the Judge on the evidence.

    Ground 3

   16. I am satisfied that it is clear from reading [63] and [66] that  the
       Judge allowed the appeal by reference to Article  3  and  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights on health grounds only  and  not
       due to her current same sex relationship.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on  a  point  of  law  in  relation  to  the  asylum
    decision.

      I set aside the asylum decision.

    The asylum appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
    novo hearing before a Judge other than Judge Miller.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
31 January 2016
