
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00208/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 21 December 2015                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MSM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  Yeo  instructed  by  B.H.T  Immigration  Legal
Services.
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In a determination promulgated on the 4 September 2014 Upper Tribunal
       Judge Pitt found a material error of law in the determination of  the
       First-tier Tribunal which was set aside. The matter comes  before  me
       today for the purposes of a  Resumed  hearing  to  enable  the  Upper
       Tribunal to remake the decision by either allowing or dismissing  the
       appeal.

    2. The challenge  to  the  original  determination  was  made  on  three
       grounds. Judge Pitt found no merit in the first ground [7] but  found
       merit in Grounds 2 and 3. In relation to the First-tier determination
       Judge Pitt found:

           "6.    At [21] Judge Hamilton found that:

                "[The appellant] did not produce any independent evidence to
                support his claim that he was the  organiser  of  the  anti-
                government protests in Sussex.   The  friend  with  whom  he
                claimed to have organised the protests did  not  attend  the
                appeal hearing.  He provided a written statement but  I  can
                only give that limited weight.  The witness who  did  appear
                on the Appellant's behalf was unaware he had  organised  any
                protest and doubted he would be able to do so unless he  has
                a  member  of  a  larger   organisation   with   access   to
                infrastructure.  It is reasonable to expect this witness  to
                have known that the Appellant organised the first protest in
                Brighton.  He  claimed  to  have  spoken  about  it  on  the
                telephone.  It is not credible that the Appellant would  not
                have mentioned he was the one organising this  protest.  The
                Appellant's  claim  to  be   an   organiser   also   appears
                inconsistent with his claim that over last (sic) 7 years  he
                had been on a depressed  state  merely  -  surviving  (sic).
                Looking at the evidence as a whole, even applying the  lower
                standard of proof, I do not find  the  Appellant  has  shown
                that he organised any demonstrations or that he is active in
                any anti-government movements."

           7. It did not appear to me that the First-tier Tribunal  was  in
                error in concluding that it had  not  been  shown  that  the
                appellant had organised protests. He was entitled  to  place
                less weight on  an  unaffirmed  witness  statement.  He  was
                entitled to draw an adverse inference from the  evidence  of
                the witness who could be expected to know  if  a  particular
                demonstration was being organised by the appellant  if  they
                had discussed it together and who, as  someone  involved  in
                such demonstrations himself, considered that  demonstrations
                were organised at a higher level than an individual such  as
                the appellant.  The appellant was legally represented at the
                hearing and when the evidence of the witness arose the legal
                representative could be expected to deal with  it  where  it
                specifically addresses the question of the  appellant  being
                an organiser.  The appellant could  have  been  recalled  to
                give evidence on the point and it could have been dealt with
                in submissions. I did not find  that  the  first  ground  of
                appeal had merit."

    3. Despite attempts by Mr Yeo to reopen this head  of  challenge  during
       the course of the hearing by  the  use  of  additional  evidence,  no
       reason was made out to depart from the  findings  of  Judge  Pitt  in
       relation to this issue.

Background


    4. MSM is an Iranian national born in 1978. He entered the UK on  2  May
       2006 and claimed asylum. His  claim  for  asylum  was  refused  on  6
       November 2006 and appeal against the refusal dismissed on 23 December
       2006 by Judge Baker. It was found the appellant had not been  telling
       the truth in respect of significant parts  of  his  account.  Further
       representations were made on 15 May 2007 which were  rejected  on  23
       October  2008.  On  19  May   2011   the   appellant   made   further
       representation asking for his asylum claim to be reconsidered.

    5. The reconsideration request was made on the basis:

        i) Judge Baker had found as a fact that the Appellant worked in the
           defence industry in Iran.  There was expert evidence that showed
           that this fact alone would put him at risk if he  were  returned
           to Iran.

       ii) The Appellant had been interviewed by the  Ministry  of  Defence
           while he had been in the UK.  Again, expert evidence showed that
           this fact would put him at risk if he were returned to Iran.

      iii) Whilst he had been in the UK, the Appellant had  taken  part  in
           and organised demonstrations  against  the  Iranian  government.
           This fact would put him at risk if he were returned to Iran.

       iv) It was also asserted that the Appellant had  established  family
           life in the UK with a British Citizen and her children and  that
           his removal would breach their rights under  Article  8  of  the
           European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR).

    6. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings of fact

        a. The appellant used deception to gain entry to  the  UK.  He  has
           shown that he is prepared to tell lies in order to  be  able  to
           enter and live in the  UK.  Judge  Baker  found  him  to  be  an
           unreliable witness [21]

        b. The appellant has produced a number [of] photographs said to  be
           stills from video on the internet showing that he was present at
           a  number  of  anti-government  demonstrations  and   an   anti-
           government conference [22]

        c. It was accepted that some elements of  the  Iranian  authorities
           are paranoid and oppressive. It was  accepted  that  significant
           resources have been put into monitoring  the  internet  for  the
           purposes of preventing what are deemed to be unacceptable  ideas
           being  disseminated  and   spying   on   known   anti-government
           activists. There  is  no  evidence  of  the  authorities  having
           identified anyone in this manner even though their sophisticated
           internet filtering system has been in  place  since  about  2009
           [25]

        d. The reference by the expert of 90 Iranians living overseas being
           warned by their government to stop their  activities  on  social
           media or face retribution, appears to relate to individuals  who
           came to the attention  of  the  authorities  because  they  were
           openly active on social media and easy to identify  rather  than
           because the authorities had tracked them down  through  detailed
           analysis of photographs of protests and demonstrations. There is
           no evidence that this is being done or that  facial  recognition
           software or other methods are being used for this purpose or  in
           order to identify participants in protests  who  may  return  to
           Iran [26]

        e. Judge Baker found the  appellant  is  not  on  'on  the  regimes
           radar'.  It has been found that although the appellant may  have
           worked at the Defence Industries Complex, Hadid  Plant,  he  had
           not been engaged in high level sensitive work as he claimed.  He
           had not shown he had any serious difficulties with his employers
           or that the authorities were looking for him or that he  was  of
           interest to them [27]

        f. The fact the appellant  was  working  as  a  technician  at  the
           Defence Plant does  not  necessarily  mean  he  was  working  on
           "prototype weapons systems and armaments".  The evidence is that
           he was effectively a lathe operator. The account of having  made
           unauthorised copies of software was rejected by Judge Baker  and
           Judge Hamilton on the  basis  that  if  his  account  was  true,
           despite being accused of spying and detained, when  released  he
           did not think to remove the  software  from  his  home  computer
           despite the clear risk with possessing the same. This was  found
           to be implausible "given the  appellants  obvious  intelligence"
           [29].

        g. The suggestion by the expert that the appellant is highly likely
           to be arrested on return to Iran because he was  interviewed  by
           the Ministry of Defence on arrival is rejected as it is said  to
           be based upon an assumption the appellant might  have  sensitive
           information about the countries security. It is said  there  was
           insufficient evidence to support  such  an  assumption.  It  was
           noted the expert did not say that the fact of being  interviewed
           per se placed an individual at risk [33].

        h. The appellant has not  adduced  sufficient  evidence  to  permit
           departure for the case of SB. The appellant  has  not  shown  he
           will be perceived as a threat or that the authorities  have  any
           interest in him. The  appellant  has  not  shown  he  left  Iran
           illegally [34].

        i. The claim based upon family life was not  actively  pursued  and
           the appellant no longer claimed to have family life in  the  UK.
           It was accepted the appellant has a private life in the  UK  but
           as he has been granted limited  leave  to  remain  there  is  no
           interference at this stage with  his  private  life  in  the  UK
           sufficient to engage Article 8  [35]

    7. The profile as found of the appellant is therefore

       (i)    of an individual who left Iran but who has not proved  he  did
           so illegally

       (ii)   a person who worked for the  named  defence  contractor  as  a
           lathe operator with no access to sensitive information

       (iii)  a person whose claim to have downloaded sensitive software was
           found not to be credible

       (iv)   a person who was interviewed by the MOD having entered the UK

       (v)    a person who produced photographs showing  his  attendance  at
           demonstrations and a conference in the UK

       (vi)   a person whose claim to have been responsible  for  organising
           demonstrations has not been found to be credible.

    8. The appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing. In a further witness
       statement dated 11 September 2015 the appellant repeated his claim in
       relation to previous demonstrations in 2009 in support of  the  Green
       Movement.  He claims he does not want to overthrow the government but
       wants a peaceful transition to democracy. He asserts that  on  return
       to Iran he would be frightened to express himself in the way  he  has
       been able to do in the UK because he is frightened of the authorities
       there. He claims that if he were in  Iran  and  a  demonstration  was
       arranged in Tehran next year, he would have to attend even though  he
       was aware it would be dangerous.

    9. In his oral evidence the  appellant  confirmed  he  last  attended  a
       demonstration in the UK in 2011 and that there were no  documents  or
       information on the internet showing he organised demonstrations.

   10. As the appellant has been granted limited leave to remain this is  an
       upgrade hearing only. The appellant has been  granted  leave  to  May
       2016.

The law


   11. There are a number of cases dealing with the issue of risk on return.



   12. In relation to risk on return for  failed  asylum  seeker:  in  MA  v
       Switzerland (Application no. 52589/13) it was held  that  removal  to
       Iran, where the appellant claimed to face a sentence of  seven  years
       imprisonment  and  flogging  for  his  participation  in  anti-regime
       demonstrations breached Article 3 of the ECHR.  However, at paragraph
       57 the ECtHR also said that "Whilst being aware  of  the  reports  of
       serious human rights violations in Iran as set out above,  the  Court
       does not find them to be of such a nature as to show, as they  stand,
       that there would be as such a violation  of  the  Convention  if  the
       applicant were to return to that country". The decision to allow  the
       appeal was taken on the specific facts claimed by the  Appellant  and
       not on the basis that removal to Iran per se would breach Article 3.

   13. In FM (Risk - Homosexual - Illegal departure) Iran  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
       05660 (Collins J) the Tribunal concluded that "there is  no  evidence
       of any general persecution or ill treatment of failed asylum  seekers
       merely because they are failed asylum  seekers."   The  general  view
       seems to be that returning asylum seekers will only  be  at  risk  on
       arrival back in Iran where there were other factors which  make  them
       stand out, such as a political profile.

   14. In GN (Iran) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 112 the Court of Appeal agreed with
       the Tribunal that the objective material  demonstrated  that  neither
       illegal departure nor asylum failure would of themselves give rise to
       mistreatment on return contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

   15. In SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053  the
       Tribunal held at headnote (ii) that Iranians facing  enforced  return
       do not in general face a real risk of persecution  or  ill-treatment.
       That remains the case even if  they  exited  Iran  illegally.  Having
       exited Iran illegally is not a significant risk factor,  although  if
       it is the case  that  a  person  would  face  difficulties  with  the
       authorities for other reasons, such  a  history  could  be  a  factor
       adding to the level of difficulties he or she is likely to face.

   16. In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT
       00036 (IAC) the Tribunal held that Iranians  returning  to  Iran  are
       screened on arrival.  A returnee who meets the profile of an activist
       may be detained while searches of documentation  are  made.  However,
       there is not a real risk of  persecution  for  those  who  have  just
       exited Iran illegally or  are  merely  returning  from  Britain.  The
       conclusions of the Tribunal in the country guidance case of SB  (risk
       on return -illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 are followed  and
       endorsed.

   17. In relation to the procedure at  airport:  in  BA  (Demonstrators  in
       Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00036  (IAC)  the
       Tribunal held  that  Iranians  returning  to  Iran  are  screened  on
       arrival.  A returnee who meets the profile  of  an  activist  may  be
       detained  while  searches  of  documentation  are   made.   Students,
       particularly those who have known political profiles are likely to be
       questioned as well as those who have exited illegally.  There  is  no
       evidence of the use of facial  recognition  technology  at  the  Imam
       Khomeini International airport, but there are a number  of  officials
       who may be able to recognize up to 200 faces at  any  one  time.  The
       procedures used by security at  the  airport  are  haphazard.  It  is
       therefore possible that those whom the regime might wish to  question
       would not come to  the  attention  of  the  regime  on  arrival.  If,
       however, information is known about  their  activities  abroad,  they
       might well be picked up  for  questioning  and/or  transferred  to  a
       special court near the airport in Tehran  after  they  have  returned
       home. It is important to consider the level of political  involvement
       before considering the likelihood of the  individual  coming  to  the
       attention of the authorities and the priority that the Iranian regime
       would give to tracing him. It is only after considering those factors
       that the issue of whether or not there is a real risk of  his  facing
       persecution on return can be assessed.

   18. In SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]  UKAIT  00053  the
       Tribunal held  that  events  in  Iran  following  the  12  June  2009
       presidential elections have led to a government crackdown on  persons
       seen to  be  opposed  to  the  present  government  and  the  Iranian
       judiciary has become even less independent.  Being a person  involved
       in court proceedings in Iran who has engaged in conduct likely to  be
       seen as insulting either to the judiciary or the  justice  system  or
       the government or to Islam constitutes another risk factor indicating
       an increased level of risk of persecution or ill treatment on return.
       Being accused of anti-Islamic conduct  likewise  also  constitutes  a
       significant risk factor.

   19. In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT
       36 (IAC) the Tribunal held that

       (i)    given the large numbers of those who demonstrate here and  the
           publicity which demonstrators receive, for example on  Facebook,
           combined with the inability of the Iranian Government to monitor
           all returnees who have been  involved  in  demonstrations  here,
           regard must be had to the level of involvement of the individual
           here as well as any  political  activity  which  the  individual
           might have been  involved  in  Iran  before  seeking  asylum  in
           Britain;

       (ii)   (a)  Iranians returning to Iran are screened  on  arrival.   A
           returnee who meets the profile of an activist  may  be  detained
           while searches of documentation are made. Students, particularly
           those who  have  known  political  profiles  are  likely  to  be
           questioned as well as those who have exited illegally.

          (b) There is not a real risk of persecution  for  those  who  have
           exited Iran illegally or are merely returning from Britain.  The
           conclusions of the Tribunal in the country guidance case  of  SB
           (risk on return -illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]  UKAIT  00053  are
           followed and endorsed.

          (c) There  is  no  evidence  of  the  use  of  facial  recognition
           technology at the Imam Khomeini International airport, but there
           are a number of officials who may be able to recognize up to 200
           faces at any one time. The procedures used by  security  at  the
           airport are haphazard. It is therefore possible that those  whom
           the regime  might  wish  to  question  would  not  come  to  the
           attention of the regime on arrival. If, however, information  is
           known about their activities abroad, they might well  be  picked
           up for questioning and/or transferred to a  special  court  near
           the airport in Tehran after they have returned home.

       (iii)  It is important to consider the level of political involvement
           before considering the likelihood of the  individual  coming  to
           the attention of the  authorities  and  the  priority  that  the
           Iranian regime would give to  tracing  him.  It  is  only  after
           considering those factors that the issue of whether or not there
           is a real risk of  his  facing  persecution  on  return  can  be
           assessed.

       (iv)   The following are  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  when
           assessing risk on return having regard to sur place activities

          (a) Nature of sur place activity. Theme of demonstrations  -  what
           do the demonstrators want (e.g. reform of the regime through  to
           its violent overthrow); how will they be  characterised  by  the
           regime? Role in demonstrations and political profile -  can  the
           person be described as a leader; mobiliser (e.g. addressing  the
           crowd), organiser (e.g.  leading  the  chanting);  or  simply  a
           member of the crowd; if the latter is he active or passive (e.g.
           does he carry a  banner);  what  is  his  motive,  and  is  this
           relevant to the profile he will have in the eyes of the  regime.
           Extent of participation - has the person  attended  one  or  two
           demonstrations  or  is  he  a  regular  participant?   Publicity
           attracted - has a demonstration attracted media coverage in  the
           United Kingdom or the home country;  nature  of  that  publicity
           (quality of images; outlets where stories appear etc)?

          (b) Identification risk. Surveillance of demonstrators -  assuming
           the regime aims to identify demonstrators against it how does it
           do so, through, filming them, having agents who  mingle  in  the
           crowd,  reviewing  images/recordings  of   demonstrations   etc?
           Regime's capacity to identify individuals - does the regime have
           advanced technology  (e.g.  for  facial  recognition);  does  it
           allocate human resources to fit names to faces in the crowd?

          (c) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return. Profile - is  the
           person  known  as  a  committed  opponent  or  someone  with   a
           significant political profile; does he fall  within  a  category
           which  the   regime   regards   as   especially   objectionable?
           Immigration history - how  did  the  person  leave  the  country
           (illegally; type of  visa);  where  has  the  person  been  when
           abroad; is the timing and method of return more likely  to  lead
           to inquiry and/or being detained for more than  a  short  period
           and ill-treated (overstayer; forced return)?

          (d)  Consequences  of  identification.  Is  there  differentiation
           between demonstrators depending on the level of their  political
           profile adverse to the regime?

          (e) Identification risk  on  return.  Matching  identification  to
           person  -  if  a  person  is  identified  is  that   information
           systematically stored and used; are border posts geared  to  the
           task?

Discussion


   20. The appellant's claim is based upon a number of elements. In relation
       to his claim to be at risk in relation to his interview  by  the  MOD
       [para 27  A's  2014  witness  statement]  Mr  Bramble  submitted  the
       evidence was incomplete in that no evidence had been provided of  (i)
       when the interview took place (ii)  where  this  occurred  (iii)  the
       duration of the interview (iv) how he was invited. That  may  be  so,
       but the assessment of potential risk must be viewed through the  eyes
       of the persecutor  and  it  is  not  said  this  information  is  not
       available to the respondent in any event. There is no information the
       authorities are aware of the fact an interview occurred or  that  the
       appellant would not be entitled to not reveal the fact as it  is  not
       connected with any fundamentally held belief. There  is  an  argument
       that if the authorities were aware of the interview they may wish  to
       interview the appellant to establish the type  of  questions  he  was
       asked. The appellant's country expert, in a  report  dated  21  April
       2011, states

           "25.   [MSM] prior employment  as  a  technician  as  a  defence
           industry complex,  working  on  prototype  weapons  systems  and
           armaments, would most  likely  cause  difficulties  for  him  on
           return to Iran.  Ordinary individuals face problems  of  return,
           but to a former staff of the defence industry  who  fled,  there
           can be more severe consequences, because he  could  be  seen  as
           abusing his position and undermining his employment contract.

           ...

           27.     More  importantly,  the  fact  that   [MSM]   has   been
           interviewed by the Ministry of Defence on his arrival in the  UK
           is highly likely to result in his arrest and  being  accused  of
           espionage.  Iranian  authorities  like  any   other   authority,
           consider  crimes  involving  the  revealing  of  the   country's
           military defence infrastructure as an infringement  of  national
           security.

           28.    This could also be perceived by the  Iranian  authorities
           as  an  infringement  of   the   Iranian   national   interests.
           Furthermore, there is a real risk that he could be perceived  to
           be a third party agent or collaborator;  this  is  an  issue  of
           which the Iranian authorities are frequently suspicious.

           ..."

   21. The later report dated 6 February 2014 does not amend this opinion.

   22. The core claim to be working on prototype weapons has  been  rejected
       and not made out before the Upper Tribunal. It has not been shown the
       appellant required the  permission/authorisation  of  the  police  to
       resign his position or that the same was not  received  if  required.
       The report refers to employees of the Defence Ministry. The appellant
       claims to have been an employee of Defence Industries Complex,  Hadid
       Plant. The  Defence  Industries  Organization's  Armament  Industries
       Group (AIG) is controlled by Iran's Ministry of Defence Armed  Forces
       Logistics (MODAFL) and the Hadid Industries Company is listed  as  an
       entity of concern for military procurement activities [Iran Watch, 16
       January 2008]. They appear to be two separate entities and not one as
       the appellants evidence infers. The finding the  appellant  had  left
       the  country  legally  and  lack  of  evidence  in  relation  to  his
       resignation not being accepted admits a finding it was  and  that  no
       further issue has been shown to arise in relation to the same.

   23. In relation to risk arising from  political  opinion  and  sur  place
       activities, the appellant last attended a demonstration in the UK  in
       2011. He claims to be a follower of the Green Movement.  The  country
       expert comments upon internet monitoring in his two reports but  this
       is an issues that was considered at some length by the Tribunal in AB
       and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran  [2015]  UKUT
       257 (IAC) in which it was held  that  the  material  put  before  the
       tribunal did not disclose a sufficient evidential  basis  for  giving
       country or other guidance upon what, reliably,  can  be  expected  in
       terms of the reception in Iran for  those  returning  otherwise  than
       with a "regular" passport in relation to whom interest may be excited
       from the authorities into internet activity as might be  revealed  by
       an examination of blogging activity or a Facebook account.

   24. The appellant has not proved he was the co-organiser of any  protests
       in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Bramble  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the
       evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton at paragraphs 138-
       158 in which there is mention of  a  demonstration  in  Brighton  but
       which does not name the Appellant as the organiser.

   25. It is accepted there are photographs of a demonstration at pages 146-
       150 in which the appellant can be seen at page 146 but his  image  is
       not as clear or is not present at pages 147-150.  It is  accepted  he
       attended demonstrations the last of which was in 2011.

   26. In relation to recognised risk  criteria;  the  appellant  is  not  a
       journalist, not a film maker who has produced films  deemed  contrary
       to the interests of the regime or Islam, and there is no evidence  he
       has a web site or a Facebook account of his own.    Even  though  the
       appellant appears on some media on the internet it has not been  made
       out he has a prominent profile or one  that  will  have  led  to  his
       coming to the adverse  interest  of  the  authorities.  The  lack  of
       evidence of facial  recognition  software  at  the  airport  that  is
       programmed to detect  those  appearing  in  any  publication  on  the
       internet supports the respondents case that there is no  evidence  of
       adverse interest in the appellant or risk of his being recognised  or
       of detection on return.

   27. Although the appellant has expressed a political belief and  that  he
       would  attend  a  demonstration  if  called  in  Iran,  the  evidence
       indicates a person whose political activities do not reflect that  of
       a committed activist in the UK or one who has the political  opinions
       he asserts. As such the appellant is unable to  benefit  for  the  HJ
       (Iran) principle for there is insufficient evidence to show  that  on
       return he will be required to  lie  and  deny  a  fundamentally  held
       belief to escape persecution. In any event, not all supporters of the
       Green  Movement  in  Iran  have  been  persecuted.    Many   attended
       demonstrations but not all  were  arrested  and  many  detained  were
       released without charge. As with any such political group it  is  the
       organisers and those deemed to present a threat to the authorities in
       Iran who suffer the most. It has not been  shown  the  appellant  had
       such a profile in Iran or in the UK. The evidence as a whole supports
       a finding that the attendance at the demonstrations and conference is
       a cynical attempt  to  create  an  asylum  claim  rather  than  being
       reflective of a genuine opposition view that the appellant  would  be
       forced to conceal on return.

   28. Mr Yeo accepted some copy photographs were not as clear as they could
       be but suggested the screen images are clearer. That may  be  so  but
       these were not seen by the Tribunal and do  not,  in  themselves,  do
       anything  other  than  to  confirm  the  appellants   attendance   at
       demonstrations in the UK, which is accepted.

   29. Both advocates refer to the 'pinch point argument' at  the  point  of
       return when  the  appellant  will  come  into  contact  with  Iranian
       authorities. It is also accepted he does not  have  a  valid  Iranian
       passport but neither create a real risk per  se.  The  appellant  has
       failed to make out that he meets the profile of an activist  or  that
       information is known about his activities abroad, either political or
       in relation to the interview with the MOD.

   30. The claim to be an organiser of a demonstration in Brighton has  been
       rejected as lacking credibility and has not been made out before  the
       Upper Tribunal even applying the lower standard of  proof  applicable
       to appeals of this nature. The level of political involvement is  low
       and it has not been made out that it is of a level that  will  result
       in the likelihood of the appellant coming to  the  attention  of  the
       authorities or of the Iranian regime having any interest  in  tracing
       him.  BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG  [2011]
       UKUT 36 (IAC) considered and applied. It has not been made  out  that
       the appellant has a profile such that the authorities  will  wish  to
       make further enquires.

   31. The appellant is a failed asylum seeker from the UK whose  claim  has
       been found to lack credibility. As such he has not  established  that
       he is entitled to a grant of any form of international protection.

Decision

   32. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially erred
       in law and the decision set aside by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt.  I
       remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity

       The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  I  make
       such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 December 2015

