

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00544/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated on               |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 14 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ARAN RASOULI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    Cresswell of the First-tier Tribunal on  4  March  2014  following  the
    hearing of the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to grant asylum and her decision to give removal directions  to
    the respondent, whom  we  shall  call  'the  claimant'  as  an  illegal
    entrant.

 2. The claimant's case is that he is a national of Iran from  the  Kurdish
    part of Iran and of Kurdish ethnicity and that he has  been  active  in
    Kurdish politics; following which incidents occurred which  caused  him
    to fear for his life.  It is not said by the Secretary of State  as  we
    understand it that the claimant's story, if true, would not  give  rise
    to a proper claim to asylum.  The Secretary of State's position on  the
    contrary is and always has been that the story simply is not true; and,
    indeed, that the claimant is not Iranian.

 3. In the course of the Secretary of State's investigation  of  the  claim
    there was a telephone Sprakab  interview.  The  interviewer  asked  the
    claimant a number of questions, some of which appear to go well  beyond
    matters of the use of language.  The Sprakab interviewer concluded that
    the claimant was not of the nationality he claimed.

 4. At the hearing before Judge Cresswell the claimant appeared in  person.
    He gave his account of his history and was subject to cross-examination
    by a Presenting Officer.  In the course of his evidence, as is apparent
    from Judge Cresswell's determination, he provided  explanations  for  a
    number of the factors that had caused the Sprakab interviewer to  reach
    the conclusions that he did.  In particular, the claimant's  home  town
    is very near the Iraqi border and the  claimant's  mother  was  herself
    Iraqi.  Judge Cresswell decided to accept the  claimant's  explanations
    and that they outweighed the reasons  and  conclusion  of  the  Sprakab
    report.

 5. Judge Cresswell's decision is challenged on the grounds that  he  erred
    in law by failing to give sufficient weight to that report.  It is said
    that he failed to follow the  then  authority  which  was  that  of  RB
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2012] EWCA (Civ) 277.

 6. Mr Richards has expanded today on the Secretary of State's  grounds  of
    appeal.  Although we note that the judge did  conclude  that  he  would
    follow the oral evidence of the claimant  rather  than  the  report  of
    Sprakab, it appears to us that the judge did nothing that  he  was  not
    entitled to do.  He clearly regarded  the  report  as  of  the  highest
    importance: indeed much of  the  determination  is  devoted  to  seeing
    whether the factors mentioned in the report were  truly  matters  which
    should affect the judge's conclusion.  That was, in  our  judgement,  a
    perfectly proper way of approaching what the authorities say is  always
    very important evidence.  Nevertheless this was a case where the  judge
    had the opportunity of seeing the claimant in  person  and  seeing  for
    himself the claimant's performance in cross-examination.  He had before
    him two opposing possible  conclusions  and  in  our  judgment  he  was
    entitled to make the choice that he did between them.

 7. For those reasons we have  concluded  that  the  judge's  determination
    discloses no error of law and the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    allow the appeal accordingly stands.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 4 November 2014
