
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00394/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             Ms Mahin Robatjazi
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Heaps


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 23rd  September  1963.   The
    Appellant between 2003 and 2010 made several visits to the UK on  visit
    visas.  On 22nd September 2011 the Appellant and her daughter,  who  is
    dependent on  her  claim,  arrived  in  the  UK  on  her  own  passport
    containing a valid visa until 22nd December 2011.  She  claimed  asylum
    on 20th November 2011 on the grounds that she feared persecution in her
    homeland  on  account  of  her  religious  beliefs.   The   Appellant's
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 29th December 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Edwards sitting in the First-tier Tribunal on 26th February 2014.  In a
    determination  prepared  the  same  day  the  Appellant's  appeal   was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  and  the  Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 10th March 2014 the Appellant's instructed solicitors lodged Grounds
    of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  On 18th  March  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes  granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Holmes
    noted,

         "The excessively lengthy grounds can  perhaps  be  reduced  to  the
         following  simple  proposition;  there  was  a  wealth  of  medical
         evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
         psychiatric  health,  and  before  the  Tribunal  turned   to   any
         assessment of the  credibility  of  her  written  evidence  it  was
         obliged to assess that medical evidence, and in turn form a view as
         to what weight could be placed upon any consistencies in it, or any
         perceived failings in its  depth  of  knowledge  of  her  religious
         faith.  It is  arguable  that  the  medical  evidence  in  question
         received inadequate  analysis,  rendering  the  assessment  of  the
         Appellant's credibility (and in particular the  attachment  of  any
         weight to the failure to tender her for cross-examination) unsafe."

 4. On 31st March 2014 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those  grounds  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was clearly mindful of the contents of  the  psychiatric
    report and at no point did he make an adverse finding as  a  result  of
    the Appellant's decision not  to  give  oral  evidence.   The  response
    contends that there was no indication that the  Appellant  was  unable,
    due to psychiatric difficulties, to answer questions at interview or to
    give a written statement through solicitors at the relevant  times  and
    that it was for the judge to assess what weight to give to each item of
    evidence, and to reach a conclusion as to the Appellant's  credibility.
    The response contended that in doing so the judge had not  fallen  into
    error of law.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to  decide  whether
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Medley-Daley.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mrs Heaps.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Medley-Daley starts by referring me to the authority  of  The  Queen
    (on the application of SA (Iran)) [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) and  to  the
    finding of His Honour Judge Gilbart QC therein that,

         "There must be a real risk that if she has professed herself to  be
         a Christian, and conducted herself as one, that profession, whether
         true or not, may be taken in Iran as evidence of apostasy."

 7. Mr Medley-Daley submits that the key ground herein is medical  evidence
    and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has been very selective  in  his
    approach and that when taken as a whole a different picture emerges and
    that it is appropriate for the judge to make findings before addressing
    the Appellant's mental  health  problems.   He  takes  issue  with  the
    findings of the judge at paragraph 42 of his  determination  submitting
    that the judge has not considered the position in the round.

 8. Mr Medley-Daley takes me to the medical evidence that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He starts by referring to the letter of 25th July
    2013 from Dr J Mylvaganam.  At page 2 of his report he states,

         "Her memory loss is the most severe I have ever seen in a PTSD case
         and functionally it is  as  debilitating  as  that  of  a  demented
         patient.  This memory loss symptom of her PTSD is  responsible  for
         her depression symptoms which  comprise  low  mood/tearfulness/poor
         concentration/low motivation/anhedonia/some suicidal thoughts."

    Mr  Medley-Daley  emphasises  that  the  judge  has   not   given   due
    consideration to this nor has he considered the letter  from  Dr  Hoult
    dated 13th January 2014 where Dr Hoult has stated,

         "I do however  believe,  through  my  extensive  appointments  with
         Mahin, that the threat is very real and if she  were  to  return  a
         catastrophic effect on her mental  health  could  ultimately  prove
         fatal."

 9. Mr Medley-Daley submits  that  the  failure  to  address  these  issues
    constitutes a material error of law.  He acknowledges that the test  is
    not that set out in N but is the six stage test as set  out  in  J  and
    that this test has not been applied.  He asked me to  find  a  material
    error of law and to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and to remit it on the basis that it can be reheard.

10. Mrs Heaps in response merely relies on the Notice  of  Refusal  as  the
    starting point and submits that the judge has looked at the issue  with
    regard to the Appellant's conversion to Christianity at  paragraphs  37
    to 38 of his determination.  She emphasises she has nothing further  to
    add.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. It is very clear from the medical evidence that  was  available  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  medical  practitioners  have  very
    serious reservations about the mental health of the Appellant.   It  is
    regrettably also fairly clear that that  has  only  been  addressed  at
    paragraph 42 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination and  that
    he has failed to  give  full  and  due  consideration  to  the  medical
    evidence, something to which Mrs Heaps in  her  very  sensibly  limited
    submission acknowledges.  There  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge a wealth of medical evidence.  Whether he would have decided  the
    decision differently had he addressed it in his determination is not  a
    matter for the Upper Tribunal to comment on but I think it is  fair  to
    say that the judge may well have come to a different  decision  had  he
    given full and due proper attention to the medical  testimony  when  he
    came to address the issue of the Appellant's purported Christianity and
    as such I find that the credibility  finding  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is fatally flawed and I find that there  is  a  material
    error of law and I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge with none of the findings of fact to stand and remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

14. Following discussion between the legal representatives it  is  accepted
    by both sides that the Appellant is not fit to attend to give  evidence
    but Mr Medley-Daley considers that there will be a considerable  number
    of witnesses whom he would wish to call on the Appellant's behalf.   On
    that basis I set out below  directions  with  an  estimated  length  of
    hearing of one day.  The appeal  can  be  remitted  to  any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge sitting  at  Manchester  other  than  Immigration  Judge
    Edwards.

15. Decision and Directions following Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.  Directions for the rehearing are:-

    1.   That on the finding of a material error of law the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside and the appeal  is  remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal with none of the  findings  of  fact  to
         stand.


    2.   The appeal can be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other
         than Immigration Judge Edwards sitting at Manchester.


    3.   That there be leave to the  Appellant's  solicitors  to  file  and
         serve  an  additional  bundle  including  any  up-to-date   witness
         statements and medical evidence by 15th October 2014.


    4.   Leave is granted to the Appellant's solicitors  not  to  call  nor
         have in attendance the Appellant for the rehearing.


    5.   Relist on the first available date after 1st November 2014 with an
         ELH of one day - 6 points.  It is recorded that six  witnesses  are
         expected to attend to give evidence.


    6.   In the  event  that  interpreters  are  required  the  Appellant's
         instructed solicitors must notify the Tribunal and the Secretary of
         State seven days prehearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
