
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00577/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December  2015               |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Ms Manjit Dogra (Counsel instructed by M & S Solicitors)


                     DECISION following resumed hearing

1.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary  of  State  and  I  shall
    refer to the parties as the Secretary of State and the  Claimant.   The
    Claimant was born on 21 June 1989 and is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

2.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 6th November 2015, to which  I
    refer, the Tribunal found an error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Abebrese) (FtT) promulgated on  27  May  2015.  Specifically  it
    concluded that the FtT failed properly to consider the risk factors  in
    GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) and to give reasons for finding  that  the  appellant  came
    within those categories.

3.   The findings of fact in the FtT decision were  preserved  and  are  set
    out from [17 - 25].  In  summary  the  FtT  found  that  the  appellant
    provided financial assistance for the LTTE between 2007 - 2008 and from
    2010 he was involved in assisting LTTE members to leave Sri Lanka.   He
    left the country using his own passport with a student visa and came to
    the UK to study in 2011.  He returned to Sri Lanka in February 2012 and
    was there for a period of  10  months  without  difficulties.   He  was
    reported as someone who had assisted the  LTTE  and  he  was  arrested,
    detained and ill treated.  He was released after payment of a bribe, he
    was not the subject of any warrant or court order, but was charged. The
    contents of a medical report were  accepted  as  reliable  evidence  of
    torture.  His explanation for his late claim for asylum was found to be
    credible.

4.   At the resumed hearing Ms Dogra produced a skeleton argument  in  which
    the risk categories from paragraph 356 of GJ are set out at paragraph 3
    of the skeleton argument. Ms Dogra submitted that  the  appellant  came
    within the categories at 7(a) "Individuals who are, or are perceived to
    be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because
    they are or have been perceived to have a significant role in  relation
    to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or renewal of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka". And (d) "A person whose name appears  on
    a computerized stop list is accessible at  the  airport,  comprising  a
    list against whom there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
    Individuals whose name appears on a "stop " list will be stopped at the
    airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan  authorities,  in
    pursuance of such order or warrant."

5.   Both representatives made oral submissions, the details  of  which  are
    set out in the record of  proceedings  and  which  I  have  taken  into
    account in reaching my decision.

Discussion and decision

6.   I find that the FtT failed adequately to consider the country  guidance
    case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It was submitted by Mr Kandola that the Claimant did
    not  meet  any  of  the  identified  risk  categories,  and  I   agree.
    Notwithstanding that the appellant was found to be credible as  to  his
    claim of having assisted the LTTE,  been  arrested,  detained  and  ill
    treated, I am satisfied that the evidence fails to show  he  faces  any
    risk on return to Sri Lanka.

7.   Ms Dogra placed significance on the chronology  of  events  and  argued
    that because the appellant was of  interest  to  the  authorities  post
    conflict in 2012,  this  indicated  that  the  interest  was  based  on
    sophisticated intelligence, and therefore he remains at  risk  on  that
    basis.

8.   I find no evidence to support that  submission.   The  evidence  before
    the FtT was that the appellant came to the attention of the authorities
    because someone reported his past involvement assisting the  LTTE.  The
    appellant was not a member of the LTTE and had no  significant  profile
    or political involvement.  The evidence was that he had  been  somewhat
    reluctant to provide help and in any event his role was limited to  the
    period in 2007 - 2010.

9.   I find no evidence that the appellant was or would be  perceived  as  a
    threat to the integrity of the state nor that he  has  any  significant
    role in relation to post conflict  Tamil  separatism.   His  activities
    were limited in extent and in time  to  2007  to  2010  and  there  was
    nothing to link him with any post conflict activity to indicate that he
    was or could be perceived as involved in  renewing  hostilities  or  as
    presenting a destabilising risk.

10.  I find no evidence that the  appellant  was  on  a  stop  list  and  as
    submitted by Mr Kandola at its  highest  the  evidence  could  possibly
    place him on a watch list, but this did not amount to a  real  risk  of
    ill treatment.

11.   Although  the  appellant  has  established  past  persecution,  I   am
    nevertheless satisfied that he  fails  to  meet  any  of  the  GJ  risk
    criteria and that he is a person who would be seen as having  had  past
    LTTE involvement of little significance given the current concerns  are
    now focused on potential destabilisation of the state.

Decision

12.  I allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and set  aside  the  First
    tier Tribunal decision.

13.   I  substitute  my  decision  and  I  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 16.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 16.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
