

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/00434/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21st April 2017                        |  On 3rd May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                           Simon guilherme makengo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McIndoe, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abonie, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 10th November, 1970 and is a citizen  of  the
    Congo.

2.   The appellant claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  13th
    June, 2005, using a passport to which he was not entitled.  He  claimed
    asylum the following day, which was refused on 29th  June,  2005.   The
    appellant then appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 14th September, 2005.  The appellant became appeal  rights
    exhausted on 23rd September, 2005 and on 18th January, 2010  he  lodged
    further submissions which were refused on 7th June, 2010.

3.   The appellant lodged further submissions  on  27th  January,  2014  and
    supplementary representations on 3rd January, 2012,  4th  April,  2014,
    27th February, 2015 and 7th May, 2015.
4.   On 8th January, 2016, the respondent decided to  refuse  to  grant  the
    appellant asylum and humanitarian protection under paragraphs  336  and
    339F of HC 395.

5.    The  respondent  exercised  his  right  under  Section   82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the Act") to  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal  was  heard  on  24th  November,
    2016, by First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker.

6.   In a determination promulgated on 13th December, 2016,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the   appellant   enjoys   a   subsisting
    relationship with his Portuguese partner who had been in a relationship
    since 2011.  His partner has two Portuguese  sons,  one  born  on  19th
    April, 1999, and the second on 30th November, 2004.  The children  have
    limited contact with their biological father and regard  the  appellant
    as their  father.   The  appellant  and  his  partner  went  through  a
    religious marriage ceremony on 21st September, 2013, but have not  been
    able to register  the  marriage  since  he  does  not  have  sufficient
    evidence of his identity to do so.

7.   It is the appellant's inability to produce evidence of  identity  which
    prevents him obtaining a passport.  Were he in possession  of  a  valid
    passport, then he would be in a position to apply for a residence  card
    as an extended family member on the basis of his relationship  with  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

8.   Instead, the appellant based his appeal on Article 8.

9.    The  judge  noted  pay  slips  produced  by  the  appellant's  partner
    confirming that she is in employment and the judge found that she was a
    qualified worker so that were the appellant in a position to produce  a
    passport he would be in a position to apply for a residence card.

10.  Mr McIndoe, who represented the appellant at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, accepted that the appeal could not be allowed  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, but argued that the appellant's removal would result in  a
    breach of his Article  8  rights,  irrespective  of  paragraph  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE because it would separate the appellant from both  his
    partner and from her children.

11.   The  Immigration  Judge  referred  to  Sunassee   v   Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2015] EWHC 1604 Admin and found  that
    the appellant could not bring himself under the  Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of his Article 8 claim.  He  then  proceeded  to  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim, finding that the appellant  enjoys  family
    life with his partner and her children and that his removal would  also
    interfere with his private life.  In considering  whether  or  not  the
    decision was proportionate, the judge said at paragraph 39:-

         "The role of the Human Rights Act is not to fill a  gap  where  the
         appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules for whatever  reason.
         There is a strong public interest argument in removing persons with
         no legal basis to stay.  In assessing public interest I  must  take
         into account Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended) which  deals
         with public interest arguments and applies to  all  decisions  made
         after 8th July,  2014.   This  provision  is  mandatory  and  being
         enshrined in primary legislation overrides existing case law.   The
         provision sets out the public interest considerations applicable in
         all cases and requires me to carry out a balancing exercise,  where
         circumstances engage Article 8(1), to decide whether  the  proposed
         interference is proportionate in all the circumstances".


    The judge then found he  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  his
    partner were  in  a  loving  relationship,  that  they  had  both  been
    consistent and that they had lived together since 2014.  He noted  that
    the Presenting Officer accepted that the best interest of the  children
    was to be with their mother.  The judge said:-


         "It is difficult to ignore the EEA  aspect  in  this  appeal.   The
         appellant's wife has made a fresh application, her previous one had
         been refused  because  she  could  not  establish  that  she  is  a
         qualified person.  I have made that finding on the evidence  before
         me.  I would find that her appeal decision which may  take  six  or
         seven months to be made by the respondent will be in her favour.  I
         certainly find she is a qualified person and a Portuguese national.
          I have been asked to assess the Article  8  implications  of  this
         appeal as at the date of the hearing".


12.  The judge then found that the parties were in  a  durable  relationship
    and intended to be legally married when they were able to do so.   They
    had lived together for more than two years and gave consistent evidence
    at the hearing.

13.  The judge then went on to consider the public interest  provisions  and
    noted that the appellant spoke some English but that an interpreter had
    to be used by him and by his partner.  The judge noted that the partner
    was working and could sustain the family without reference to benefits.
     There was no  evidence  of  the  appellant  having  claimed  benefits,
    although it was true he had formed a private and family life whilst  he
    had been in the United Kingdom unlawfully and his stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been precarious.

14.  The judge then said that he gave due weight to the public interest  but
    also had to take into account,

         "The very real prospect that the appellant will be allowed to  stay
         under the EEA Regulations once he has  obtained  a  passport.   [My
         emphasis].  The EEA  Regulations  do  not  incorporate  the  public
         interest provision and normally the public interest provisions  for
         a failed asylum seeker in this situation may require him to  return
         to Congo.  I also note that there has been a failure to comply with
         the EEA Regulations.  He has not produced a  passport  or  identity
         document but he is trying to obtain this.  This is not a near  miss
         type case as the  appellant's  partner  ...  is  exercising  treaty
         rights as I found she is  a  qualified  person.   They  have  lived
         together since June, 2014 and are in a durable  relationship.   The
         children have little contact with their natural  father.   He  does
         not have a passport to  return  to  Portugal  the  country  of  his
         partner ... is not an  option.   The  children  do  not  speak  the
         language of Tanzania [sic] and there would  be  difficult  cultural
         difficulties in them relocating.   He  says  he  has  no  immediate
         family in Congo as his parents have died.   He  has  an  uncle  and
         aunts but he is  not  in  contact  with  them  as  his  father  was
         estranged from them.  There is also the argument that the appellant
         does not need a residence card  to  exercise  treaty  rights  as  a
         family member".

    The judge concluded that there were strong  grounds  for  allowing  the
    appeal outside the Immigration Rules.  He reminded himself of Chikwamba
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 and then at
    paragraphs 49, 50 and 51 said this:-


         "49. Taking the above conclusions into account I find on the  facts
             as established, that the appellant would not face a real  risk
             of persecution on return to Congo  for  a  Refugee  Convention
             reason.  Even given the high threshold  of  conduct  which  is
             necessary to find that he would not face torture, inhumane  or
             degrading treatment, I find that rights under the Human Rights
             Convention with respect to Article 3 would not be infringed by
             his removal.


         50.  I must formally dismiss  the  appellant's  imputed  claim  for
             humanitarian protection under  Immigration  Rule  339C(ii)  as
             there is no credible evidence to support such a claim.


         51.  However I would allow the appeal under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Act".

15.  The respondent sought, and was granted, leave to appeal.

16.  The grounds point out that the appeal rights  being  exercised  by  the
    appellant were under the Immigration Act and not  the  EEA  Regulations
    and the Article 8 provisions were therefore to  be  considered  in  the
    light of the Immigration Rules and Section  117B  in  association  with
    relevant case law.  It was conceded that the appellant could  not  meet
    the EEA Regulations at the date of the hearing and it is  not  intended
    that Article 8 should be used to "fill gaps" where  an  appellant  does
    not meet the Immigration Rules for  whatever  reason.   The  judge  has
    failed  to  separate  consideration  under  the  EEA  Regulations  from
    consideration under the Immigration Rules.   The  judge,  having  found
    that  the  spouse  was  a  qualified  person  and  accepted  that   the
    relationship between the appellant and his spouse is genuine, failed to
    give any reasons why an application under the EEA Regulations could not
    be made by the appellant in due course.  The judge had  not  considered
    or explained why the appellant had been unable to obtain a passport.

17.  The case of Chikwamba predates both  the  new  Rules  and  the  primary
    legislation regarding Section 117B and the judge's statement  that  the
    public interest provisions expressly exclude  the  EEA  Regulations  is
    misconceived, given that the application and the appeal were  not  made
    under the EEA Regulations.  They were under the Immigration  Rules  via
    further submissions on  the  asylum  claim  and  therefore  the  public
    interest provisions were clearly relevant  to  them.   Lastly,  it  was
    asserted that when assessed against the provisions of paragraph  276ADE
    and Section 117B, it was unclear on what  basis  the  appellant's  case
    outweighed the public interest factors, absent a misconceived  reliance
    on the EEA Regulations.  It was argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for concluding that the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE were met.

18.  At the hearing before me, Mrs Abonie told me that  she  relied  on  the
    grounds.  The judge had allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds, ignoring the fact that the appellant could succeed  under  the
    EEA Regulations if he were to make an  application.   The  judge  found
    nothing exceptional or compelling  which  would  justify  allowing  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
    clearly not disproportionate to refuse the appeal.  The  children  were
    not qualifying children under the Immigration Rules in any event, being
    the partner's children by her former husband.  The children in question
    are 18 years and 12 years and their father plays no part in their life.
     For the respondent, Mr McIndoe reminded me that  the  judge  had  made
    clear findings that the parties were in a qualifying relationship.  The
    case was not put on the basis of the EEA Regulations and the judge does
    appear to have confused the situation under the EEA Regulations and  on
    Article 8 but he has made clear findings.  Mr McIndoe said that he  did
    not accept that the appellant  could  not  meet  Article  8  under  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of paragraph  276ADE(vi)  based  on  the
    length of time the appellant had been out of the  Congo.   He  accepted
    that the appellant had spent the first 25 years in the Congo,  that  he
    speaks Lingala, Portuguese and French as well as English.

19.  Mr McIndoe told me  that  to  his  credit  the  appellant  works  as  a
    volunteer, he has done so for several charities.  His asylum claim  was
    dismissed in 2005.  I reserved my determination.

20.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did err  by  confusing  the
    issues of the appellant's entitlement under the EEA Regulations and his
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  Were the appellant to be  able  to
    obtain a passport, then he could at some stage apply  for  a  residence
    card under the Immigration Rules.  His difficulty appears to be that he
    has no means of identity and as a result the Congolese  authorities  in
    London will not grant him a passport until he is in a position to prove
    his identity.  So far as the appellant's  Article  8  claim  under  the
    Immigration Rules is concerned, I do not accept that there would be any
    obstacles to the appellant's integration on his return to Congo.  He is
    a 46 year old, healthy male who speaks Lingala, Portuguese  and  French
    as well as English, and who spent the first 35 years in  Congo.   I  do
    not accept, therefore, that the appellant can succeed on his Article  8
    claim under the Immigration Rules.

21.  To his credit, this man has spent  his  time  as  a  volunteer  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has formed a loving relationship with a  Portuguese
    lady who now appears to exercise treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant's sponsor's children are aged 18 and 12 and  they  regard
    the appellant as their father.  They have little contact with their own
    father.  I bear in mind that to separate the appellant from his partner
    and from  her  children  would  cause  his  partner  and  her  children
    considerable distress.  I  have  no  doubt  it  would  also  cause  the
    appellant considerable distress.  However, there is no evidence  before
    me that removing the appellant from the United Kingdom would cause  his
    partner or her children any long term damage.   Having  considered  all
    the appellant's circumstances, I find that there is nothing  about  him
    or his circumstances which would entitle me to allow his appeal outside
    the Immigration Rules, given the need to consider  the  rights  of  the
    wider public in the maintenance of effective immigration.

22.  I am satisfied that the making  of  the  decision  involved  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J Parker in making an error on a point of law.  I  set
    aside his decision.  For the reasons I have given I find  that  I  must
    dismiss the appellant's human rights appeal.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

