
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00110/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M A E
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Draycott, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                                  EXTEMPORE


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State is the Appellant and appeals with  permission  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 6th July 2015.   The
    grounds of  the  application  assert  that  the  judge's  reasoning  is
    unclear, principally because it is not apparent  on  the  face  of  the
    decision the basis upon which the judge has  allowed  the  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal. I  am
    going to refer to the parties as they were known before the  First-tier
    Tribunal for my convenience.

 2. The Appellant had appealed on asylum and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR  grounds
    and, in the alternative, on humanitarian protection grounds.  The judge
    sets out clearly at paragraph 9 of the decision the self-directions  in
    respect of the alternative provisions of humanitarian protection.

 3. The judge explains that many of the matters that had been in contest at
    the time of the decision  had  fallen  away,  in  particular  that  the
    Respondent had conceded that the Appellant was in  fact  a  Palestinian
    national.

 4. The judge finds in favour of the Appellant on the issue as  to  whether
    or not he is on the Israeli-controlled population register, finding  at
    paragraph 19 that he is not so registered.

 5. The judge explains why the difficulties for the Appellant in  returning
    to Gaza and the discrimination, as identified in the  country  guidance
    case of SH do not entitle the Appellant to protection under the Refugee
    Convention.  Indeed the judge notes at paragraph 24 that in reality the
    Appellant  has  never  claimed  that  he  has  been  singled   out   by
    governmental or non-governmental bodies  for  persecution.   The  judge
    then identifies that the force  of  the  Appellant's  case  or,  as  he
    describes it, the "real thrust  of  his  appeal"  is  the  position  in
    respect of the humanitarian situation in  Gaza,  in  other  words,  the
    humanitarian protection position.

 6. The judge notes that the country guidance case of SH does deal with the
    general position in terms of humanitarian protection but indicates that
    the staleness of the country guidance case, being seven or eight  years
    old at the time of the judge's hearing, and also the  current  position
    in the country, mean that it is appropriate  to  look  outside  of  the
    country guidance cases. The judge sets out at [25], [26] and  [27]  the
    evidence that he considers to  be  determinative  of  the  humanitarian
    protection position.  The grounds do not take any specific  issue  with
    any of the judge's findings set out in those paragraphs.  There  is  no
    evidence adduced or any particularisation to the point that any of  the
    matters raised therein had been incorrectly assessed  or  are  in  fact
    mistaken.

 7. The judge specifically refers to the detail of the Appellant's own life
    in the context of his having left Gaza as an orphaned minor, and having
    no family, and no support network, and finds that, in combination  with
    the matters set out in the expert evidence of Dr George which  has  not
    been  significantly  challenged,  in  the  round,  the   evidence   has
    established the humanitarian protection argument.

 8. Insofar as the Respondent's  grounds  assert  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed  to  establish   indiscriminate   violence   the   grounds   are
    misconceived because it is quite clear that the judge is looking to the
    other provision in respect of humanitarian protection.  As the case  of
    SH makes clear, it is right for the judge to take into account not only
    the general circumstances but the absence of family support  in  making
    that assessment and in that regard  I  note  in  particular  that  very
    similar issues are considered at 113 and also 117 of SH ,  although  in
    that case a different view was taken.

 9. Nothing in the judge's approach reveals any misdirected so as to  found
    legal error.  I note that Mr Draycott has referred me to  the  case  of
    Sufi and Elmi and in particular the issue of state involvement  in  the
    humanitarian position, by which I mean the Israeli State involvement in
    the occupied territory.  Whilst the judge  has  not  referred  to  that
    decision, the approach that has been taken is entirely consistent  with
    that case law.

10. The grounds complain that the judge has found against the Appellant  in
    the context of Article 3, and posed the question as to why  it  is,  in
    that  context,  that  the  judge  found  in  favour  of  in  terms   of
    humanitarian protection.  I find that that is a  misconception  because
    in reading the decision what is clear is that the judge,  having  found
    that the Refugee Convention did not  afford  protection,  moved  on  to
    consider humanitarian protection, and in  that  context  there  was  no
    finding in respect of Article 3 adverse to the Appellant, so as to give
    rise to internal incoherence in the judge's reasoning as argued.

11. In respect of the issue as to whether or not,  having  found  that  the
    Appellant would be at real risk of serious harm  on  return,  he  could
    nonetheless relocate to the West Bank, the grounds  complain  that  the
    inaccessibility of the West Bank does not make  the  relocation  unduly
    harsh in the context of the test  set  out  in  Januzi.  The  grant  of
    permission gives an answer to the Respondent in regard to that  matter,
    where at paragraph 5 Judge Nicholson points out that  a  person  cannot
    reasonably be expected to relocate to another area which is safe if, as
    the judge found in this case, he cannot get there.   Nothing  has  been
    advanced before me by Ms Isherwood to assert that the position set  out
    in the grant of permission is in error.

Notice of Decision

12. It follows for all the reasons that I have set out that I find that the
    judge has not made any material error in concluding that the  Appellant
    is entitled to humanitarian protection and accordingly the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

