
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00663/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7th August 2017                    |On 10 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     u s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Hawden-Beal  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 22nd November 2016.

 2. The Appellant claimed that he arrived in the UK with his stepmother  in
    June or July 2012.  His father and elder brother were  already  in  the
    UK.  The Appellant claimed that firstly his stepmother  abandoned  him,
    leaving him with his father and brother.  Then his father  disappeared,
    and his brother left him at a police station and abandoned  him  there.
    The Appellant made an asylum claim on 2nd August  2013.   There  was  a
    screening interview on that date and a substantive asylum interview  on
    30th September 2013.  Prior  to  the  asylum  interview  the  Appellant
    submitted a witness statement dated 15th August 2013  setting  out  his
    claim.  He explained that he had had no  contact  with  his  biological
    mother.  His father came to the UK in 2002.  The  Appellant  originates
    from Lahore where he went to school until 2012.

 3. The Appellant lived with his stepmother in Lahore.   On  occasions  his
    father returned from the UK to visit.  The Appellant first visited  the
    UK in 2009 with his stepmother and older brother.  He  travelled  using
    his own passport.  He and his stepmother returned to Pakistan after two
    or three months.  His brother remained with his father in the UK.

 4. The Appellant returned to the UK with his stepmother in  June  or  July
    2012.  They stayed with his father in Burton-on-Trent.   The  Appellant
    attended school.  After about three months he returned from  school  to
    be told that his stepmother had returned to Pakistan.

 5. The Appellant and his father and brother moved houses  and  during  the
    move the Appellant lost his passport.

 6. Four or five months after his stepmother left, the  Appellant  returned
    from school to discover that his father had  also  left.   He  remained
    with his brother for about two months before his brother took him to  a
    police station and abandoned him there.  Thereafter the  Appellant  was
    taken into foster care.

 7. The application for asylum and the accompanying human rights claim  was
    refused by the Respondent on 3rd March 2015.  However the Appellant was
    granted leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child  until
    10th November 2015.  The Respondent accepted his nationality, and  that
    he had been abandoned by  his  family  as  claimed.   The  Respondent's
    records indicated that the Appellant's father came to the UK to work on
    a permitted basis in approximately 2002.  The  records  confirmed  that
    the Appellant together with his brother and stepmother had been  issued
    a visa and it was accepted that they had travelled to the UK in 2012.

 8. The Appellant's asylum claim as the member of a particular social group
    was not  accepted,  as  the  Respondent  concluded  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection available in Pakistan.

 9. Having been granted leave  to  remain  until  10th  November  2015  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to remain  on  9th  November  2015.
    This application was  refused  on  25th  April  2016.   The  Respondent
    pointed out that the Appellant's family had been traced and his  father
    and three sisters were living in Lahore, and at the  time  the  enquiry
    was made the Appellant's brother was  also  in  Pakistan,  but  he  had
    married a British national and  was  planning  to  return  to  the  UK.
    Enquiries made in Pakistan confirmed that the Appellant was in the UK.

10. The Respondent therefore did not accept that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned as a member of  a  particular  social  group,  that  being  an
    unaccompanied child.  It was not accepted that he would be at  risk  if
    returned to Pakistan as there was a sufficiency of protection.  It  was
    not accepted that his return would breach Articles 2, 3  or  8  of  the
    1950 Convention.

11. The Appellant appealed to the FtT, and the  appeal  was  heard  on  7th
    November 2016.  The FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   The  FtT
    rejected the Appellant's claim  that  he  had  been  abandoned  by  his
    family, on the basis that the family had been located in  Lahore.   The
    Appellant, who was unrepresented at the hearing, claimed that he  would
    be at risk if returned to Pakistan because he is gay.  This  claim  had
    not been made in either of the two previous applications for  leave  to
    remain.  The FtT rejected that claim, and did not accept the  Appellant
    was gay.

12. Following dismissal of his appeal the Appellant  applied  for  and  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

13. On 23rd May 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation  to
    error of law.  By the time of the Upper Tribunal hearing the  Appellant
    had secured legal representation and was represented  by  Ms  Imamovic.
    It was contended that the  FtT  had  erred  in  law  by  not  providing
    adequate reasons for conclusion.  It was  conceded  by  the  Respondent
    that the FtT had erred in law in considering the Appellant's  claim  to
    be abandoned, but it was not conceded the FtT had  erred  in  rejecting
    the Appellant's claim to be at risk based upon his sexual  orientation.
    I found that the FtT had materially erred in law, and I set  out  below
    the findings;

         "14. As accepted by the Respondent  the  FtT  materially  erred  in
             considering the Appellant's claim to be at risk if returned to
             Pakistan because he had been abandoned by his family.  The FtT
             findings on this issue are contained in paragraph 27, the  FtT
             finding that this aspect of  the  Appellant's  claim  'can  no
             longer succeed' because his family had been  traced  and  were
             living in Lahore.   The  FtT  went  no  further  in  providing
             reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
             abandoned.  As conceded by the Respondent, this aspect of  the
             FtT decision is set aside because of inadequacy of reasons.

         15.  I find no error of law contained in the conclusion reached  by
             the FtT that the Appellant has not  proved  he  is  gay.   The
             findings are  set  out  in  paragraphs  28-30,  and  they  are
             findings which were open to the FtT to make on  the  evidence,
             and are supported by adequate reasons."

14. The hearing on 23rd May 2017 was adjourned so that the  decision  could
    be re-made by the Upper Tribunal after further evidence was given.  The
    FtT findings in relation to the Appellant's sexuality were preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

15. At the commencement of the hearing on 7th  August  2017  I  ascertained
    that I had received all documentation upon which the  parties  intended
    to  rely,  and  that  each  party  had  served  the  other   with   any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

16. I had received the following documents;

       . Respondent's bundle with Annex A-I;

       . Appellant's supplementary trial bundle comprising 31 pages;

       . Expert report dated 4th August 2017 prepared by Uzma Moeen;

       . Appellant's skeleton argument.

17. Ms Imamovic informed that the Appellant did not pursue  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  The appeal was based upon the Appellant's  claim  that
    he is entitled to humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of
    the Immigration Rules, and that to return him to Pakistan would  breach
    Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).  The Appellant also contended that his  appeal  should  be
    allowed by reliance upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  His Article 8  claim  was  based  upon  private
    life.  It was not contended that he had established family  life  which
    engaged Article 8.

18. Ms Imamovic confirmed that the Appellant would be giving oral  evidence
    as would Miss Teresa Gotham who is the  Appellant's  personal  advisor,
    and  who  is  employed   by   Staffordshire   County   Council.    Both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there was
    no application for an adjournment.

The Oral Evidence

19. The Appellant gave oral evidence in English.  The interpreter  in  Urdu
    remained throughout the hearing in  case  of  difficulty  but  was  not
    required.

20. The Appellant adopted the contents of his witness statement dated  15th
    August  2013  which  has  already  been  summarised,  and  his  witness
    statement dated 1st August 2017.  A brief  summary  of  this  statement
    confirms his abandonment by his family.  He was placed  with  a  foster
    family.  He remained for three years with a foster family before living
    independently.

21. Teresa Gotham has been his personal advisor since he attained 18  years
    of age.  She helps him manage his shopping and expenses.

22. The Appellant has no wish to  join  his  family  in  Lahore.   This  is
    because they abandoned him.  He has not had any contact with them since
    being abandoned in 2013.

23. The Appellant maintained his contention that he is  gay.   He  contends
    that he would find it very difficult to integrate back  into  Pakistani
    culture, pointing out that the last time he read or wrote something  in
    Urdu was in Pakistan.  He has no experience of employment.

24. The Appellant was cross-examined.  I have recorded  all  questions  and
    answers in my  Record  of  Proceedings  and  it  is  not  necessary  to
    reiterate them here.  If relevant I will refer  to  the  oral  evidence
    when I set out my findings and conclusions.  The Appellant did say that
    he did not wish to return to Pakistan, as he would have to start again,
    and he had established a life in this country in the last  five  years.
    When asked if he practised his religion he replied not much, and he had
    not attended a mosque since 2013.

25. Oral evidence was then given by Miss Gotham who confirmed that she  had
    been his advisor since he turned 18.  She described  the  Appellant  as
    polite and  well-mannered  and  a  very  nice  and  kind  person.   The
    Appellant wishes to be able to engage in full-time employment, and  has
    been attending a full-time course which is a BTec carpentry and joinery
    course.  The  Appellant  has  lived  independently,  but  has  required
    ongoing support, more than average,  to  maintain  his  tenancy  as  he
    struggled to understand bills,  benefits  and  to  deal  with  letters.
    There was no cross-examination of Miss Gotham.

The Respondent's Oral Submissions

26. Mr Duffy submitted that the Appellant's passport details are  known  to
    the Respondent, and therefore it would be relatively straightforward to
    obtain a travel document to enable him to return to Pakistan.   It  was
    not accepted that the Appellant  would  have  difficulty  in  obtaining
    identity documentation in Pakistan, or documentation to enable  him  to
    travel to Pakistan, as had been contended in  the  expert  report.   Mr
    Duffy also pointed out that the Appellant would  be  entitled  to  some
    assistance if  he  returned  voluntarily  which  would  assist  him  in
    reintegration.

27. In addition the Appellant had skills that would assist him  in  finding
    employment in Pakistan.  It was not accepted that the  Appellant  would
    be regarded as a potential kidnap victim if he returned to Pakistan, Mr
    Duffy pointing out that kidnappers would  chose  a  victim  who  had  a
    family or friends who would be willing to  pay  large  sums  of  money.
    This was not the case with the Appellant.

28. Mr Duffy contended that the Appellant would be returned to Pakistan and
    would not be in a different position from  any  other  young  Pakistani
    citizen, who did not have family support.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

29. Ms Imamovic relied upon her skeleton argument.  I  was  asked  to  find
    that the Appellant is a vulnerable young man, and therefore would be at
    risk.  He has been described as a shy and introverted  individual,  and
    would have no family support network.

30. I was asked to find that he would be destitute, and Ms Imamovic pointed
    out that the emergency travel document referred to by Mr Duffy, is  not
    a passport or a Pakistani identity card.

31. Kidnapping would not be the only risk to the Appellant, as there  would
    be risks of sexual exploitation and forced labour.

32. It was submitted that the risks faced by the Appellant  meant  that  he
    was entitled to humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C, and
    the risk of ill-treatment reached the  Article  3  threshold.   In  the
    alternative Ms Imamovic submitted that the Appellant  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan,  and  therefore
    should succeed in his appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
     The Appellant had been in the UK since he was 14 years of age.  He had
    developed a private life here and had friends in this country.

33. The Appellant had not read anything in Urdu since he left Pakistan, and
    had not written anything in Urdu and therefore would have difficulty in
    reading and writing.

34. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

35. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before me, and the oral submissions made by both  representatives.   In
    considering risk on return I take into account the  lower  standard  of
    proof that applies, which can be described as a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.  The burden of proof is on the Appellant.

36. In considering Article 8, my view is that the  burden  of  proof  is  a
    balance of probabilities.  I have considered the evidence in the  round
    and with anxious scrutiny.  This is not  a  case  where  the  Appellant
    claims that he is entitled to be granted asylum.  The Appellant  claims
    that he is entitled to be granted humanitarian protection  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules, which means that he must prove
    to a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds to believe that he would face a real risk of suffering  serious
    harm, and he is unable, or  owing  to  such  risk  unwilling  to  avail
    himself of the protection of the authorities in Pakistan.  Serious harm
    is defined in  paragraph  339C  as  the  death  penalty  or  execution,
    unlawful  killing,  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or
    punishment, or a serious and individual threat to  life  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict.

37. With reference to Article 3 the Appellant must prove  to  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he  would  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

38. I do not find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof for
    the following reasons.

39. I do not find that the Appellant would have  any  undue  difficulty  in
    obtaining a national identity card,  or  a  passport  or  an  emergency
    travel document enabling him to travel to Pakistan from the UK.  It  is
    common ground that the Appellant has held a valid  Pakistani  passport.
    The Respondent has records of this.  The Appellant was granted  a  visa
    enabling him to visit the UK as the dependant of a work permit  holder.
    These records will be available to the Pakistani authorities,  and  the
    authorities will have their own records which  will  confirm  that  the
    Appellant has previously been issued with a valid  Pakistani  passport.
    He has travelled out of Pakistan on  two  occasions,  and  returned  to
    Pakistan once, using that passport.

40. I do not find that the Appellant would have any difficulty if he needed
    to obtain his birth certificate from the local council in Lahore.   The
    expert at paragraph  32  comments  that  a  birth  certificate  can  be
    obtained  from  the  Local  Union  Council  in  Lahore,  and  a   birth
    certificate can be  obtained  through  a  friend  or  third  person  in
    Pakistan.

41. The Appellant has not demonstrated  that  he  would  be  at  risk  from
    indiscriminate violence in Pakistan.  I do not find that any  objective
    evidence has been submitted to prove this, neither do I find  that  the
    expert  report  states  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  from
    indiscriminate violence.

42. I accept that the Appellant has been abandoned by his family.  I accept
    that he no longer wishes to contact them.   I  am  satisfied  that  his
    family, with the possible exception  of  his  brother,  are  living  in
    Lahore.

43. The finding made  by  the  FtT  that  the  Appellant  is  not  gay  was
    preserved.  The FtT did not err in law in reaching that conclusion.   I
    therefore do not consider in this case, the circumstances  in  Pakistan
    that relate to an individual who is gay.

44. The Appellant does not have any relevant health difficulties.  He would
    have no linguistic difficulties.  I do not find that he would have  any
    substantial difficulty in speaking, reading or writing Urdu.   Urdu  is
    his first language, which he used both verbally and in writing until he
    left Pakistan at 14 years of age.

45. I do not find that the Appellant would be at risk of kidnapping  simply
    because he has lived in the UK since 2012.  The expert at paragraph  75
    refers  to  opportunist  criminals  abducting  a  British  Asian.   The
    Appellant is not a British  Asian.   The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan who has lived the greater part of his life in Pakistan.  I  do
    not find that the Appellant, having  lived  in  Pakistan  for  fourteen
    years, and the UK for five years, could be described as westernised.

46. The Appellant would be entitled to  assistance  with  reintegration  on
    return.  This is confirmed in the Respondent's refusal  letter.   I  do
    not find that the Appellant would be at risk of destitution.

47. The Appellant has learned English while in the UK.  I see no reason why
    this  would  not  assist  him  in  seeking  employment.   He  has  also
    undertaken a two year carpentry course, and again I see no  reason  why
    this would not assist him in finding employment.

48. The Appellant has established himself in the UK, where English was  not
    his first language.  He confirmed that he has been living independently
    for approximately eighteen months.  I  accept  the  Appellant  has  had
    advice and assistance from Miss Gotham, and I accept  that  there  have
    been occasions when she has been meeting with the Appellant on a weekly
    basis to give him assistance in managing his  affairs.   She  made  the
    comment in her oral evidence that she gave the same sort of  assistance
    to her 24 year old son when he started living independently.  I do  not
    find that the evidence confirms  that  the  Appellant  could  not  live
    independently.

49. The evidence does not indicate to a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,
    that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  secure  employment  and
    accommodation.

50. I do not find that the evidence indicates that the Appellant  would  be
    at risk of serious harm, or at risk  of  treatment  that  would  breach
    Article 3.

51. Turning to Article 8, it is my view that the Appellant cannot rely upon
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because this sub-paragraph  provides  that  the
    Appellant must be aged 18 years or over, at the  date  of  application.
    The date that the Appellant applied for further leave to remain is  9th
    November 2015.  At that time the Appellant was 17 years  of  age.   The
    Appellant did not attain 18 years of age until 10th May 2016.

52. Even if the Appellant could rely upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) I do  not
    find that he has proved there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into Pakistan.  I accept what  the  Appellant  said  in
    oral evidence that if returned he would have to start again.   That  is
    what he did when he came  to  this  country.   The  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) confirmed that mere  hardship,  mere
    difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and  mere  inconvenience,  even
    where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test of very  significant
    obstacles in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

53. I have considered Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules,  following
    the principles in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 by adopting a balance sheet
    approach.

54. I find that Article  8  is  engaged,  not  because  the  Appellant  has
    established family life in the UK, but because  he  has  established  a
    private life.  I take into account his wish to remain in the UK.

55. However I also have to take into account the considerations in  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002
    Act).  Maintenance of effective immigration control is  in  the  public
    interest.  It is in the public interest that a person seeking to remain
    in this country can speak English.  The Appellant can speak English but
    this must be regarded as a neutral factor in the balancing exercise.

56. It is in the public  interest  that  a  person  seeking  to  remain  is
    financially independent.  The Appellant is not financially independent.

57. I must attach little weight to a private life established when a person
    has been in the UK unlawfully or with a precarious immigration  status.
    The Appellant has had a precarious immigration status in  that  he  has
    only ever been granted limited leave to remain.  Therefore I  am  bound
    by section 117B to attach little weight to the  private  life  that  is
    established.

58. I find that I must attach weight to the fact that  the  Appellant  will
    not be at risk if returned to  Pakistan.   He  is  a  citizen  of  that
    country.  I  find  that  he  would  be  able  to  find  employment  and
    accommodation.

59. I attach weight to the fact  that  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in order to be granted  leave  to
    remain.  I must  attach  weight  to  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.  I find that this weight outweighs the  weight  to
    be placed upon the wishes of the Appellant to remain in the  UK,  where
    he has lived for approximately the last five years.  In  conclusion,  I
    do not find that the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant
    leave to remain, is disproportionate, and I find that the decision does
    not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
was set aside.  I make a fresh decision as follows.

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 8th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
