







Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00394/2016

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd September 2017                   |On 29th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                          Mr Seyed Iman Nasirzadeh

                        (NO AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bradshaw Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Action

For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran. No  anonymity  direction  was  made
    previously. It appears that none was applied for. Having considered the
    circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on  17th  February  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  his  protection  claim   based   upon   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 3. The grant of permission at paragraph 3 states:-

         The grounds assert that the Judge failed to apply the correct test,
         namely, whether he was a regular attender at church and would  thus
         be at risk. The  Judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the  background
         evidence of Bishop Smith and made no findings  as  to  whether  the
         appellant  was  a  regular  attender  at  church.  The  appellant's
         evidence was that he was an Aaronic Priest was not, as found by the
         judge discrepant with the evidence from his witness.  Bishop  Smith
         noted that a male member above 18 can be ordained a  priest  within
         the Priesthood.  The  Judge  also  speculated  as  to  whether  the
         appellant would have devoted significantly more time and energy  to
         learning about the church, contrary  to  SZ  and  JM  [2008]  UKAIT
         00082.

 4. It is on the basis indicated that leave was granted.

 5. The appellant, an Iranian national, was claiming conversion to faith of
    the Church of the Latter Day Saints, known otherwise as Mormons,  as  a
    basis for asylum, humanitarian protection or relief on the  grounds  of
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 6. Crucial to the consideration of that  issue  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had genuinely converted to the faith referred to. In order to
    prove a genuine conversion statements, emails and  letters  in  support
    had been submitted to the Tribunal, including an email  from  a  Bishop
    Smith. It is to be noted that Bishop Smith did not attend to give  live
    evidence but had submitted an email. A Joseph Forbes, who in accordance
    with the Mormon faith would be at the very least an Aaronic Priest, did
    attend and gave evidence on behalf of the  appellant.  As  will  become
    apparent it appears that all males over 18 who have been  baptised  are
    normally ordained into the priesthood.

 7. The Judge in paragraph 6 considered the evidence that was available  to
    show whether the appellant was regularly attending  church  and  was  a
    genuine convert. It was noted  that  the  appellant's  application  was
    lodged in 2013 and all his evidence related to that  period.  The  only
    additional evidence was however an  email  from  Bishop  Smith  of  the
    Rochdale Ward of the Church of the  Latter  Day  Saints  and  the  live
    evidence from Mr Forbes.

 8. At paragraph 23 of the decision the judge has stated that the  evidence
    by the appellant that he had been ordained as an Aaronic Priest when he
    had joined the Mormon Church was  not  consistent  with  the  email  by
    Bishop Smith. The conclusion by Judge Cohen was that being ordained  as
    an Aaronic Priest was for young men between the ages of 12 and  18  and
    not for new members. The  evidence  in  the  email  however  states  in
    paragraph 5

         "The Aaronic Priesthood is the 'lesser Priesthood' young  men  from
         the age of 12 to 18 hold  the  Aaronix  Priesthood  and  their  age
         determines which office they are ordained  to  within  the  Aaronic
         Priesthood, boys 12 to 14 are ordained deacons...... All  new  male
         members aged  18+  are  ordained  as  Priests  within  the  Aaronic
         Priesthood straight after baptism."

 9. Whilst reading the first part of that email seems to indicate that  the
    Aaronic Priesthood starts for young men at the age of 12, it does go on
    to indicate that new members are also ordained into the priesthood.  In
    the decision clearly the judge has misunderstood  what  the  email  was
    saying. The following paragraphs of the email deal with the  fact  that
    those being baptised into the Mormon faith, who are 18+, are encouraged
    to be  ordained  into  the  priesthood.  The  fact  merely  of  baptism
    qualifies an individual to be ordained into the Aaronic priesthood  and
    it does not reflect any detailed  knowledge  or  understanding  of  the
    faith itself. Normally an  individual  is  ordained  into  the  Aaronic
    Priesthood on baptism. Indeed further on the  emails  from  the  Bishop
    indicate that an  individual  progresses  from  being  in  the  Aaronic
    Priesthood to being in the Melchizedek Priesthood indicating that it is
    at that stage that one has developed an understanding and knowledge  of
    the faith.

10. The emails also indicate that the church does not have  vicars  in  the
    sense that is normally understood in the Church  of  England  or  other
    Christian denominations. The church has wards. Each ward is  run  by  a
    bishop, who is effectively performing the functions of a vicar. In that
    context the fact  that  the  appellant  did  not  understand  what  was
    referred to as a vicar or  what  the  responsibility  of  such  a  post
    involved may be explainable. In the decision the judge has made much of
    the fact that the  appellant  did  not  seem  to  understand  what  the
    functions of a priest or  vicar  were.  Given  that  an  individual  is
    ordained virtually at the same time that one is baptised the baptism of
    itself does not preserve many deep knowledge or  understanding  of  the
    faith, but is only indicative of commencing a journey  it  may  not  be
    surprising that the appellant did not have  a  knowledge  of  what  the
    functions of the priest or a vicar were.

11. As indicated the point made by the judge that the appellant's  evidence
    is discrepant from that of  his  witness  is  not  sustainable  in  the
    circumstances. Equally some of the conclusions drawn that an individual
    who was in the Aaronic Priesthood would have a detailed  knowledge  and
    understanding of the faith are not borne out by the email.  It  appears
    to an extent that the judge speculated that an individual that had been
    ordained into the Aaronic Priesthood would have such knowledge and that
    such was unjustified. Equally the reference to vicars as a test of  the
    commitment of an individual to a faith may not have  relevance  in  the
    context of the Mormon faith.

12. As indicated within the letters by Bishop Smith and by the evidence  of
    Mr  Forbes  the  appellant  was  regularly  attending  church  and  was
    regularly being instructed in the tenets of the  faith,  which  he  had
    joined.

13. The judge  has  made  adverse  findings  with  regard  to  factors  and
    indicated that there are contradictions in the evidence, which  do  not
    exist. That undermines the whole of the process  of  findings  of  fact
    made by the judge. In the light of that the  findings  of  fact  cannot
    stand. The only courses for this matter to be considered further in the
    First-tier Tribunal. I therefore remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

14. In any reconsideration of the case reference will have to  be  made  to
    domestic case law the case of FS  & ors  (Iranian  Christian  Converts)
    [2004] UKAIT 00303, which  case  was  intended  to  give  a  definitive
    approach to how to treat converts. Clearly since that time case law has
    moved on.  At paragraph 187 of FS it was found that those that are  not
    leaders, do not promote the faith, are not proselytisers or evangelical
    Christians would not be at risk. The  evidence  disclosed  that  whilst
    there may be questioning of such converts there was  no  suggestion  of
    any ill treatment during the course of such questioning. There  may  be
    some restrictions on liberties but such would not engage either of  the
    conventions. The case even considered the prospect of mistreatment from
    Basiji and the frequency and level of such was not such  as  to  engage
    Article 3 or asylum or humanitarian protection.

15. By comparison at paragraph 189 of FS those that  were  leaders  of  the
    church, were proselytisers or evangelical Christians would be  at  risk
    of  persecution.  The  greater  their  activity  and  the  greater  the
    leadership role the greater the risk of mistreatment  and  persecution.
    The more significant the  role  the  greater  the  likelihood  that  an
    individual would come to the attention of licensed zealots  or  adverse
    attention of the theocratic state. Whilst there may  be  other  factors
    which would result in an individual being at risk, at paragraph 192 the
    case states that fact finders have to consider how a person will act on
    return to Iran. The case of SZ & FM [2008]  UKAIT  00032  endorsed  the
    approach set out in FM.

16. Those cases have to be considered in light of the case  of  HJ  v  SSHD
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 wherein the guidance given  with  regard  to  the
    expectation that an individual will live discretely or in  the  present
    case hide his faith was dealt with and if one had  to  so  amend  one's
    life to avoid the risk such would be an unacceptable infringement could
    constitute persecution.

17. Within the more recent authorities it is accepted that those that  have
    genuinely converted to Christianity may be at risk. In FG v Sweden  App
    No 43611/11 ECtHR 2016 it was accepted that converts per se would be at
    risk. In any hearing before the First-tier Tribunal consideration  will
    have to be given to the background evidence and  determine  whether  or
    not if the appellant has a genuine convert how would he be  treated  if
    returned to Iran

18. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility  assessment
    contains material errors and must be set  aside.  With  regard  to  the
    further disposal of this appeal I have regard to paragraph 7.2  of  the
    Senior Presidents Practice statement and to the nature  and  extent  of
    the factual findings required in remaking the decision. I have  decided
    that the most appropriate courses to remit the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal so that fresh findings of fact can be made. None  of  the
    findings of fact made by the judge are preserved.

Notice of Decision


19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of material
    error of law. Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

20. The case will be remitted back for a fresh hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. None of the findings of fact of the First-tier  Tribunal
    are preserved.




Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



