
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: AA/00737/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                              |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8th October 2014                               |22nd October 2014         |
|                                                  |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                                     UT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms S Anzani, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  in  1993.  He  appeals
      against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dated  23rd  May
      2014, dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's  decision,  dated
      17th January 2014, to remove him to Sri Lanka under section 10 of  the
      Immigration and Asylum act 1999 on asylum, humanitarian protection and
      human rights grounds.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the UK on  3rd  December  2013  and  claimed
      asylum after he  was  found  concealed  in  the  lavatories  at  Luton
      airport. He was interviewed on 4th December 2014 (screening interview)
      and 13th January 2014 (substantive interview).

3.    It is the Appellant's case that in 2008 he was travelling  on  a  bus
      with his uncle when he was kidnapped by the LTTE. He was  trained  for
      45 days and then taken to Paranthan where he was told to dig  bunkers.
      On 31st December 2008, he was hit by a shell fired by the  Sri  Lankan
      army and taken to hospital. On 1st April 2009, the LTTE took him  from
      the hospital and he continued  fighting  and  delivering  food  for  a
      further 20 days before he left the LTTE. The Appellant surrendered  to
      the Sri Lankan army on 17th May 2009 and was identified as a member of
      the LTTE. He was arrested and taken to the camp at  Karaichikudiruppu.
      On 18th May 2009, he was taken to Joseph Camp in Vavuniya where he was
      detained and assaulted regularly for two years. His uncle  paid  seven
      Lakh rupees for his release on 28th November  2013.  He  was  told  to
      report to the police station on 4th December 2013.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox did not find  the  Appellant  to  be  a
      credible witness because he was unable to provide  meaningful  details
      relating to his time with the LTTE, there were  discrepancies  in  his
      account and  his  account  of  torture  was  inconsistent.  The  Judge
      considered the medical report, but did not accept that the  Appellants
      injuries were caused as he claimed or that he  was  actively  involved
      with the LTTE.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy  on
      9th August 2014 on the grounds that it was  arguable  that  the  Judge
      erred in his assessment of the Appellant's evidence that he  had  been
      recruited by the LTTE.

6.    At the hearing before me, Ms Anzani relied on the grounds  of  appeal
      and submitted that the Judge's credibility findings were  unreasonable
      in light of the Appellant's evidence and the background evidence,  and
      his reasons were insufficient. The Judge identified nine issues  which
      he found undermined the Appellant's credibility. Ms Anzani dealt  with
      each point in turn and submitted that these credibility  points,  even
      taken as a whole,  were  insufficient  to  undermine  the  Appellant's
      credibility. The Appellant had given detailed and consistent  evidence
      in his substantive interview and his witness  statement.  The  Judge's
      finding that his account was lacking in detail was perverse.

7.    Ms Anzani submitted that the Judge had decided that the Appellant was
      not credible before considering the medical report. The Respondent had
      not alleged that the Appellant's injuries were self inflicted. Some of
      the Appellant's scars were consistent with shell attacks during combat
      which supported the Appellant's account that he was involved with  the
      LTTE. The injuries on his thighs were typical  of  being  beaten  with
      rods,  which  supported  his  account  that  they  were   deliberately
      inflicted.  Paragraph  64  of  the  determination  was  not  a  proper
      assessment of the medical evidence. The Appellant would be at risk  on
      return.

8.    Mr Tarlow submitted that the Judge's findings were open to him and he
      gave sufficient reasons for his conclusions. In his determination, the
      Judge dealt with adverse credibility findings  and  then  the  medical
      report. He then considered the evidence in the round before concluding
      that the Appellant had failed to make out  his  claim.  There  was  no
      error in the determination taken as a whole.

Discussion and conclusions

9.    At paragraph 54, the Judge stated that he did not find the  Appellant
      to be a credible witness. He gave  his  reasons  for  coming  to  this
      conclusion at paragraphs 54 to 64.

10.   During his substantive interview, the Appellant could not recall  the
      names of those with whom he lived for 45 days during training with the
      LTTE. In his witness statement, he explained  that  he  did  not  know
      their actual names and referred to them as 'anna' in  accordance  with
      cultural tradition. In oral evidence, he  stated  that  he  was  dizzy
      during his interview and this was why he could not recall their  names
      at that time.

11.   The Judge rejected the Appellant's explanation  for  his  failure  to
      recall  the  names  of  his  associates  with  whom  he  had  spent  a
      significant amount of time. I find that it was open to  the  Judge  to
      conclude that  the  lack  of  detail  and  the  discrepancies  in  the
      Appellant's explanation for this damaged the Appellant's credibility.

12.   In his interview, the Appellant was asked to give more  detail  about
      what he learned in political training. He stated that he was told  how
      to talk to people to make them join the  LTTE  and  about  the  leader
      Velupillai Pirabarakan and his family. In his  witness  statement,  he
      stated that he was taught about the history of the conflict  with  the
      LTTE and the Sri Lankan Government. He was taught about the history of
      the LTTE and their goals; the leader of the LTTE and his  family;  and
      about how to recruit people. In his oral evidence, he initially stated
      that the instructors were  not  interested  in  whether  the  trainees
      engaged with the training process, but later he  stated  that  he  was
      required to memorise the leaders' names  and  birth  places,  and  the
      various factions and their composition.

13.   The Appellant claimed to have spent two hours per  day  for  45  days
      receiving political training. The Judge found that the  Appellant  was
      unable to give meaningful  details  relating  to  that  training.  The
      Appellant's  explanation  for  this  given  in   oral   evidence   was
      inconsistent. The Judge found that it was more likely  than  not  that
      the  Appellant  had  embellished  his  claim  as  a  reaction  to  the
      discrepancies rather than a reliable account of  true  events.  In  my
      view, this finding was open to him on the evidence.

14.   The Appellant had  given  inconsistent  evidence  about  how  he  was
      identified as LTTE upon his arrest. In his substantive  interview,  he
      stated that he was identified by a lady. In his witness statement,  he
      stated that he was identified by a man wearing a black mask  over  his
      face. In his oral evidence, he claimed that he  was  identified  by  a
      lady who shouted out and then he was stabbed in the stomach by an army
      official.

15.   In his interview on 13th January 2014, the Appellant stated  that  he
      was tied to a table and beaten  twice  with  a  wooden  pole.  In  his
      witness statement, dated 2nd May 2014, he added  to  his  account  and
      stated that he was also whipped with a thick  metal  whip  and  burned
      with cigarettes. The Judge found these discrepancies significant. This
      finding was open to him on the evidence.

16.   The Judge went on to consider the medical report dated 8th March 2014
      and considered the evidence in the round before concluding that he did
      not accept that the Appellant received  his  injuries  as  he  claimed
      because his evidence was unreliable.

17.   In the medical report, Dr Mason was of the view  that  three  of  the
      scars to  the  Appellant's  stomach  were  diagnostic  of  exploratory
      surgery. However, he was  not  certain  as  to  the  reason  for  such
      surgery. Although the other scar on the Appellant's stomach was highly
      consistent with being struck by  a  hard  ragged  object  such  as  an
      artillery  shell,  other  accidental  causes  of  such  a  wound  were
      possible. The scars on  the  Appellant's  legs  were  consistent  with
      flying fragments from an exploding artillery  shell,  but  could  have
      resulted from wounds caused in everyday life.  The  Appellant  claimed
      that these injuries were caused whilst he was a member  of  the  LTTE.
      Looking at the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  find  that  the  Judge's
      conclusions that the Appellant had failed to show that he was a member
      of the LTTE and his injuries were caused whilst fighting for the  LTTE
      were findings open to him on the totality of the evidence.

18.   The Appellant claimed that the injuries to his thighs and  arms  were
      caused when he was detained by the army.  The  skin  staining  on  his
      thighs were typical of marks from a forceful beating with a hard  thin
      object such as a whip or metal cord. This  supported  the  Appellant's
      account given in his witness statement, but  not  in  his  substantive
      interview. The scars on the  Appellant's  arms  were  consistent  with
      cigarette burns, but could have been caused by other accidental burns.
      The Appellant had given  inconsistent  evidence  in  relation  to  his
      arrest and ill-treatment in detention.  The  opinion  in  the  medical
      report did not preclude the Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant  had
      failed to show that the injuries were caused in the manner he claimed.



19.   The Judge did not accept that the Appellant  was  involved  with  the
      LTTE or that he had been  detained  and  tortured  as  a  result.  The
      medical opinion was consistent with such a finding. The Appellant  had
      changed his account  in  his  witness  statement  and  embellished  it
      further in oral evidence.

20.   I am not persuaded by Ms Anzani's submission  that  the  nine  issues
      identified by the  Judge  were  insufficient  to  support  an  adverse
      credibility finding. The  majority  of  the  arguments,  both  in  the
      grounds and in submissions, amounted to disagreements with the Judge's
      findings. Ms Anzani's submission was not that these points  could  not
      be relied upon, but that cumulatively they did not lead to a  negative
      credibility finding.

21.   Having reviewed the evidence in the  Appellant's  interview,  witness
      statement and his oral testimony, I find that the  Judge's  conclusion
      that the Appellant's account was inconsistent and  lacking  in  detail
      was open to him on the evidence. There was no  error  of  law  in  the
      Judge's findings that the Appellant's account was not credible and  he
      had failed to show that he was a former LTTE cadre. The Appellant  had
      failed to show that he had a previous record as a suspected or  actual
      LTTE member and to establish, to the lower standard, that  he  was  at
      risk of harm upon return to Sri Lanka.

22.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  23rd
      May 2014 shall stand.

23.   There was no application to vary  or  discharge  the  anonymity  order
      made by the First-tier Tribunal and therefore that  order  remains  in
      force.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
21st October 2014
