
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00291/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 April 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [J O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE))
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Muzira
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 25  December  1980.   She
    has been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan dismissing her appeal against  the  decision  of
    the respondent made on 26 January 2016, to refuse her claim for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant claimed that if she were to return to Nigeria, her  three
    daughters would be subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM).  Since
    her community in Nigeria heard about the birth of her first daughter on
    28 April 2011, they have asked for her to return so that her  daughters
    could receive circumcision.  She underwent FGM herself as a child.

3.   The three daughters were born on 28 April 2011, 28 April  2011  and  23
    April 2015.

4.   On 31 March 2010, the appellant was granted leave to enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a British citizen, James Samuel Walters, for a
    period of two years.  On 20 January 2012,  however,  before  the  leave
    granted had expired, the appellant was served with form  ISI51A.   This
    was because it had been discovered that her husband was not in  fact  a
    British national called James Walters, but a Nigerian  national  called
    [FA].  He had fraudulently  adopted  the  identity  of  Mr  Walters,  a
    British citizen who died in New York in 1989.  He  obtained  a  British
    passport in that name, and used his assumed  identity  to  sponsor  the
    appellant's application.  He was convicted of fraud and conspiracy, and
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment for those offences.  The  appellant
    herself was acquitted of conspiracy in respect of her husband's  fraud.



5.   On 29 June 2012, the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her human rights.  That application was refused on  15  August
    2013 with no right of appeal.  On 3 December 2013 the appellant  issued
    proceedings  for  judicial  review  against  the   respondent's   first
    decision, and on 23 January 2014 it was  agreed  that  her  application
    would be considered.  The matter was  duly  reconsidered  on  17  April
    2014, but the decision was upheld.  The appellant appealed against that
    decision.  The appeal came before Judge Flower on  12  September  2014.
    By way of a decision promulgated on 30  September  2014,  Judge  Flower
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

6.   The respondent made a separate decision on 25 June 2014 to  deport  the
    appellant's husband.  He appealed against that  decision.   The  appeal
    came before Judge Phull on 15 May 2015.  Judge Phull allowed the appeal
    to the limited extent that she found that the decision had not been  in
    accordance with the law.   This  was  because  the  appellant  and  her
    husband had raised fears that, if returned to Nigeria, their  daughters
    would be subjected to female genital mutilation  (FGM).   Although  the
    appellant had herself claimed asylum on that basis, at the  time  Judge
    Phull came to consider the matter, the appellant's asylum claim had yet
    to be determined, and no interview had  been  conducted.   Judge  Phull
    found that she was not in a position to properly assess the risk of the
    children being subjected to FGM.   She  was  also  concerned  that  the
    respondent had not considered the welfare and  best  interests  of  the
    children.  She remitted the matter back to the respondent so that these
    matters could adequately be considered.

7.   Subsequently the respondent  considered  the  application  and  made  a
    decision on 26 January 2016 to refuse the appellant's claim for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection.  It was  the  appellant's  appeal  against
    this decision that First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan dismissed.  It  is
    the dismissal of this appeal that  forms  the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before me.

8.   The judge said she had considered the findings  made  by  Judge  Flower
    and Judge Phull.  In so doing, she had reminded herself of the guidance
    set out in the case of Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The judge said  that
    Judge Flower's findings in relation to the issue of FGM were  extremely
    limited.  She said that was  not  surprising  because  she  noted  from
    paragraph 13 of Judge Flower's decision  that  the  issue  of  FGM  was
    raised for the  first  time  in  the  appellant's  bundle  prepared  in
    readiness for the hearing before her.  At paragraph  14,  Judge  Flower
    recorded  that  both  the  appellant's  Counsel  and  the  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  before  her  agreed  that  it  would   have   been
    inappropriate for her to explore and determine the issue.  Judge Flower
    concurred with that.  Accordingly, she made no findings in  respect  of
    the matter, save one, that is that medical evidence had been  presented
    which established that the appellant had herself been subjected to FGM.
     Judge O'Hagan said that this formed part of the factual matrix of  the
    appeal before her.

9.   The judge, at paragraph 35, said  that  Judge  Phull  set  out  in  her
    decision her concern that the respondent had not engaged with the issue
    of FGM.  The judge also said that Judge Phull did not make any findings
    of her own in respect of the issue of FGM.  She noted that Judge  Phull
    had recorded at paragraph 46:-

         "I find that the evidence from both the appellant and his  wife  is
         consistent that FGM is prevalent and compulsory in the states  from
         which they originate.  They cannot relocate to another part of  the
         country because FGM is practised widely throughout Nigeria and  the
         authorities are unable or unwilling to protect the victims of  FGM.
         "

10.  The judge continued at paragraph 35 as follows:-

         I think it somewhat unfortunate that Judge Phull records this under
         the heading 'My Findings' since the findings in  this  passage  are
         limited to the fact that  the  appellant  and  Mr  [A]  (sic)  were
         consistent with one another in their evidence as to the position in
         Nigeria.  Judge Phull was not saying that she  found  that  matters
         were, as a matter of fact, as they describe, but merely  that  they
         were consistent in their claims.  I am, therefore,  left  with  the
         one judicial finding, on which I rely, that the appellant had  been
         subjected to FGM."

11.  The judge at paragraph 36 went on to consider  the  evidence  given  to
    her by the  appellant  and  Mr  [A].   In  contrast  to  Judge  Phull's
    experience of them, she found that  their  evidence  was  not  mutually
    consistent.  More significantly still she found neither of them to be a
    reliable witness.  On the contrary, she found them both to  be  evasive
    and dishonest.  The judge set out the inconsistencies in their accounts
    from paragraphs 37 to 40.

12.  The judge said at paragraph 41  that  given  the  regrettably  lack  of
    reliability shown by both witnesses, she was  not  satisfied  that  she
    could accept their account of the position  taken  by  the  appellant's
    family to FGM, and nor could  she  accept  their  evidence  as  to  the
    general level of risk.  She found that both were quite willing  to  say
    anything that they felt would bolster their  chances  of  remaining  in
    this country.

13.  In the absence of evidence from the parties on  which  it  could  rely,
    the judge considered the objective evidence available to her about  the
    level of risk generally of girls being subjected  to  FGM  in  Nigeria.
    The judge said as follows at paragraphs 42 to 45:-

         "42. ... The country information  and  guidance  issued  in  August
             2015, at paragraph 2.3.6, states,


              'Although against the  law  and  in  decline,  female  genital
                  mutilation(FGM) continues to be practiced  with  differing
                  prevalence rates and type across  Nigeria  and  by  ethnic
                  group, religion, residence (urban/rural), state, education
                  and socio-economic class.  A 2013 UNICEF report found that
                  27% of women had undergone FGM, although in  the  last  20
                  years the prevalence among adolescent girls has dropped by
                  a half.  FGM is usually inflicted on a  child  before  she
                  can give her informed consent but it may also be difficult
                  for adolescent  girls  and  women  to  refuse  social  and
                  extended family pressure to have the procedure.'


              Whilst a rate of 27% is unacceptably and depressingly high for
             such an appalling practice, it is still less than a  third  of
             the population.  Moreover, that 27%  contains  a  considerable
             historic element when the prevalence was much higher.  I  note
             that, in  2013,  UNICEF  found  that  the  prevalence  amongst
             adolescent girls had dropped by a half, indicating a declining
             practice.  It is also reasonable to assume  that  the  figures
             include a preponderance of girls subjected  to  the  procedure
             with the agreement of their parents, and that the position  is
             very much better where, as here, the parents do not agree.


         43.  The UNICEF report which the guidance refers  was,  of  course,
             issued before the practice was made illegal in 2015.  Whilst I
             have no direct evidence as to the degree to which the new  law
             is being enforced effectively, it  is  reasonable  to  suppose
             that the prevalence  of  the  practice  is  unlikely  to  have
             increased since it was criminalised, and it is more likely the
             criminalisation will have compounded the existing trend  to  a
             decrease in the practice.  That view is reinforced by  section
             2.4 of the August 2015 country information and  guidance.   In
             essence, the position is  that  there  is  steadily  improving
             situation in Nigeria, particularly since the Violence  against
             Persons (Prohibition)  Act  2015  was  passed.   The  guidance
             states that this,


              '... shows a determination to tackle violence  against  women,
                  provides stiffer penalties for a  number  of  gender-based
                  offences such as FGM, and may make it easier for women  to
                  seek recourse and protection.'


              The guidance acknowledges that there are  still  difficulties,
             both with the implementation of the legislation, and with  the
             adequacy and effectiveness of the state institutions, such  as
             the police, from which protection may be sought.  Nonetheless,
             it describes an improving situation.


         44.  The  guidance  indicates  that  regard  must  be  had  to  the
             individual circumstances of the case  in  considering  whether
             adequate protection is likely to be available to the  specific
             individual.  In  this  case,  the  Appellant  has  not  sought
             protection, still less been refused it.  On the face of it, as
             an articulate woman, with the  support  of  her  husband,  she
             would be well placed to seek protection.


         45.  Having considered all of these matters,  I  am  not  satisfied
             therefore that the Appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
             proving that she or her daughters face a substantial  risk  of
             serious harm in her home country.  I find  the  Appellant  has
             not discharged the burden of proof of showing  entitlement  to
             the protection of the Refugee Convention or Articles 2  and  3
             of the Human Rights Convention.   Any  claim  to  humanitarian
             protection would stand or fall for identical reasons.  Since I
             have not accepted the factual basis for the claim, the  issues
             of internal flight and sufficiency of protection do not arise.
              Even if the factual claims were accepted, the evidence  leads
             me to believe that there would be a sufficiency of  protection
             in this case.  The protection might not be  certain  or  carry
             the level of confidence that one might ideally  like,  but  it
             would be sufficient."

14.  The judge said at paragraph 46 that although Miss Muzira who  had  also
    appeared before her raised paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and Article  8,  she
    had no independent arguments to advance, and conceded that  the  matter
    would stand or fall with the issue of FGM.  Given that concession,  the
    judge found that the appellant's claim fell for the same reasons  given
    in respect of her claim for asylum.

15.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  He said that the grounds before  him  were  much  better  than
    those supporting the application to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  made
    out a reasonably arguable  case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    overlooked evidence that might have made a difference to the  decision.
    He therefore gave permission on all grounds.

16.  Miss Muzira challenged the judge's decision on Devaseelan.  She  argued
    that the judge failed to  properly  take  into  account  Judge  Phull's
    decision at paragraph 46 which the judge recorded at  paragraph  35  of
    her decision as her starting point.  Miss Muzira submitted  that  Judge
    Phull made more than one judicial finding.  The first  finding  was  at
    paragraph 33 when she adopted Judge Flower's finding that the appellant
    had herself been subjected to FGM.  The second  finding  was  that  the
    appellant and her family could not relocate in Nigeria because  FGM  is
    practised widely throughout Nigeria,  and  thirdly,  that  despite  the
    change in the law in 2015, the authorities in  Nigeria  are  unable  or
    unwilling to protect the victims of FGM.  In the light of these claimed
    findings, Miss Muzira argued  that  there  was  no  need  to  have  re-
    litigated the appellant's case.

17.  I  accept  that  the  finding  that  the  appellant  herself  had  been
    subjected to FGM was a finding that was first  made  by  Judge  Flower,
    accepted by Judge Phull and also accepted by Judge O'Hagan.  I do  not,
    however, find that Judge Phull made the second and  third  findings  as
    claimed by Miss Muzira.  I agreed with the judge that Judge  Phull  was
    not saying at paragraph 46 that she found that matters were as a matter
    of fact, but merely that they were consistent in their claims.  I  find
    that Judge Phull did not make any substantive  findings.   Judge  Phull
    found that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    because the respondent had failed to  give  any  consideration  to  the
    risks of FGM that the appellant's  daughters  may  face  on  return  to
    Nigeria to enable her to make a proper assessment under Article  3  and
    Article 8 ECHR.  Consequently,  she  referred  the  case  back  to  the
    respondent to consider the appellant's claim.

18.  Miss Muzira sought to challenge the credibility findings  made  by  the
    judge.  I informed her that having considered the findings of fact made
    by the judge, I found that they disclosed no error of law.   The  judge
    had identified the inconsistencies in the accounts, the evasiveness and
    the lack of credibility of  the  appellant  and  her  husband  on  core
    matters.  I  found  that  the  judge's  findings  on  credibility  were
    properly made and therefore sustainable.

19.  The only issue that we were left with was in respect of the  risks  the
    appellant's children may face if they return  to  Nigeria  and  whether
    there was a sufficiency of protection for  them  if  they  returned  to
    Nigeria.

20.  The grounds upon which permission was granted  argued  that  the  judge
    paid no regard to the background evidence in her assessment of risk  to
    the children on return to Nigeria  should  the  parents  resist  having
    their children subjected to FGM.  It was further argued that no  regard
    was paid in the judge's decision to the educational level and  economic
    status of the family in being  better  able  to  resist  the  procedure
    having regard to the background evidence.  It was also argued that  the
    judge was wrong to state that she did not have  the  relevant  evidence
    before her and further erred in  making  suppositions  which  were  not
    backed by relevant evidence.

21.  I accept Miss Muzira's argument that the adverse  credibility  findings
    made by the judge against the appellant and her husband did not  go  to
    the core of her claim having regard to what is in issue in  this  case,
    namely, risk to the young  children  of  being  subjected  to  FGM,  in
    particular,  their  mother's  family  members  and  an  FGM  practising
    community.  She submitted that according  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement of August 2014, she and her husband are uneducated  and  they
    would not be able to resist societal pressure to have  their  daughters
    subjected to FGM.  She submitted that at paragraph 43 the  judge  erred
    in seeking to ignore background evidence  about  the  effectiveness  of
    police protection.  Miss  Muzira  submitted  that  the  authorities  in
    Nigeria may be willing  to  prevent  FGM  but  are  unable  to  provide
    effective protection.

22.  I find from the background evidence that FGM  is  viewed  as  a  tribal
    identity and is rooted in culture and tradition.  Indeed, the appellant
    herself underwent FGM.   The  objective  evidence  indicates  that  the
    performing of FGM depends on the educational level and economic  status
    of the family, with better educated and  more  affluent  families  more
    resistant to the practice.  In view of the appellant's own  experience,
    I accept her evidence that she and her husband would  not  be  able  to
    resist societal pressure to  have  their  daughters  subjected  to  FGM
    because of their lack of education.

23.  I find that having made the  finding  which  she  did  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 43, the judge should have allowed the appeal.  The judge held
    as follows:

     "The guidance acknowledges that  there  are  still  difficulties,  both
         with the implementation of the legislation, and with  the  adequacy
         and effectiveness of the state institutions, such  as  the  police,
         from which protection may be sought.  Nonetheless, it describes  an
         improving situation."

24.  I find that despite the improving  situation,  the  objective  evidence
    indicates that the authorities in Nigeria would not be  able  to  offer
    the children with adequate and effective protection.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date:  9 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

