
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00774/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 15th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Master ORGEST PEROSHI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kanola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahluwalia, instructed by Luqmani Thompson and
Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against the decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Archer) dated 23rd of June 2015. In this decision, I shall refer to the
    parties as they were in the First tier, i.e. that Master Orgest Peroshi
    is the Appellant, and the Secretary of State for the Home Department is
    the Respondent.

2     Judge Archer allowed the appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 19 December 2014 to refuse asylum and to  make
    a decision under s.10 Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  to  remove  him
    administratively from the United Kingdom to  Albania,  his  country  of
    nationality.

    Background

3     The background to this matter is that the Appellant  was  born  on  14
    November 1997 and who is therefore still a minor. He entered the United
    Kingdom in or  around  May  2012  and  claimed  asylum.  In  a  witness
    statement dated 9th July 2012, made in support of  his  initial  claim,
    the  Appellant  recounted  that  he  had  converted   from   Islam   to
    Christianity in Albania.  He was from the Durres area which is  in  the
    coastal, western area of  Albania.  He  describes  befriending  someone
    named Armando Simoni,  a  Catholic,  and  becoming  interested  in  the
    Christian faith.

4      The  account  given  in  the  statement  is  that  his  interest  and
    conversion to Christianity became known to schoolmates  and  the  wider
    community, resulting in his experiencing discrimination, and  receiving
    beatings. He decided to leave Albania, and travelled to the UK.

5     The Appellant underwent a SEF interview  on  11th  July  2012,  and  a
    further interview on 22 July 2013. In these interviews,  the  Appellant
    gave a similar account to that in his original witness statement.

6     However, on 31st July 2013, the  Appellant's  representatives  Luqmani
    Thompson  and  Partners  provided  further   representations   to   the
    Respondent in support of the Appellant's  application  for  protection.
    This included a letter from the Appellant's Social Worker dated 25 July
    2013. In this letter the Social Worker recounted information which  was
    said to have been given to her by the Appellant. The  letter  described
    additional problems that the Appellant had experienced in Albania prior
    to his departure,  from  another  young  man  at  school  called  Xhema
    Berisha. It was said that the Appellant  had  been  bullied  by  Xhema,
    resulting in a fight between the two  in  which  the  Appellant,  being
    trained in boxing, defeated Xhema.

7     This had in turn resulted in the Appellant's father  being  kidnapped,
    and serious death threats being made against the  Appellant's  life  by
    members of Xhema's family. Also  included  with  these  representations
    were a series of Facebook messages, said to have been received  by  the
    Appellant from various people  connected  with  Xhema,  making  threats
    against the Appellant using extremely violent language.

8     The Respondent refused the application  for  protection  in  a  letter
    dated 14th December 2014, and on 19th December 2014 made  the  decision
    to remove the Appellant to Albania.

9     The Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision,  the  appeal  coming
    before Judge Archer at Columbus House, Newport on 11th June  2015.  The
    Appellant gave oral evidence, as did the Appellant's Social Worker, and
    a boxing coach with whom the Appellant had trained  in  the  UK.  Other
    evidence contained a statement from the Appellant's father in  Albania,
    and a letter from the Principal of the Appellant's  school,  describing
    the altercation that passed between the Appellant  and  Xhema  Berisha,
    and its consequences.

10    In fact no Presenting Officer had attended the hearing of  11th  June.
    On the Tribunal file is a letter from the Respondent to the First  tier
    Tribunal dated 10th June 2015 which states that the court list for that
    week had been scrutinised, checked and carefully considered,  and  that
    exceptionally in the light of the finite  resources  available  to  the
    Respondent it had been decided that there would not be  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at the hearing. The Respondent's subsequent  grounds
    of appeal raise no issue as any procedural unfairness, and in  my  view
    the Judge dealt fairly with the issues before him and the Appellant did
    not receive any  unfair  advantage  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  a
    representative for the Respondent.

11    The Judge accepted the credibility of the  Appellant,  giving  reasons
    at  pars  30-32  for  doing  so.  The  Judge  therefore  accepted   the
    Appellant's account set out at para 17  that  Xhema's  father  was  the
    cousin of one Sali Berisha who was a very powerful man in  Albania  and
    was the Prime Minister at the time, that the family had killed a number
    of people, owned many buildings and had plenty of money.

12    The Judge held at paragraph  33  of  the  determination  that  he  was
    satisfied  that  the  problems  with  the  Berisha  family   could   be
    categorised as a blood feud, and that the Appellant  forms  part  of  a
    particular social group. The Appellant  had  suffered  persecution  for
    around seven months before he left because of his self confinement. The
    Berisha family were  powerful,  and  internal  relocation  was  not  an
    option, given the reach of the aggressor  clan  and  the  size  of  the
    country. If the Appellant returned to Albania he would be  forced  into
    self-confinement again, and the Police  had  not  helped  so  far.  The
    family had moved 150 km from their house (to an area where  there  were
    no schools for the Appellant's younger brother to attend - see para 27)
    and there was plainly no sufficiency of State protection.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13    The  Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  Judge's
    decision for the reasons set out in grounds of  appeal  dated  26  June
    2015. In summary, they argue that the Judge had materially  misdirected
    himself in law in his application of the Country Guidance  case  of  EH
    (Blood Feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC),  in  finding  the
    Appellant to be the subject of a blood  feud  at  all.  The  Respondent
    argued that the situation that the Appellant found himself and had  not
    resulted in  the  killing  of  any  individual  and  it  was  therefore
    submitted that the main requirement listed in  EH  to  demonstrate  the
    existence of a blood  feud  had  not  been  satisfied.  The  Respondent
    referred to paragraph 70(f)-(g) of EH, as follows:

         "(f)     In determining whether an active blood  feud  exists,  the
             fact-finding Tribunal should consider:

             (i) the history of the alleged feud, including  the  notoriety
                  of the original killings,  the  numbers  killed,  and  the
                  degree of commitment by  the  aggressor  clan  toward  the
                  prosecution of the feud;

             (ii)      the length of time since  the  last  death  and  the
                  relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;

             (v) the ability of members of the aggressor clan to locate the
                  appellant if returned to another part of Albania; and

             (vi)      the past and likely future attitude  of  the  police
                  and other authorities towards the feud and the  protection
                  of the family of  the  person  claiming  to  be  at  risk,
                  including any past attempts to seek prosecution of members
                  of the aggressor clan, or  to  seek  protection  from  the
                  Albanian authorities.]

         (g)      In order to establish that there is an active  blood  feud
             affecting  him   personally,   an   appellant   must   produce
             satisfactory individual evidence of its existence in  relation
             to him.  In particular, the appellant must establish:

             (i) his profile as a potential target of the  feud  identified
                  and which family carried out the most recent killing; and

             (ii)      whether the appellant has been, or other members  of
                  his  family  have  been,  or  are  currently,   in   self-
                  confinement within Albania."

14    The Respondent argued that given that there had been  no  killing  the
    judge erred in finding the existence of a blood feud. Further, "the one
    overriding principle of establishing whether a blood  feud  existed  or
    indeed continues is specifically related to whether there  has  been  a
    killing of a clan member and which clan suffered the last killing". The
    Respondent pointed out that the  father  had  been  released,  and  not
    killed; in the  absence  of  a  blood  feud,  the  treatment  that  the
    Appellant had described did not reach the level required  to  establish
    persecution. There was effective protection available.

15    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal
    Shimmin in a decision dated 7th July 2015 on the grounds  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge had erred in his application of the case law on
    blood feuds in Albania because there had been no killing.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

16    At the commencement of the hearing Mr Ahluwalia  provided  me  with  a
    copy of a Rule 24 Response which he had prepared the previous  day.  He
    informed me that it had been faxed the day before, but it had not  come
    to my attention. It is undesirable that a lengthy document such as this
    should be provided on the date of hearing, but I formed the  view  that
    the document was of assistance to both parties, having  the  effect  of
    clarifying the Appellant's position in the appeal. Mr  Kandola  had  no
    objection to considering it. Mr Kandola and I took time to consider the
    document.

17    Mr Kandola made submissions on behalf of the  Respondent.  He  adopted
    the grounds, asserting that the country guidance contained at paragraph
    74 of EH requires the occurrence of a killing in order  for  any  blood
    feud to exist. In the absence  of  any  such  killing,  the  Respondent
    argued that there could be no blood feud, and the immigration judge had
    proceeded on an incorrect basis.

18    I did not require Mr Ahluwalia to address me in this appeal.

    Discussion

19    I find that there was no material error  of  law  in  the  First  tier
    Tribunal's decision.

20    My reasons for finding that there is no material error of law  include
    the following.

21    It was plain that the Judge had considered  the  determination  of  EH
    and  made  reference  to  it  at  a  number  of   points   within   his
    determination. The judge was also plainly aware that there had been  no
    killing (see para 24).

22    It was open to the judge, in considering the evidence before  him,  to
    reach the conclusion that the Appellant's circumstances fell within the
    definition of a blood feud, as defined by EH. In  my  view,  EH  itself
    does not require that a killing had already taken place before a  blood
    feud could be said to exist.

23    At paragraph 5 of the determination in EH, the Upper Tribunal set  out
    a number of definitions and concepts which had been extracted from  the
    evidence  before  it.  These  definitions  including  a  reference   to
    (emphasis added):

         "(v)     Gjakmarrja ('Blood-taking'). A vendetta,  or  blood  feud,
             which may have lasted for decades, or may be recent in origin.
              It is closely linked to collectivist notions  of  family,  or
             clan solidarity and  reliability.   A  blood  debt  carries  a
             related loss of honour which  can  only  be  restored  by  the
             taking of blood from the other family.  It is generally  borne
             by the males of the  nuclear  family,  parents,  grandparents,
             children and grandchildren.

             Typically, a feud begins with  a  killing  or  offence  by  an
             individual from Clan A, which must be  revenged  by  a  senior
             male figure from Clan B.  When revenge has been carried out by
             Clan B, Clan A is required to retaliate by killing  a  Clan  B
             member, and so on, potentially to the extinction of  all  male
             members of both clans.  Children under 15 and  women  are  not
             usually required either to kill or be killed,  except  perhaps
             where a woman is the cause of the feud, or the last  surviving
             member of the target clan."

24    A blood feud may therefore typically, but not explicitly,  begin  with
    a killing or an offence by an individual  from  one  clan  to  another.
    There is no logical reason why the beating to the ground of  one  young
    man by another would not be capable of causing 'offence' to the Berisha
    clan, which apparently holds a position of some power  in  Albania  and
    would no doubt be keen not to be seen as being put in a  weak  position
    by  one  of  its  members  being  publicly  humiliated.   Proportionate
    responses and respect for the rule of law are  not  necessarily  to  be
    expected in  Albania,  where  evidence  clearly  establishes  that  the
    phenomenon of murderous blood  feuds  persists.  In  that  regard,  the
    Respondent's description of  the  conflict  as  'a  fight  between  two
    schoolboys' wholly fails to put the  issue  into  its  proper  country-
    specific context.

25    In EH the Upper  Tribunal  considered  evidence  of  expert  witnesses
    including Dr Schwander-Sievers, whose evidence, discussed at paras  37,
    54, and 59 was of assistance to the Tribunal and was  accepted  by  it.
    She had given evidence that the concept of a blood feud  bore  a  close
    relationship with social honour, akin to the Italian approach to family
    honour (see EH App C para 20); the real issue in such  disputes  always
    concerned local politics, status, and which families could impose their
    superiority (EH App C para 21).  Another expert Dr  Allston  had  given
    evidence that blood feuds did occur, often over  property  or  personal
    insults (EH App C para 26).

26    Para 74(f)(i)-(iv) of  EH  sets  out  various  matters  deemed  to  be
    relevant to the assessment as to whether an active blood  feud  exists.
    This in my view is distinct from the issue of whether a  given  set  of
    circumstances meets the definition of a blood feud at all. Alternatives
    to an active blood feud existing include,  for  example,  that  (i)  no
    blood feud has ever  existed;  (ii)  a  blood  feud  may  have  existed
    historically, but no longer, or (iii) recent events  might  potentially
    appear to meet the definition of a blood feud, but it is clear  that  a
    feud is not being actively pursued by  any  aggressor  clan.   Although
    some of the factors set out at paragraph 74(f) raise  the  question  of
    what killings have already taken place, such issues are relevant to the
    whether a feud may be deemed to be currently active.  Further,  I  note
    that such matters are identified as being matters  to  that  the  fact-
    finding Tribunal should consider,  but  none  is  identified  as  being
    determinative as to the existence of an active blood feud. In  my  view
    the absence of an initial killing would not prevent  the  circumstances
    faced by the Appellant from meeting the definition of a blood feud  set
    out at paragraph 5 of EH. The Judge did not misapply  the  guidance  in
    EH.

27    In any event the Judge took into account the factors  at  para  74(f).
    In particular the Judge had clearly taken into account the  history  of
    the conflict; the notoriety of the aggressor family and its  commitment
    towards the prosecution of the feud. The Judge  noted  evidence  (which
    was credible - para 30-32) that even after the initial  kidnapping  and
    beating of the Appellant's father, the father was threatened and beaten
    up on several  further  occasions  (para  18)  and  the  Appellant  had
    received threats via Facebook (para 19). The  Appellant's  brother  had
    moved school because of the problems but was attacked there by  friends
    of Xhema, resulting in his teeth being broken, and the father had  been
    kicked and threatened when standing near the front door (para 20).

28    In conclusion I am of the view that the key submission advance by  the
    Respondent, that 'the one overriding principle of establishing  whether
    a blood feud exists or continues is specially related to whether  there
    has been an initial killing', is not a proposition which can  be  found
    within the country guidance case of the EH, and the  Respondent's  case
    is not made out.

29    I am of the view that having made sustainable findings of fact,  which
    are not challenged by the Secretary of State in her grounds of  appeal,
    the Judge made a proper and sustainable assessment that  the  situation
    experienced by the Appellant and his family amounted to a  blood  feud;
    that a real risk of serious harm existed for the Appellant upon  return
    to Albania; and that there would be no effective  protection  available
    to the family.

30    I also note that in oral submissions, Mr Kandola  suggested  that  the
    Judge had erred in law by failing to consider internal flight properly,
    it being part of the Appellant's evidence  that  his  family  had,  two
    weeks prior to the hearing of 11th June 2015, moved home to a place 150
    km away from the original location.

31    I note that such a ground  of  appeal  is  not  contained  within  the
    Respondent's grounds of appeal, is not Robinson obvious, and permission
    has not been granted to argue  that  point.  For  those  reasons,  this
    Tribunal is not obliged to entertain the submission.

32    If I am wrong in that finding, I would in  any  event  find  that  the
    Judge had not materially erred in law in relation to  the  availability
    of internal  relocation.  The  Judge  had  noted  that  there  were  no
    educational opportunities for the Appellant's brother in that place  of
    internal relocation (para 27); the family lived in an old  house  in  a
    village (para 28); and held that the Berisha family are  powerful,  and
    internal relocation was not an option, given the reach of the aggressor
    family and the size of the country  -  if  the  Appellant  returned  to
    Albania he would be forced into self-confinement again (para 33).

    Decision

33    I find that the making of the decision of 23.6.15 did not involve  the
    making of any material error of law.

34    I do not set aside the First tier decision.

35    I dismiss the Respondent Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 14.9.15
