
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00152/2016
     AA/00154/2016
     AA/00155/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2016                             |On 27 October 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS P V (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         MRS A V (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        MASTER ARV (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  However, I refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    Secretary of State was the respondent.  The appellants are citizens  of
    Sri Lanka.  The first appellant was born on 6 June 1992 and the  second
    appellant was born on 10 November 1950.  The  third  appellant,  Master
    ARV was born on 28 March 2014.  The first appellant is the daughter  of
    the second appellant and the third appellant is the son  of  the  first
    appellant  and  the  grandson  of  the  second  appellant.   The  third
    appellant is dependent on the first appellant.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 16 August 2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Blake allowed  the  appeals  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed with permission on the grounds that the
    reasons given by the judge for allowing the appeals are not  sufficient
    to bring the appellants  within  the  risk  factors  contained  in  the
    country guidance of GJ and Others (Post-civil war returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Whilst the judge also allowed the  appeals
    under Article 8 it was submitted that there were no reasons  given  for
    that finding and no considerations of those articles separate from  the
    Refugee Convention.

 4. It was Mr Kotas' submission that the judge did not  set  out  the  risk
    categories in GJ  and  that  the  judge  found,  in  effect,  that  the
    appellants would be at risk of 'by association' coupled with attendance
    at demonstrations in the UK.  However he submitted  that  this  is  not
    what the country guidance says.  Individuals have to be a threat to Sri
    Lanka or perceived to be so.   However  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the
    appellants are a mother, a grandmother and a  child  returning  to  Sri
    Lanka and it was submitted that clearly there  would  not  be  a  risk.
    Although Mr Blundell, in his Rule 24 response, indicated that the  only
    issue was credibility, Mr Kotas did not accept that this was  the  case
    and submitted that there was no express concession  made  by  the  Home
    Office and the Record of Proceedings indicated that at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the Home Office Presenting Officer made  submissions  both  on
    credibility and the country guidance.  Mr Kotas further submitted  that
    the lack of findings in relation to the human  rights  was  flawed  and
    there was no reference to the very high threshold necessary. I asked Mr
    Kotas for his view on PP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1828 as relied  on
    by Judge  Blake  (at  paragraph  [213]  of  his  decision).   Mr  Kotas
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  said  anything  in  relation  to
    persecution of women or whether that was what was being relied on.

 5. Mr Blundell took me to the skeleton argument provided  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which set out the current  position  in  Sri  Lanka  with
    reference to the respondent's guidance of May 2016  on  Sri  Lanka  (at
    paragraphs 20 to 24 of that skeleton).  Mr Blundell  also  referred  to
    the statements of the appellants in the bundle  and  the  supplementary
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  This set out the background  of
    this case including that, as accepted by Judge Blake in his decision at
    [208], the father of the first appellant was a  senior  figure  in  the
    LTTE and was responsible for procuring arms and other banned goods  and
    transporting them.

 6. Mr Blundell also relied on the factual matters accepted by Judge  Blake
    including that the father of the first appellant and the husband of the
    second appellant was currently in Vietnam.   Both  the  appellants  had
    dealt in their statements with the situation of the father of the first
    appellant who fled Sri Lanka to Laos and then Vietnam.  It was also set
    out in the statements, again as accepted by Judge Blake, that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities had subsequently visited the brother  of  the  first
    appellant in Sri Lanka and interrogated him about the family  including
    the  father.   In  addition  paragraph  33  of  the  first  appellant's
    supplementary statement November 2014 referred to events  in  May  2014
    where it was indicated that again the authorities had visited the first
    appellant's brother and had indicated that the appellants  were  taking
    part in rallies in  the  UK  and  the  appellant's  brother  was  again
    threatened.  The first appellant's further statement of  10  July  2016
    contained similar indications of ongoing interest in the family on  the
    part of the Sri Lankan authorities.

 7. Mr Blundell indicated that this was the case presented to the Secretary
    of State and therefore it was in this context that the judge's findings
    at paragraph [17] of the decision must be viewed.  Judge Blake at  [17]
    stated that the issue in the appeal was  "one  of  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account".  That credibility was accepted  by  Judge  Blake.
    It was Mr Blundell's submission that it was not a case, as argued by Mr
    Kotas, that the judge was saying that this  family  would  suddenly  be
    perceived as a threat.  It was the case that there was ongoing interest
    in this family as a whole.  In Mr Blundell's  argument  this  explained
    the relative brevity of the judge's risk analysis.  If it was  accepted
    that there was ongoing interest which Judge Blake  effectively  had  in
    his credibility findings then that addressed the GJ (Sri Lanka).

 8. Mr Blundell submitted that in relation to the human rights findings  it
    was clear that the judge had allowed the case on the same grounds.   In
    terms of a freestanding mental health case Mr Blundell was of the  view
    there was sparse reasoning but that did not detract from the  soundness
    of the judge's findings and the sustainability  of  those  findings  in
    relation to the Refugee Convention and Articles 3 and 8  being  allowed
    on the same grounds.

 9. The risk categories in GJ (Sri Lanka) are as follows:

          a) "Individuals who are or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

          b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human  rights
             activists, who, in either case have criticised the Sri  Lankan
             government, in particular its human rights records, or who are
             associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
             government.

          c) Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
             Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan  security
             forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged
             war crimes.  Among those who may  have  witnessed  war  crimes
             during the conflict, particularly in the No Fire Zones in  May
             2009, only those who have  already  identified  themselves  by
             giving  such  evidence  will  be  known  to  the  Sri   Lankan
             authorities and therefore  only  they  are  at  real  risk  of
             adverse attention or persecution on  return  as  potential  or
             actual war crimes witnesses.

          d) A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
             accessible at the airport comprising a list of  those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a stop list will be  stopped
             at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri  Lankan
             authorities in pursuance of such order or warrant".

10. It is evident from the judge's findings that he was satisfied that  the
    appellants fell within the first category of risk, in  that  they  were
    individuals who would be perceived as a threat to the integrity of  Sri
    Lanka because they are or are perceived to have a significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism.  This must be seen  in  the
    context of the history of this family as a whole  as  set  out  in  the
    comprehensive evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and which was recorded in his decision and accepted by him.  The  judge
    in conclusion at [215] accepted their association  with  the  LTTE  "in
    combination with their activities in the UK was likely to place them at
    risk on return".  It was not a case that their actions in the UK  alone
    were considered by the judge to be a risk.

11. I am satisfied that the respondent's challenge is  misconceived.   Even
    if Judge Blake was wrong and there was no  specific  concession  before
    him in relation to risk on return if found credible, that error is  not
    material.  The evidence considered in some detail and accepted by Judge
    Blake, of the extent of the involvement of the first appellant's father
    with the LTTE and the extent of the ongoing interest in the family from
    the Sri Lankan authorities, shows that the parties  if  found  credible
    were at risk and did fall within the relevant risk category and that as
    per Lord Justice Underhill at paragraph 50 of  MP  (Sri  Lanka)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 829 they will be perceived as "current threat to the integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state"  and  would  accordingly  be  at  risk.
    Although another judge might have worded the reasoning  differently,  I
    find no material error in the judge's reasoning.

12. Although the judge's decision arguably discloses  a  lack  of  adequate
    reasoning in relation to what was a freestanding mental  health  claim,
    Judge Blake at 217 considered Articles 2, 3 and 8 to be engaged on  the
    basis of the facts which he had found and accepted on the asylum claim.
     On that basis there was no material error in  him  also  allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.  The fact that the case may  well  also
    have succeeded in its own right under mental health grounds,  which  he
    failed to adequately address, is not a material error.

Conclusion

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of  law  and
    shall stand.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.


Signed                                  Date:  25 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


