
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00766/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th June, 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                     M M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Lynne Brakaj of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion a Home Office Presenting Officer



                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

The First-tier Tribunal made a direction regarding anonymity.  Unless and
until a Tribunal or Court orders otherwise the appellant is granted
anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
identify him or her or any member of his or her family.  This direction
applies to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  who  was  born  on  22nd  July,
    1987.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom  on  15th  March,  2005,  using  his  own
    Zimbabwean passport.  He had leave to enter with  a  visa  valid  until
    20th January, 2007, as the dependant of his mother, a work permit  visa
    holder.  The appellant was granted  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, with his last leave expiring  on  20th  October,  2009.
    The appellant claimed asylum on 29th September, 2009, and made  further
    submissions in respect of this claim by  letter  dated  15th  November,
    2012.

3.   On 11th January, 2013, the respondent decided to remove the  appellant,
    having refused the appellant's asylum claim and the appellant  appealed
    this decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber.

4.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  P  J
    Buchanan who, in a determination promulgated  following  a  hearing  at
    North Shields on 26th February, 2013, dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on asylum grounds, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights
    grounds.

5.   The appellant challenged  the  determination  on  the  basis  that  the
    report of Dr Laurel Birch De Aguilar had not been  properly  considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in respect of the consideration of
    the appellant's Article 8 claim.   The  report  raised  the  notion  of
    "likely" probing of the appellant on his arrival in Zimbabwe, both with
    regard to his long stay in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  arrival  in
    Zimbabwe without family.  The expert report stated that it was  "highly
    likely" that the appellant would be asked where he was going  to  stay,
    who he was going to see, and where he is from.   The  expert  concluded
    that passport records could link the appellant with his brother.

6.   The Article 8 challenge  suggested  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    proportionality assessment as it failed to, "take into account relevant
    factors as part of the proportionality assessment". In  particular,  it
    was asserted that the Tribunal failed to take  into  account  that  the
    appellant had arrived  lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  minor
    dependent on his mother, who is now settled in the United Kingdom,  the
    fact that his brother is a refugee in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that
    there are, therefore, limitations upon the ability  of  the  family  to
    maintain their ties, and the fact that the appellant has not formed  an
    independent family life outside his lifelong family unit.

7.   At the hearing before me, Mrs Brakaj suggested that  the  judge  needed
    to take account of the expert report, but had simply failed to  do  so,
    leading to an error of law on his part.  The Presenting Officer told me
    that the appellant's mother has indefinite leave to remain  and,  prior
    to the appellant coming to the United Kingdom, his  older  brother  had
    been granted asylum. I pointed out to Miss  Brakaj  that  the  expert's
    report had not actually been signed and  in  the  circumstances  it  is
    difficult to see how the judge could have relied upon it to  any  great
    extent.  I pointed out that the report may not be signed because it  is
    a draft report, or the expert may simply have  forgotten  to  sign  it.
    Either way, it seemed to me that little weight could be attached to the
    report in the circumstances, given that the expert did not  attend  the
    hearing to give oral evidence.

8.    I  told  the   representatives,   however,   that   on   reading   the
    determination,  I  was   concerned   with   the   judge's   Article   8
    determination, because nowhere did he indicate that he  had  considered
    the impact of the appellant's removal on his mother and brother.

9.   The Presenting Officer told me that he agreed that the  judge  had  not
    considered the impact of the appellant's  removal  on  his  mother  and
    brother, but that was not material, because those factors  alone  would
    not make removal disproportionate.

10.  The judge has made no reference at all to the expert report  which  was
    clearly before him.  However, that report was not signed and the weight
    that he could have attached to that report would have been  limited  in
    any event.  Because the First Tier Tribunal Judge had not  referred  to
    that unsigned report, I decided that the matter would have to be  heard
    again.  I was also concerned about the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 claim.  The judge  found  that  there  was  both  family  and
    private life, but he failed to consider the impact on  the  appellant's
    mother and younger brother if he were removed from the United  Kingdom.
    I indicated that I was minded to set aside the determination.

Appellant's Oral Evidence

11.  I then heard evidence from the appellant who confirmed his full  names,
    address and nationality and said that he was born on 22nd  July,  1987.
    His solicitor referred him to  a  statement  made  by  him  dated  11th
    November, 2012.  The appellant was asked if he had read  the  statement
    and whether he wished to adopt it as part of his evidence.

12.  I explained to the appellant that he was  free  to  adopt  anything  he
    wished as part of his evidence, but that he should only do so if he was
    completely sure that the contents were  true,  accurate  and  complete,
    because, if when giving evidence to me he later  contradicted  anything
    in his written statement, that might cause me to believe  that  he  was
    not telling the truth.  I explained that in the event that  I  did  not
    believe he was telling the truth, there was  a  danger  that  he  might
    damage his appeal.  The  appellant  told  me  that  he  understood  the
    warning I had given to him and asked that he be permitted to read it.

13.  For completeness, the statement is  set  out  at  Appendix  A  of  this
    determination.  Having read it, the appellant  adopted  his  statement.
    He has, since the date of his statement, carried on  with  his  cookery
    course which is due to finish this week.  It is a level 2  professional
    cookery course and the appellant has enrolled for level 3.

14.  At the moment the appellant lives with his mother and younger  brother,
    J.  His mother is a nurse.  J is currently at school; he is 16 years of
    age and is going to sixth form.

15.  The appellant told me that he  hopes  to  go  to  university  to  study
    culinary arts.

16.  In describing the impact that his  removal  would  have  on  his  young
    brother, the appellant told me that he and his brother spend all  their
    time together.  They go out together, go to church together and, "do  a
    lot of brotherly stuff".

17.  The appellant said that he is a mentor for his  brother  who  comes  to
    the appellant to discuss whatever problems he might have with him.

18.  J arrived in the United Kingdom last year.  He had  been  looked  after
    by a guardian in Zimbabwe.  The appellant's  removal  would  affect  J.
    Before 2005, the appellant lived  with  his  grandmother  in  Zimbabwe.
    After his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  and  J  spoke  on  the
    telephone.  It was hard for him and his brother being  apart,  and  J's
    schooling in Zimbabwe was affected.

19.  The appellant told me that he was close to his mother who is  a  single
    parent.  He helps in the garden and helps with shopping.  He plays  the
    'male role' at home and helps around the house.   He  sees  his  other,
    older brother, P every week, but he lives in Scotland.

20.  Most of the appellant's aunts live in Newcastle.   The  appellant  told
    me that he sees them every Sunday at church.  They would be very  upset
    if he were to leave.  He looks after his cousins and teaches them Bible
    stories.  He sees them every weekend.  He often cooks  for  the  family
    and he teaches his uncles and aunts different dishes that he has learnt
    to cook.

21.  The appellant's cousins are aged 6, 10, 12 and 17 years.   He  now  has
    nobody left in Zimbabwe.

22.  The appellant's mother found a friend who acted  as  a  guardian  to  J
    when he was in Zimbabwe.  This friend has now  remarried  and,  because
    she lives with her new husband, would not be  in  a  position  to  look
    after the appellant if he were to return.  His family do  not  own  any
    land or property in Zimbabwe.

23.  If returned, the appellant believes that he would be at risk from ZANU-
    PF who were after his older brother.  He believes that they  would  now
    want to come after him.

24.  In answer to a question put to him by  me,  in  order  to  clarify  his
    evidence, the appellant confirmed that his former home in Zimbabwe  had
    been in Bulawayo.

25.  Cross-examined by the Presenting Officer, the appellant  said  that  he
    last saw LM, his first cousin, two months ago.  She lives in Brighouse.

26.  The appellant confirmed that the author of the letter  at  page  41  of
    the bundle prepared on his behalf was from his brother, P.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2002.

27.  The author of the letter at page 42, N M, is  also  a  cousin  and  the
    appellant told me that he last saw her  last  year,  as  he  did  M  M,
    another cousin.  Both cousins live in Lincoln.

28.  The appellant confirmed that he was the dependant  of  his  mother  who
    held a work permit visa when she arrived in the United Kingdom.  J  had
    not travelled to the  United  Kingdom  at  that  time.   The  appellant
    explained that his mother tried to bring J into the United Kingdom, but
    he was refused.  When the appellant came to the United Kingdom J  would
    have been about 9 years of age.  He lived  with  his  grandmother,  but
    when she died in  2009,  he  went  to  live  with  the  guardian.   The
    appellant did not know how much his mother paid the  guardian  to  look
    after J, but he did remember that she used  to  send  money  every  two
    weeks or so.

29.  The appellant's grandmother did not own her own  property,  she  rented
    it.

30.  The appellant explained that if he were to go  and  live  in  Zimbabwe,
    his mother could  send  money  to  him  to  support  him,  but  she  is
    struggling already financially.  She is a nurse working for an  agency,
    but she does not work full-time.

31.  The appellant confirmed that he used to live with his brother.

32.  He was referred  to  page  46  of  his  bundle.   I  explained  to  the
    representative that I did not have page 46 in my bundle and she told me
    that she did not have a page 46 in her copy of the bundle either.

33.  In answer to questions put by me,  the  appellant  explained  that  his
    father had died before the appellant knew him.

34.  There was no re-examination.

Submissions

35.  The Presenting Officer told me that  he  relied  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  urged  me  to  find  that  the
    appellant's removal would be a proportionate response on  the  part  of
    the Secretary of State.  J, the appellant's younger brother, is a half-
    brother and he arrived in the United Kingdom only  last  year.   Before
    that the family were  separated  when  J  was  left  behind  after  the
    appellant left Zimbabwe in 2005.

36.  J's guardian had been willing to look after  J  for  some  three  years
    before he came to the United Kingdom  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that she would not be in a position to  assist  the  appellant,
    should he need it.   He  is,  however,  an  adult.   Additionally,  the
    appellant's  mother  would  be  able  to  assist.   She   supported   J
    financially while he was in Zimbabwe and there would be no  reason  why
    she could not do the same for the appellant.  The family had known  for
    some time that it was possible that the appellant would be removed.

37.  The  appellant's  older  brother  was  granted  asylum  in  2005.   The
    appellant left Zimbabwe in 2005 and his mother returned to Zimbabwe  in
    2009.  There clearly would be no risk now because of  the  family  name
    and it could not be said that there was a real risk to the appellant at
    the airport.  Bulawayo was not likely to cause him any difficulties  at
    all.  He has no political profile of his own.  He invited me to dismiss
    the appeal.

38.  Addressing  me  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  the
    appellant's solicitor asked me to note  that  the  appellant  was  from
    Bulawayo, but that there would be a  risk  to  him  on  return  at  the
    airport.  He left Zimbabwe when he was a minor.  His older brother  was
    politically active and that would cause the appellant to  be  at  risk.
    She asked me to consider EM & Others, in  particular  paragraph  66  on
    page 166.  She referred me to the bundle containing the  expert  report
    and asked me to note in particular what the expert said at page 52.

39.  Mrs Brakaj  confirmed  that  the  expert  had  not  been  told  of  J's
    departure from Zimbabwe, and nor had she been told of  the  appellant's
    mother's return to Zimbabwe in 2009.

40.  Miss Brakaj asked me to refer to, and apply paragraph 203 of CM.

41.  As to  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights,  he  has  a  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom and he obviously plays  an  important
    part in J's life as his mentor.  The family were separated before,  but
    that separation was not  under  the  control  of  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's mother sought to bring J to the United Kingdom, but was not
    permitted to for some  time.   The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the age of 17 years and has no work experience in  Zimbabwe.
    He has not only worked, but also studied in the  United  Kingdom.   His
    younger brother is currently  continuing  his  education.   There  were
    problems involving the  appellant's  mother's  divorce  and  J  clearly
    suffered in his education as a  result  of  being  separated  from  the
    appellant.  He is a minor and separation will be devastating for him.

42.  The appellant has always had status in the United  Kingdom.   He  might
    have been able to secure status for himself before his  18th  birthday,
    but for whatever reason he did not.  He has no family in  Zimbabwe  and
    cannot rely on the guardian who looked after J.  The family do not  own
    any property in Zimbabwe and there is no  home  he  can  return  to  in
    Bulawayo.  The appellant's removal would be disproportionate, she said.

43.  I reserved my determination.

The Law

44.  In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant to show  that
    returning him to Zimbabwe will expose him to a real risk of persecution
    for one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951  Refugee  Convention
    or to a breach of his protected human rights.  The question of  whether
    a person has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
    has to be looked at in the round in  the  light  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances and judged against the situation as at the  time  of  the
    appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that there  will
    be an interference with the appellant's human rights and  the  relevant
    Article permits, then it is for the respondent to  establish  that  the
    interference is justified.

45.  The standard of  proof  in  asylum  appeals  as  regards  to  both  the
    likelihood of persecution and the  establishment  of  past  and  future
    risks, is a real risk.  In Kacaj v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same as  that
    in asylum appeals.


Background Evidence

46.  I was supplied with a copy of  the  Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report
    dated 13th January, 2013.  This spoke of the  power-sharing  government
    having either failed to amend, or come to  an  agreement  on  amending,
    oppressive laws such as the access to  Information  and  Protection  of
    Privacy Act, the Public Order and Security Act  and  the  Criminal  Law
    (Codification and Reform) Act, which severely  curtailed  basic  rights
    through what are described  as  being  "vague  defamation  clauses  and
    draconian  penalties".   The  laws  provide  criminal   penalties   for
    defamation, undermining the authority or insulting  the  President  and
    have  been  routinely  used  against  journalists  and   human   rights
    defenders.  The remaining parts of the report were of little assistance
    to me.

47.  I was provided with  extracts  of  the  Zimbabwean  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report of July 2012.  Quite why I was not provided with the
    full report I do not know.  The US State Department Country Report  was
    quoted as saying  that  there  were  credible  reports  of  politically
    motivated abductions and attempted abductions and that leaders of  both
    MDC factions reported that security agents and ZANU-PF party supporters
    abducted and tortured MDC-T and MDC-M members,  civil  society  members
    and student leaders.  The Human Rights  Watch  Report  referred  to  an
    increase of violence and abuses as a result  of  ZANU-PF  and  elements
    within  security  forces  resorting  to  violence,   intimidation   and
    harassment.  Members of the MDC  were  being  implicated  in  beatings,
    arbitrary arrests and harassment by state security agents,  police  and
    ZANU-PF  supporters.   None  of  the  perpetrators  of   human   rights
    violations have been held accountable and the assumption is said to  be
    that they can operate with impunity.  Concern was expressed  about  the
    failure to investigate  security  force  abuse  and  that  despite  the
    constitution  and  laws  prohibiting  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention
    security forces do arbitrarily arrest and detain  people,  particularly
    political and civil society activists perceived to oppose  the  ZANU-PF
    party.  Police officers were accused of only arresting MDC-T supporters
    as  they  are  regarded  as  enemies  of  the  state,   leaving   known
    perpetrators of violence roaming free.  Torture is said to be regularly
    used by the police  when  interrogating  suspected  criminals  and  the
    security sector continues to use torture during  politically  motivated
    interrogations.  A Human Rights Watch Report  noted  that  torture  and
    other ill-treatment of activists by police and members of the  Zimbabwe
    Intelligence Services remain a  serious  and  systematic  human  rights
    problem in Zimbabwe.  Detainees in police custody  are  at  significant
    risk of torture.

48.   In  some  cases  torture  was  said  to  be  an  element  of  coercive
    interrogations while in others it was used as a form of punishment  for
    activists' perceived leanings or intentions.  Allegations of torture by
    the police or intelligence officers are rarely investigated, the report
    said.  I  read  section  14  of  the  report  dealing  with  'Political
    affiliation'.

49.  Included within the bundle were extracts from the 2011 Country  Reports
    on Human Rights Practices, but quite why I was given this old  material
    I am not sure.  I was not referred to any of it and reading it did  not
    alter my view of the objective situation in Zimbabwe  which  I  gleaned
    from the earlier information.

50.  It was against  this  background  that  I  considered  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and made my findings of fact.

Findings of Fact

51.  The appellant is a Zimbabwean who, within a matter of days will  be  26
    years of age.

52.   He arrived in the United Kingdom as the dependant of the holder  of  a
    work permit visa in 2005.

53.   The  appellant  is  a  mild-mannered,  polite,  likeable  and  clearly
    intelligent young man who is currently  studying  professional  cookery
    and who would like to become a professional chef.

54.  The appellant's older brother, P, was granted refugee status  in  2002,
    because of his political activity with the MDC.  I have not been  given
    any further information  relating  to  his  asylum  claim,  but  it  is
    suggested that because he and the appellant share the  same  name,  the
    appellant will  be  identified  as  being  from  the  same  family  and
    perceived to be opposed to the regime in Zimbabwe.

55.  I have carefully read the expert's report.  As I  pointed  out  to  the
    appellant's solicitor, the report is not signed.  As a result, I do not
    know whether Dr  Aguilar  has  approved  the  report  or  not.   It  is
    perfectly possible that the report is in draft stage.

56.  I concluded that it was incumbent upon me to read the  report,  but  to
    bear in mind that there was nothing to indicate  that  Dr  Aguilar  had
    approved it before it was submitted to the Tribunal.  I  did  not  feel
    able, in the circumstances to place as much weight on  it  as  I  would
    have done had it been signed.

57.  I thought it significant that the expert had not been told that J,  the
    appellant's younger brother, had remained in Zimbabwe until  2009,  and
    had since joined the family.  I accept, of course, that he  might  well
    have a different surname, but I believe that it was  information  which
    would have been relevant to the expert.  I was also surprised to  learn
    that the expert had not been advised that the  appellant's  mother  had
    returned to Zimbabwe  in  2009,  without  her  having  experienced  any
    apparent difficulty.  This is precisely the sort  of  information  that
    might have affected the expert's opinion.

58.  Reading the report, it became clear to me that the  report  did  appear
    to be in draft form.  For example, on page 50, at the end of the second
    paragraph, the word, "cite" is typed in  parenthesis.   I  assume  that
    this is because it was the intention of the author to make a  reference
    to background information.

59.  That part of the expert's report which deals with the  likelihood  that
    the appellant will be identified as being related to someone opposed to
    the regime and, therefore, be perceived as against  the  regime  is  on
    pages 51 and 52.  Particularly relevant are the following paragraphs:-

         "On arrival in  Harare  [the  appellant]  can  use  his  Zimbabwean
         passport to enter the country,  assuming  it  is  current.   It  is
         highly likely he will be addressed in a local  language,  Shona  or
         Nbedele, and asked why he has been away for so many years, where he
         is going to stay, who he is going to see, and  where  he  is  from.
         These questions are  standard  on  arrival  in  my  experience  and
         experiences of others.  How he answers these questions, and further
         ones, will be a factor in how he is treated on arrival in Zimbabwe.


         It is highly likely Immigration Authorities will ask  questions  on
         arrival and probe for information about his prolonged stay  in  the
         UK, and his arrival without any family in  Zimbabwe.   It  is  also
         likely that his long absence in Zimbabwe will  be  known,  or  that
         this information  is  knowable  by  the  CIO  monitoring  names  of
         passengers in the airport.  There are only a few  flights  per  day
         bringing foreign passengers, and fewer originating  in  Europe,  so
         the CIO will have ample time  to  investigate  passengers  if  they
         wish.


         It is plausible that CIO will have access to passport  records  and
         be able to make  a  connection  between  [the  appellant]  and  his
         brother that fled in 2002 [sic], and his  mother  who  departed  in
         2004.  If so, it is highly plausible that [the appellant]  will  be
         asked about the whereabouts of his  family.   Such  questioning  is
         highly likely to  lead  to  a  more  thorough  questioning  causing
         detention.  An example of questioning was published in  2010  by  a
         woman detained who had a family member in the ZANU-PF  who  rescued
         her and she later revealed what happened (2009 attached).


         While it is not possible to know the actions of CIO officers in the
         airport on the particular day [the appellant] will  arrive,  it  is
         plausible, in my view, that his long absence in the UK  will  raise
         questions.  The fact that his passport is not in order with a valid
         visa will raise further questions.  [The appellant] will arrive  in
         the airport on his own and his treatment may not be known to anyone
         if he is detained for questioning on arrival,  or  followed  as  he
         leaves the airport."[My emphasis]


60.  The  Presenting  Officer  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  Zimbabwean
    passport was still current.

61.  If it is plausible that the CIO will have access  to  passport  records
    and will be able to make a connection between  the  appellant  and  his
    brother who fled in 2002 and his mother who departed in 2004, then  the
    CIO will also be aware of the fact that the appellant's mother returned
    in 2009 and was allowed to leave the country again and come back to the
    United Kingdom without experiencing any difficulty.  That  suggests  to
    me that the CIO  will  have  absolutely  no  interest  at  all  in  the
    appellant.

62.  I do not know why  the  appellant's  older  brother's  claimed  asylum,
    because the appellant's solicitors have chosen not disclosed  this.   I
    do not know whether the appellant's brother had difficulties  with  the
    Zimbabwean  authorities,  or  simply  with  members  of  the   ZANU-PF.
    However, the fact that the appellant's mother returned to  Zimbabwe  in
    2009 and was then able to leave,  bringing  with  her  the  appellant's
    younger brother, suggests to me that the CIO will  have  absolutely  no
    interest at all in the appellant, or anyone with the appellant's family
    name.

63.  The expert speculates by suggesting that, "the fact that  his  passport
    is not in order with a valid visa will raise further  questions".   The
    appellant's Zimbabwean passport is in fact both  valid  and  in  order.
    Why the expert was not advised of this I do not know; she  should  have
    been.

64.  I concluded that the weight I could place on the  expert's  report  was
    very limited, because it had  not  been  signed.   Indeed,  there  were
    indications which suggested that it is possible that the report in  the
    appellant's bundle is only a draft report.  Nonetheless,  even  if  the
    report had been signed and I had  felt  able  to  accord  it  the  very
    considerable weight I  would  have  given  ordinarily  to  an  expert's
    report, I believe that the fact that the appellant's mother returned to
    Zimbabwe in 2009, without event, and the fact that this was  not  drawn
    to the attention of the expert, led me to conclude that the authorities
    in Zimbabwe would not be remotely interested in the appellant once they
    had established his identity would allow him to pass.

65.  I have paid careful attention to what the  Supreme  Court  said  in  RT
    (Zimbabwe) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] UKSC 38 and note at paragraph 66 there is reported that  it  had
    been conceded before the Court of Appeal in the case  of  KM  that  the
    fact that KM's son had been granted asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    account of his MDC sympathies, would come out on his return to Zimbabwe
    and that this might place that appellant in an enhanced risk  category,
    making it more difficult for him to  demonstrate  his  loyalty  to  the
    regime.  With very great respect, each case is different and  dependent
    on its own facts.  I do not know why a concession was made  before  the
    Court of Appeal in KM, but  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities were not remotely interested  in  this  appellant's  mother
    when she returned to Zimbabwe and, if  the  CIO  had  any  interest  in
    people with the same family name as the appellant's older  brother  who
    had been granted asylum  in  2002,  then  she  would  have  encountered
    difficulties.

66.  I do not believe that the appellant  would  be  placed  in  a  position
    where he will face a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-
    PF.  EM & Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 1998 supports  the
    contention that a returnee to Bulawayo will, in general, not suffer the
    adverse attention of the ZANU-PF, including the security  forces,  even
    if he or she is thought to have a significant MDC profile.

67.  CM (EM country guidance: disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059
    simply reinforces the view that someone  without  ZANU-PF  connections,
    returning from the United Kingdom after a significant absence,  is  not
    likely to face a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF
    and returning to Bulawayo is not likely to cause him  to  come  to  the
    adverse attention of ZANU-PF or the security forces.


Conclusion

68.  I have concluded that the appellant has  simply  failed  to  show  that
    there is a real risk  that  on  his  return  to  Zimbabwe  he  will  be
    persecuted or suffer harm or ill-treatment as someone perceived  to  be
    an MDC supporter and against ZANU-PF, or the ruling regime in Zimbabwe.
     I dismiss the appellant's asylum appeal.

69.  For the same reasons I dismiss the appellant's humanitarian  protection
    and Articles 2 and 3 appeals.

Article 8

70.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.   An  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of Article 8 subsists and that  the
    decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does so, then
    it is for the respondent to show that the respondent's decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, that it is for one of the legitimate  purposes
    set out in Article 8(2) (in this case for the economic wellbeing of the
    country, for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection
    of the rights and freedoms of others) and that it  is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society, which means that it must be proportionate.

71.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"
72.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant enjoyed both a  family
    and private life.  I am not sure how the appellant demonstrated that he
    met the "Kuganthas"  (Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31) test referred to in JB (India) &  Others
    v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] EWCA Civ 234, because the appellant is
    an adult and the judge does not  explain,  but  this  finding  was  not
    challenged by the Home Office and I, therefore, proceed  on  the  basis
    that the appellant does enjoy both family and  private  life.   In  any
    event, the private life he enjoys with his family members is close.
72.  I have to bear in mind in considering the appellant's Article 8  appeal
    the fact that there is only one family life and that it is necessary to
    look at the family as a whole and to regard each affected family member
    as a fiction (see  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39).  I  must  also  have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the appellant's  half-brother,  in  the  way  required  by
    paragraph 29 of the judgements in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4.   There
    are  no  considerations  inherently  more  significant  that  the  best
    interests of children.
73.  I have very little information  about  how  J  was  affected  when  his
    mother and the appellant left him behind in Zimbabwe, but of course  he
    was only 9 at the time.  One can imagine that it must have been a  most
    traumatic time for a 9 year old, losing not only a mother  who  decided
    to go abroad, but a brother who was going with her.

74.  Were the appellant to be removed now then it has to be borne  in  mind,
    of course, that J would still have his mother and  older  brother  with
    him in the United Kingdom and he is now, of course, very much older.

75.  I have no doubt that J would be upset at the  thought  of  his  brother
    having to return to Zimbabwe, but in the  absence  of  school  reports,
    psychological reports or, indeed, any evidence from J himself, I am not
    prepared to accept that the upset he will be caused  is  likely  to  be
    anything other than temporary.  In the event that  the  appellant  were
    returned to Zimbabwe, J would still be able to communicate with him  by
    telephone and other electronic means and, should he wish to,  there  is
    no reason why J should not visit  the  appellant.   I  have  concluded,
    therefore, that the effect on J of the appellant's removal is likely to
    be temporary and short-term.  It will be far  less  traumatic  than  it
    must have been for him when he was a 9 year old, saying goodbye to  his
    older brother and his mother.

76.  So far as the appellant's mother is concerned, of course one can  quite
    understand how a mother would not wish to be separated  from  her  son,
    particularly one who is 25 years of age, but I note  that  contrary  to
    what I was told, the appellant and his mother have lived  separate  and
    apart before, in 2009 following his claim for asylum.

77.  I have read the two letters from the  appellant's  mother,  both  dated
    22nd September, 2012, in the appellant's bundle at pages 44 and 45.   I
    have no doubt at all that she will be upset were her son to be removed,
    but I do not believe that  his  removal  will  have  any  long-term  or
    adverse effects on her either.  She will of course be free  to  contact
    him by telephone and other electronic means of communication should she
    wish to and of course she still has the possibility of going  to  visit
    him in Zimbabwe.

78.  In considering the question of proportionality,  I  carefully  examined
    the documentation in the appellant's bundle.   The  appellant's  mother
    enjoys leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  appellant's  older
    brother was recognised as a refugee following his arrival in 2002 and I
    take into account the fact that the appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his mother, as her dependant, and has studied  and  worked
    in the United Kingdom.  I bear in mind that he has been in  the  United
    Kingdom with leave throughout his time here.  It is  true,  of  course,
    that he could have made application for leave to remain before his 18th
    birthday, but did not do so.  I do not know what the  outcome  of  that
    application might have been; the fact of the matter is that he did  not
    make the application.  I bear in mind that the appellant has  continued
    to live with his mother and never lived apart from her, other than  for
    the period when he went to live in Liverpool for a year after  claiming
    asylum, at the time he went to live with his aunt and his brother.

79.  The appellant is a mild-mannered, polite  and  intelligent  young  man.
    He clearly enjoys cooking and the examination  results  in  the  bundle
    clearly show his enthusiasm and talent. His mother has every  right  to
    be proud of him.

80.  The letters from the appellant's cousins clearly  show  what  a  credit
    the appellant is to his mother.  I have read the letter from  House  of
    Destiny Ministries.  It is unsigned and fails to identify  the  author,
    but I am prepared to accept that the appellant has  become  a  valuable
    and reliable member of the church and his community and he is a regular
    attendee at services and conferences and participates in activities for
    young adults and for the entire church.

81.  It is not at all difficult to  believe  that  the  appellant  is  well-
    liked, appreciated  and  respected  both  in  the  church  and  in  the
    community.

82.  The appellant  has  applied  himself  diligently  to  his  studies  and
    clearly has a flair for cooking which, understandably, he  shares  with
    his family members.

83.  The appellant has been in the United Kingdom now for some  eight  years
    and I accept that during this time he has become familiar with  British
    culture and British way of life.

84.  I have concluded, however, that  the  appellant's  return  to  Zimbabwe
    would not be a disproportionate response on the part of  the  Secretary
    of State.  The appellant and his mother have known that his stay in the
    United Kingdom was only temporary.  I accept that he  might  very  well
    have been entitled to apply for leave to remain before he was 18  years
    of age, and I also accept that it is possible that such application may
    very well have been granted by the Secretary of  State.   However,  the
    fact remains that he did not make such application.  The appellant  and
    his mother have known since his claim was refused that his stay in  the
    United Kingdom was precarious.  The appellant is clearly an intelligent
    young man, who has quickly been able to adapt to  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I accept that conditions in his native country  are  entirely
    different, but I have no reason at all to believe  that  he  would  not
    quickly adapt.  I do not know whether or not J's guardian would be able
    to assist the appellant, but it has to be borne in mind that he is,  in
    any event, a mature young man who has skills which he has learnt in the
    United Kingdom which, should he choose to, he can put to  good  use  in
    Zimbabwe.

85.  In all the circumstances I have  concluded  that  I  must  dismiss  the
    appellant's Article 8  human  rights  appeal  because  the  appellant's
    removal is, in my view, proportionate.

SUMMARY

The making of the determination by the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
error on a point of law.  I set aside that determination.   My  decision  in
respect of the appellant's asylum appeal is that it should be dismissed.   I
have concluded that since his humanitarian protection and Articles 2  and  3
human  rights  appeals  are  based  on  the  same  factual  matrix  as   the
appellant's  asylum  appeal  that  they  should  be  dismissed  also.    The
appellant's Article 8 appeal is also dismissed.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

























                                 APPENDIX A


"I can confirm that the contents of this statement are true and correct.

    1.   I write this statement in support of my claim for  asylum  in  the
         UK.


    2.   I first arrived in the UK on the 12th of March, 2005, on  a  valid
         work dependant visa.  I remained in the UK and later claimed asylum
         in September 2009.


    3.   I am originally from Bulawayo in Zimbabwe.  I did not claim asylum
         on arrival in the UK as I was a minor  with  no  knowledge  of  the
         asylum process.


    4.   I fear return to Zimbabwe as I believe I  will  be  persecuted  by
         ZANU-PF due to my family's history of being  actively  involved  in
         the MDC.  My older brother PM was an active member of  the  MDC  in
         Zimbabwe and targeted by ZANU-PF for this reason.  He was forced to
         flee  Zimbabwe  fearing  for  his  life  due   to   his   political
         involvement.  P fled to the United Kingdom and  claimed  asylum  in
         2002.  He was recognised as a refugee on 20th December, 2002.


    5.   I believe there is a high risk that I will face persecution  if  I
         am returned to Zimbabwe as I will be affiliated with my brother.  I
         fear that I will be questioned on the whereabouts of my  family  on
         return to Zimbabwe.  I will then have to disclose that  my  brother
         has been granted refugee status in the UK.  If asked I  shall  also
         have to disclose that my mother and my other family are also living
         in the UK.  I fear that I will automatically be perceived as  anti-
         regime, particularly in the light of my lengthy  residence  in  the
         UK.  I believe that I would be  at  serious  risk  if  returned  to
         Zimbabwe.


    6.   I have resided in the UK for the past seven years of my  life  and
         view this country as my home.  I am currently studying at [identity
         of college has been removed] and I am currently enrolled on a level
         2 professional cookery course, I hope to continue my education  and
         one day be a professional chef.  I ask that the UKBA do not  remove
         me from my home and my family.  I have no  experience  of  life  in
         Zimbabwe since my childhood and have no family, friends or contacts
         there.  I enjoy a close family  relationship  with  my  mother  and
         brother in the UK, in addition to all my aunts, uncles and  cousins
         here.  I ask that the UKBA do not deprive me of this.


    7.   I fear that if I am returned to Zimbabwe I will  certainly  be  at
         risk of severe mistreatment due to my political affiliation.


    8.   I ask that the UK provide me with protection and allow me to  stay
         in the UK where I can continue my life here with my family  without
         risk."
