
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00630/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2017                           |On 7 February 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by AB against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McClure, promulgated on 20 July 2016, in which  he  refused  AB's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I have made an anonymity direction.


 3.  While  acknowledging  that  all  grounds  of  appeal  were   arguable,
    permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the judge inadequately reasoned the decision  that
    relocation to Kabul would be reasonable."


 4. I heard submissions from both representatives.  I reserved my decision.


Submissions

 5. I first heard submissions from Mr. Bandegani regarding  the  inadequacy
    of reasons for the finding that the Appellant could relocate to  Kabul,
    with reference to paragraphs [43] and [44] of the decision.  Mr.  Singh
    agreed that the objective evidence  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not been addressed, and the judge's finding that it  would
    be reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate to Kabul had not been
    adequately explained.  He accepted that the judge should have addressed
    the points raised in the skeleton argument relating to Article 15c.


 6. However, Mr. Singh maintained that the credibility findings  should  be
    preserved.


 7. In response, given the acceptance that the judge had not given  anxious
    scrutiny to the material before him, Mr. Bandegani submitted  that  the
    credibility findings could not stand.  They were  compromised  as  they
    had not been made in context.  I was referred to grounds 5 and 6 of the
    grounds of appeal.  While Mr. Bandegani accepted that inferences may be
    drawn, for  example  from  the  Appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum
    earlier, or from  an  absence  of  corroborative  evidence  where  such
    evidence would be expected, the standard of proof was low.  Any  doubts
    as to the truth of the evidence needed to be  placed  in  context,  and
    they had not been.  The country material showed that the Appellant came
    from a Taliban controlled area where young people were recruited, which
    supported the Appellant's claim.


 8. Further, in relation to  ground  6,  the  judge  had  made  comparisons
    between the account given by the Appellant at his asylum interview  and
    the account given later.  I was referred to the repeated references  to
    what had been said at first, and what had been  said  later.   However,
    the asylum interview had been conducted under the Detained  Fast  Track
    process which had since been held to be systematically  unfair.   There
    was no reference to this by the judge.


 9. In response Mr. Singh submitted that the credibility findings  [34]  to
    [42] were open to the judge and were adequately explained.   The  judge
    had found that the Appellant was a low level member of the  Taliban  at
    the highest.  He had repeatedly found instances where the Appellant had
    sought to adduce evidence to bolster his claim.


Error of Law Decision


10. It was accepted by Mr. Singh at the hearing that the  judge  had  given
    inadequate reasons for why the Appellant could relocate to Kabul.   The
    judge considers  this  in  paragraphs  [43]  and  [44].   There  is  no
    reference in these paragraphs to any of the background  evidence  which
    was before him.  There is  no  assessment  of  the   reasonableness  of
    relocation, and  there  is  no  way  of  working  out  from  these  two
    paragraphs how the judge came to the conclusion that it was  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant to relocate to Kabul.


11. It was incumbent on the judge to give reasons why it was reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant to relocate to Kabul, especially given the passage
    of  time  since  the  country  guidance  case  of  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC).  I find that his failure to  do
    so is a material error of law.


12. I now turn to the grounds 5 and 6 relating to the credibility findings.


13. I have found above, and it has been accepted by  the  Respondent,  that
    the judge failed to give anxious scrutiny to  the  background  evidence
    which was before him.  I am also  aware  that  the  Appellant's  asylum
    interview took place as part of a process which has been  found  to  be
    "systematically unfair".


14. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that the country evidence was
    "clearly capable" of supporting the Appellant's  claim.   It  was  also
    submitted that excessive weight was placed on the  differences  between
    the evidence given at the  asylum  interview,  and  the  account  given
    later.


15. I have  carefully  considered  the  credibility  findings  set  out  at
    paragraphs [35] to [42].  I find that these have been made in a  vacuum
    insofar as there is no reference at any point in these findings, or  at
    all in the consideration of the Appellant's claim,  to  the  background
    information.  There  is  therefore  no  consideration  of  whether  the
    Appellant's account is  consistent  with  the  background  information.
    This is a relevant consideration in establishing the credibility of  an
    appellant's account.


16. While I find that it was open to the judge to make  findings  based  on
    the differences between the evidence given at the asylum interview, and
    the evidence given later, the  judge  has  not  acknowledged  that  the
    asylum interview took place in a process which has now been  deemed  to
    be "systematically unfair".  The Appellant had given  evidence  in  his
    witness statement about the conduct of the asylum interview (paragraphs
    106 to 108).  The judge has made no reference to this.  I find that the
    main reason that the judge rejects the Appellant's account  is  due  to
    the differences in the evidence  given  at  interview  and  that  given
    later, but without any  acknowledgement  of  the  Appellant's  concerns
    about this interview, or the fact that it was part of a  systematically
    unfair process.


 17. I find that this, when put together with the fact that  the  judge  has
     not made  reference  to  the  background  evidence  provided,  and  has
     therefore made his credibility findings without context, means that  he
     has failed to consider the  evidence  in  the  round  when  making  his
     credibility findings.  I find that this failure to do so is a  material
     error of law.  I find that the credibility findings cannot stand.


18. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Had I found that the only issue to be decided was
    that of internal relocation, I would  have  kept  the  appeal  in  this
    Tribunal.  However, given  that  I  have  found  that  the  credibility
    findings cannot stand, and therefore given the nature and extent of the
    fact-finding necessary to enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, I find that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision


19. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

