

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00648/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Date Sent                    |
|on 23rd May 2013                              |On 25th June 2013            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    N H B
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Smart Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This appeal was remitted by the Court of Appeal in an  order  dated
        11th February 2011.


     2. In addition to the issues the Tribunal is to consider  set  out  in
        the Statement of Reasons, the appellant is said to  have  converted
        to  Christianity.  In  light  of  the  decision  in  NM  (Christian
        Converts) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT  00045  it  was  agreed  this
        element of the claim would be considered first as, if he was  found
        to be a genuine convert, the appeal must be allowed.



Discussion



     3. The appellant is an Afghan national of Hazara ethnicity born on the
        1st June 1993. In his witness statement dated 2nd May  2013  [pages
        29 - 31 A's appeal bundle] he sets out details  of  his  conversion
        from Islam to Christianity.


     4. The appellant stated he started to attend church  in  January  2011
        and has continued to do so since  that  time.  His  church  is  the
        Riverside Christian Church in  Mosley  in  Birmingham.  He  attends
        services on Sunday and  sometimes  during  the  week  too.  He  was
        baptised on the 10th April 2011 and explains to his friends how  he
        feels his life has changed through his finding Jesus  and  God  and
        through his faith. The appellant also  attended  the  Alpha  Course
        which taught him more about the Christian faith.


     5. The appellant was the subject of a rigorous cross examination by Mr
        Smart in relation to his beliefs  and  elements  of  the  Christian
        faith. The replies he gave and the way in  which  they  were  given
        demonstrated an understanding of the Christian faith  and  elements
        of daily worship in line  with  the  practices  of  the  church  he
        attends, which make his claim to have attended and to be a  convert
        plausible. Nothing arose in cross-examination that cast doubt  upon
        his claim.


     6. The appellant was followed by Mr Andy Mackie a Church Leader of the
        Riverside Church. He has filed letters in support [A's bundle,  121
        -122].  In  his  oral  evidence  he  confirmed  the  core  of   the
        appellant's case in relation to his attending the Alpha Course, his
        attendance  at  church  and  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the
        Christian faith. Mr Mackie was cross examined and  I  found  him  a
        credible witness who corroborated the  appellant's  claim  to  have
        attended the Alpha Course (a course designed to explore the  basics
        of the Christian  faith),  to  have  been  baptised  and  therefore
        converted and, in whose opinion, it is a genuine conversion.


     7. Additional documentary evidence includes letters from other  church
        goers [A's bundle, 123 - 127] confirming his baptism, attendance on
        the Alpha Course, and regular  attendance  at  weekly  services,  a
        Baptism Certificate dated 10th April 2011  [129],   photographs  of
        the baptism [131-135], and a copy of the church database entry  for
        the appellant [130].


     8. I cannot look into the soul of the appellant but having  considered
        the available evidence I find to the lower standard  applicable  to
        appeals of this nature that he has substantiated his claim to  have
        concerted to Christianity and to be a genuine convert.


     9.  In  NM,  the  Tribunal  held  that  an  Afghan  claimant  who  can
        demonstrate that he has genuinely converted  to  Christianity  from
        Islam is likely to be able to show that  he  is  at  real  risk  of
        serious ill-treatment amounting to persecution or a breach  of  his
        Article 3 ECHR right on return to Afghanistan.


    10. It was accepted before  the  Tribunal  that  in  light  of  NM  the
        appellant faces a real risk of persecution by  reason  of  his  new
        religion and perception as an apostate in Islam, such as to entitle
        him to a grant of international protection as a refugee.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 25th June 2013












