
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 03 September 2015                 |On 07 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                      and Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               SAMSON CHARLES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Ms R Kieran, of Gray and Co., Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the conclusion of the hearing  of  this  appeal  we  pronounced  our
    reasoned decision, dismissing the  Secretary  of  State's  Appeal.   We
    reproduce, in  summary  terms,  our  oral  decision  in  the  following
    paragraphs.

 2. This appeal originates in the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  19
    December 2014 whereby the asylum claim of Samson Charles, a national of
    Pakistan now aged 63 years and  the  Respondent  to  this  appeal,  was
    refused.  The ensuing appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    succeeded. The Secretary of State then sought and secured permission to
    appeal to this Tribunal.  We were initially inclined  to  construe  the
    grant of permission as confined to the Secretary of State's  complaints
    about the fairness of the FtT's decision making process. On this issue,
    Mr Mullan, on behalf of the Secretary of State, acknowledged  that  the
    appeal could not succeed.  However, he  contended  that  permission  to
    appeal had also been granted on the ground of irrationality.  While  we
    had significant reservations about whether the grant of permission  can
    legitimately be construed in  this  way,  we  ruled,  generously,  that
    argument could be presented on this ground.

 3. Mr Mullan's submissions focused mainly on [62] of the determination  of
    the FtT. This is an important passage  in  the  determination.   Within
    this passage there is a single objectively demonstrable  error  on  the
    part of the Judge, relating to the  reference  number  of  a  so-called
    "FIR" ("First Information Report"). This is a species of police  record
    in Pakistan which documents an initial complaint  of  alleged  criminal
    conduct, normally made by the victim.  The  Appellant  relied  on  this
    report in making his claim for asylum  and,  subsequently,  before  the
    FtT. The Secretary of  State  made  the  case,  based  on  a  "Document
    Verification Report" ("DVR"), that  this  was  a  fabricated  document.
    Ultimately, in an important finding, the FtT decided that the  document
    is authentic.  In making this finding, the Judge stated  that  the  FIR
    does not bear the reference number  contained  in  the  DVR.   This  is
    incorrect.   The  question  is  whether  this   error   justifies   the
    condemnation of the Judge's  finding  that  the  FIR  is  authentic  as
    irrational.

 4. In evaluating the magnitude and implications of the Judge's  error,  we
    take into account that there are demonstrable errors  in  the  DVR.  In
    particular, the person identified therein is  the  Appellant's  spouse,
    rather than him, and, likewise, the passport number recorded is that of
    the Appellant's spouse.  We also weigh  what  we  consider  to  be  the
    manifestly unsatisfactory content of the DVR,  in  particular  the  key
    passage wherein  is  recorded  information  provided  to  the  document
    examiner  (described  as  an  "Immigration  Liaison  Advisor")  by  the
    relevant police station. It is terse and opaque. We  note  further  the
    intrinsic limitations of the enquiry exercise conducted, arising out of
    the method of communication employed (telephone) and the  non-provision
    of the document itself to the police station concerned.  We  must  also
    take into account the unchallenged findings in the determination  which
    were positive to the Appellant, namely that his evidence was  found  to
    be credible, as were other documents.  Finally,  there  is  no  dispute
    about the correctness about the other shortcomings pertaining to  FIR's
    generally identified by the Judge.  We further add to the equation that
    the onus was on the Secretary of State to establish that the FIR  is  a
    fabricated document and that the standard of proof is that  of  a  high
    degree of probability.

 5. Irrationality is a notoriously high threshold.  Balancing  all  of  the
    facts and considerations rehearsed above and juxtaposing these with the
    judge's error of fact, we are not satisfied that the  determination  of
    the FtT can be condemned in this way.  Though  the  Judge's  assessment
    was not impeccable, the finding which he ultimately made,  namely  that
    the FIR is an authentic document,  plainly  lay  within  the  range  of
    findings reasonably open to him.  While one of its building  blocks  is
    fallacious, it nonetheless  has  a  sufficiently  solid  substratum  to
    withstand an irrationality challenge.

DECISION

 6. Accordingly we dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.


                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 03 September 2015
