
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00650/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 July 2016                       |On 7 July 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     KB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The anonymity order imposed in my decision promulgated on 8 April  2016
    prohibiting the identification directly or indirectly of the  appellant
    or her son remains in force.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  16  September
    1982.  She last came to the UK on 6 August 2012 as a visitor with leave
    valid until 18 January 2013.   Whilst in the UK, her son, M was born on
    22 October 2012.

 3. On 17 May 2013, the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of  her  claim
    was that she was at risk of  domestic  violence  from  her  husband  in
    Pakistan and feared that he would injure or kill her.

 4. On 17 December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and  for  leave  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  On 18 December 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    made a decision to remove the appellant to Pakistan  as  an  overstayer
    under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  26  June  2015,  Judge  M  Whitcombe   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.   In  relation  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim, he made a number of positive findings:

         (1)      she was a credible witness;

         (2)      there was a real risk to her of serious harm as  a  result
             of domestic violence from her husband and his  family  if  she
             returned to Pakistan and lived with her husband;  and

         (3)      the Pakistani Authorities would not provide a  sufficiency
             of protection against that risk.

    However, the Judge found that the appellant could reasonably and safely
    internally relocate to live with her brother in  her  home  village  30
    miles away.

 6. The appellant appealed  with  the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    granted on 24 August 2015 by UTJ Blum.

 7. The appeal initially came before me on 31 March 2016.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 April 2016, I concluded that the Judge had  materially
    erred in law in reaching his adverse finding that the  appellant  could
    internally relocate to live with her brother.  My reasons are  set  out
    in my decision and it is unnecessary to repeat them here.

 8. As a consequence, I set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
    respect of the appellant's asylum claim and directed that the appeal be
    relisted for a resumed  hearing  before  me  in  order  to  remake  the
    decision  in  respect  of  the  sole  outstanding  issue  of   internal
    relocation.  The Judge's findings in respect  of  risk  on  return  and
    sufficiency of protection, not having been challenged, stood.



The Resumed Hearing

 9. A number of documents were submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant  and
    admitted without objection by the Secretary of State.   These  included
    an expert report from Professor Aisha Gill and a witness statement from
    the appellant's brother dated 29 June 2016.

10. At the hearing, Mr Richards, who represented the  Secretary  of  State,
    did not seek to resist the appeal being allowed on asylum grounds.   He
    accepted that the appellant could not reasonably and safely be expected
    to live with her brother 30 miles away.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    made a positive finding in respect of the appellant's  credibility  and
    there was now evidence from the appellant's brother that he  would  not
    be able to look after her because of  his  personal  circumstances,  in
    particular that he would be ostracised by the community  as  she  would
    bring shame on her home and it would not be acceptable for her to  live
    with him together with his family, in particular his  three  daughters.
    Mr Richards accepted that the appellant's claim was  supported  by  the
    expert  report  of  Professor  Gill,  in  particular   concerning   the
    difficulties faced by the appellant's brother if she were to live  with
    him.  Mr Richards accepted that the respondent's case  had  never  been
    that the  appellant  should  seek  relocation  in  a  women's  shelter.
    However, in any event, he accepted  that  the  expert  report  did  not
    support such an option in respect of the appellant.

11. Mr Hodgetts, who represented the appellant, in  his  brief  submissions
    reminded me that the appellant was  from  a  rural  area,  she  had  no
    education, there were no shelters in her home area and that  the  Judge
    had found that she had no financial  means  of  support.   It  was  not
    reasonable or safe to expect the appellant, even if she could live with
    her brother, to do so only 30 miles away from her husband - there is  a
    close family link  between  her  husband  and  her  brother  -  as  the
    appellant and her husband are first cousins.

12. In my judgement, Mr Richards properly accepted that the appellant could
    not safely and reasonably be expected to relocate within Pakistan.  The
    option of living with her brother was not, in  fact,  on  the  evidence
    open to her and, in any event, would not obviate  the  very  real  risk
    from her husband given that her brother only lived 30  miles  away  and
    there was a  close  family  connection  between  her  brother  and  her
    husband.

13. Adding together the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that
    the appellant was at real risk of serious harm from her husband in  her
    home area and the Pakistani authorities would be unable  to  provide  a
    sufficiency of protection, with the  finding  which  I  make  that  the
    appellant cannot  safely  and  reasonably  be  expected  to  internally
    relocate within  Pakistan,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established a real risk of persecution on  return  to  Pakistan  for  a
    Convention reason, namely that she is a member of a  particular  social
    group as a woman who is the victim of domestic violence.

14. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Decision

15. For the  reasons  set  out  in  my  earlier  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
    involved the making of an error of law.   That decision was set  aside.



16. I remake that  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

17. For the same reasons, the appeal is also allowed under Articles 2 and 3
    of the ECHR.

18. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal under  Article
    8 was not challenged and stands.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 7th July 2016
