
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00357/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WIKELEY


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel instructed by Hammersmith &
                    Fulham Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  2
    April 1989 against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz,  who
    following a hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  23  April  2015  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on  15  May  2015  dismissed  her  appeal  on
    asylum, human rights (Articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR)  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  In her letter of refusal the Respondent noted that
    the Appellant claimed to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan on the basis that she was a  member  of  a  particular  social
    group, namely that she was a woman fearing forced marriage  and  honour
    killings.

 2. The Appellant attended Punjab University where she  obtained  a  BM  in
    Arts  and  completed  a  Diploma  in  Computer  Application  and   Data
    Management from the Vocational Training Institute Punjab in 2010.   Her
    marriage was part of  an  arranged  marriage  that  took  place  on  22
    February 2010.  She had not met her husband prior to  the  wedding  and
    neither was keen on this union.  The Appellant lived with  her  husband
    40 miles away from her home area together with  her  husband's  younger
    brother.  The Appellant claimed that one month after the  wedding,  her
    husband sent her back to her parents explaining that the house was  too
    small for both of them to live in together with  his  younger  brother,
    but he would in the meantime look for a larger house.

 3. On return, her parents were angry  but  advised  the  Appellant  to  be
    patient.  Her husband would visit her once a month  when  he  would  be
    pleasant towards her in front of others.  The Appellant  had  told  her
    parents how her husband was in  fact  violent  towards  her,  but  they
    forbade her from informing the police.  The Appellant claimed that  two
    months later her parents witnessed her husband  being  violent  towards
    her.  After three to four months, her husband asked  her  to  apply  to
    come to the United Kingdom as he believed that he would then be able to
    obtain a visa and employment as a dependent spouse.  In the  event  her
    husband's application for a visa was refused.

 4. The Appellant came to the United  Kingdom  on  6  October  2011  having
    travelled from Lahore.  She arrived in the  UK  on  the  same  day  and
    reapplied to extend her student visa in November 2013 which was refused
    on 17 December 2013.  She sought advice from a  solicitor  and  claimed
    asylum on 14 October 2014.  The last time she spoke to her husband  was
    in December 2011 or she thought January 2012.   In  February  2012  the
    Appellant divorced her husband and her parents agreed to  help  her  by
    taking power of attorney assuming that she had agreed to marry a person
    of their choice, that being her maternal cousin, although the Appellant
    was unwilling to do this due to the age difference.

 5. In consequence, she received abusive  messages  and  letters  from  her
    parents, over the period May, June and October 2014 in which there were
    threats to kill her for dishonouring them.  The Appellant claimed  that
    she would be unable to report these problems  to  the  police  as  they
    would be unwilling to help because the matter would be considered to be
    a family problem.

 6. There was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, a skeleton argument  in
    which it was claimed that on the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant should benefit from the "Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No
    2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance".
    It was stated that the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    indeed a victim of domestic violence.

 7. Documentation within the Appellant's bundle  of  documents  before  the
    Judge included a report from a locum  psychiatrist  dated  9  September
    2014 attached to West London Mental Health NHS, who concluded that  the
    Appellant suffered from significant anxiety and  depression  which  was
    "reactive to her social and  family  circumstances".   She  would  need
    further follow-up.  She had been diagnosed as suffering from  a  severe
    depressive episode and experienced  suicidal  ideation  and  had  self-
    harmed.  She was prescribed Mirtazapine and Quetiapine and she attended
    counselling and the Community Psychiatric Nurse saw her  regularly  and
    she was reviewed by a psychiatrist every four to six weeks.

 8. It was pointed out that in  her  refusal  letter,  the  Respondent  had
    accepted the Appellant's account.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his
    determination further noted that the Respondent also accepted that  her
    claim engaged the Refugee Convention as  women  in  Pakistan  could  be
    considered as  part  of  a  social  group  (see  paragraph  29  of  his
    determination).  The Judge, however, further noted that the Appellant's
    application was refused because the Respondent had concluded that there
    was a sufficiency of protection available to the Appellant in  Pakistan
    and  that  internal  relocation  was  a  viable  option  and  that  the
    Presenting Officer had submitted that these were the key issues in this
    appeal. It was recorded that the Appellant's Counsel, Ms Capel  (indeed
    the Counsel who appeared before us today) wholly concurred.

 9. The Judge in the course of his determination, proceeded to take account
    of what he considered to be relevant case law and for reasons that will
    become shortly apparent, it will suffice if we  refer  specifically  to
    his consideration of KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) that held inter alia, that whether  a
    woman on return faced a real risk of an honour killing would depend  on
    the particular circumstances and that such a  risk  was  likely  to  be
    confined to tribal areas and was unlikely to impact on married women.

10. Indeed there was within KA  a  most  helpful  and  detailed  head  note
    containing the Tribunal's guidance listed from i. to vii. and again for
    the purposes of our decision it will suffice if we  make  reference  to
    vi. and vii. that reads as follows:

         "vi. The guidance given in SN and HM  (Divorced  women  -  risk  on
             return) Pakistan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00283  and  FS  (Domestic
             violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan  CG  [2006]  UKIAT  00023
             remains valid.  The network of  women's  shelters  (comprising
             government-run shelters and private and Islamic women's crisis
             centres) in general affords  effective  protection  for  women
             victims of domestic violence, although there  are  significant
             shortcomings in the level of services and treatment of inmates
             in some such centres.  Women with boys over 5 face  separation
             from their sons.

         vii. In assessing whether women victims of domestic violence have a
             viable internal relocation alternative, regard must be had not
             only to the availability of such shelters/centres but also  to
             the situation women will face after they leave such  centres."
             [Emphasis added].

11. At paragraphs 103 to 109 of his determination the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had this to say:

         "103.    The next question for the Tribunal  is  therefore  whether
             the Appellant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate  to
             another part of the country.  The Appellant is a young  single
             woman.  She  is  educated.   However,  she  completed  a  long
             distance learning  degree.   She  has  limited  experience  of
             working outside the family home in Pakistan.  Her only job  in
             Pakistan was teaching children from home.  Although she is  an
             educated person she has had no life experiences of studying or
             working in a large metropolitan city in  Pakistan.   What  she
             does have is experience of an independent life in  the  United
             Kingdom, more than anything else, the experiences she  has  of
             living in this country provide her with valuable skills  which
             may equip her with leading an independent  life  in  Pakistan.
             However, such skills have to be tempered against two factors.

         104. Firstly, for a woman to live an independent life in the United
             Kingdom is not directly comparable to  living  an  independent
             life  in  Pakistan.   Pakistan  is  a   much   more   socially
             conservative society.   This  is  recognised  in  the  country
             guidance which I have quoted at paragraphs 79 - 80 above.

         105. Secondly, the Appellant's mental health  has,  over  the  past
             twelve months, deteriorated and this in turn impacts upon  her
             ability to establish an independent life herself.

         106. Importantly, I also take into account  Section  2.4.1  of  the
             2014 COIR on Pakistan country information:

                  '2.4.1   According to  a  representative  from  the  Human
                      Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) '... it is 'next
                      to impossible' for a single woman to  live  alone  in
                      Pakistan due to prejudices against women and economic
                      dependence.'   According  to  a  Metropolitan   State
                      College of Denver Assistant Professor, most women  in
                      rural areas lived with  their  families  and  it  was
                      generally not socially acceptable for women  to  live
                      alone.  In urban areas, especially larger cities such
                      as Karachi, Lahore  or  Islamabad,  educated,  higher
                      class, working women found it easier to  live  alone,
                      although this was still quite a rare occurrence.  The
                      sources consulted  by  the  Immigration  and  Refugee
                      Board of  Canada  describe  difficulties  for  single
                      women  renting  property  in  urban  areas,  security
                      concerns  and  social  constraints.   Divorcees  face
                      specific stigmatization and social rejection.'   [The
                      Judge's emphasis].

         107. If the Appellant had been from an urban area of Pakistan, from
             an upper-class family, someone who was educated at  university
             which she attended (as opposed to studying for her degree from
             home) and had she experience of working in  Pakistan,  then  I
             may have been  persuaded  that  it  is  possible  for  her  to
             internally relocate and live alone  as  an  independent  woman
             without  male  protection.   However,  given  the   particular
             profile of this Appellant, I do not find that she  falls  into
             that category of women which the country information  suggests
             can live independently in a large city.  Even if she fell into
             this small category  of  women  in  Pakistan  who  could  live
             independently, in light of her current mental health issues, I
             would still come  to  a  conclusion  that  in  the  particular
             circumstances of her case that it would not  be  possible  for
             her to establish an independent life for herself  in  Pakistan
             without substantial support from family  members  or  friends,
             neither of which I find that she has in Pakistan."   [Emphasis
             added].

         108. The next question is whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the
             Appellant to relocate to a women's shelter in Pakistan?

         109. At paragraphs 30 - 32 of her skeleton argument, Ms Capel  sets
             out her arguments as  to  why  it  is  not  suitable  for  the
             Appellant to  be  placed  in  a  shelter.   In  particular  at
             paragraph 32(viii) she highlights the impact that being placed
             in a shelter may place upon her mental health.   I  take  into
             account her submissions."

12. The Judge then proceeded to  consider  other  aspects  of  the  country
    guidance, indeed remarking following his reference to the  guidance  in
    NL (Mental Illness - Support for Family) Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT 04408
    at paragraph 112 of his determination:

         "112.    If anything, it may be argued that  the  Appellant  in  NL
             faced greater hardships given  her  particular  profile.   The
             Appellant in this appeal is highly  educated,  has  lived  and
             worked independently in the United Kingdom and does  not  have
             children."

13. More particularly, at paragraph 113, however, the Judge was most candid
    in stating as follows:

          "113.   This has not been an easy decision  for  the  Tribunal  to
             arrive at.  I acknowledge that the country guidance  case  law
             in this area is well over ten years old..."

14. At paragraph 114 of the determination, the Judge went on  to  say  that
    had sufficient  evidence  been  submitted  to  persuade  him  that  the
    position in Pakistan had changed since NL (NL  being  a  decision  some
    thirteen years old) he may have been persuaded to arrive at a different
    decision.

15. At the outset of the hearing before us, it became apparent,  as  indeed
    most  frankly  and  realistically  recognised  by  Mr  Tufan  for   the
    Respondent, that he accepted that ground 1  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal had been granted was "the real issue".

16. In this regard Ms Capel had opened her submissions to us by making  the
    point that the failure of the Judge to make the  finding  that  he  was
    obliged to make, in terms of vii. of KA as to what would happen to  the
    Appellant after she left a women's shelter in  Pakistan  and  the  fact
    that the Judge failed entirely to consider what would happen to her  in
    such circumstances, was a most significant point as indeed we so  find.
    We cannot further ignore the fact that the Judge clearly found this  to
    be a difficult and a borderline decision.  Indeed, he remarked,  as  we
    have earlier stated, that this had not been an easy  decision  for  him
    that in our view, reinforces the conclusion that we have reached,  that
    in failing to take account of vii. of the  head  note  at  KA,  he  had
    materially erred in law and the fact  that  the  Judge  considered  the
    matter to be a borderline decision,  should  have  further  tipped  the
    balance in favour of his allowing the appeal.

17. As Ms Capel rightly submitted, had he  not  overlooked  this  extremely
    vital aspect of the guidance in KA given his overall  difficulties,  it
    should have inevitably led him  to  the  conclusion  in  light  of  the
    findings to which we have earlier referred, that this was an  Appellant
    who in her particular circumstances, simply could not  safely  relocate
    anywhere in Pakistan were she to be returned.  We remind ourselves that
    in vii. of KA the Tribunal were very clear, and it is worth  repeating,
    that "regard  must  be  had  not  only  to  the  availability  of  such
    shelters/centres [in Pakistan] but also to  the  situation  women  will
    face after they leave such centres."  [Underlining added].

18. Our task today has been to decide whether or not the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has disclosed an error  or  errors  on  a
    point of law such as may have materially affected the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and for the  reasons  that  we  have  above  identified,  it  is
    apparent that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did so  materially  err  in
    law such that his decision in dismissing the Appellant's appeal must be
    set aside.

19. We therefore proceed to make a fresh decision and for the reasons  that
    we have identified above that take account of those positive aspects of
    the Judge's findings that we have identified, it is apparent to us that
    the proper course is to allow this appeal.  We  thus  make  that  fresh
    decision.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside. We make a fresh decision to allow the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Date 16 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
