

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st April 2016                        |On 11th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                            ALI IBRAHIM DHABAREY
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, counsel, instructed by Broudie
Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  it  was
      arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  adopting  the  role  of
      inquisitor; failed to give adequate reasons for his  findings  on  the
      appellant's  clan  membership  and  that  the  judge's   findings   on
      relocation to Mogadishu were unreasoned and speculative.


   2. Although the respondent had filed  a  Rule  24  notice  this  did  not
      address the main challenge to the judge's decision with regard to  the
      clan membership and lack of reasoning save to assert, in essence  that
      the judge's reasoning was adequate.

   3. It is most unfortunate that although the judge set out the  italicised
      words from MOJ & others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT
      00442 (IAC), he failed to address save in general  terms  the  matters
      raised. Given the findings made which appear to be  either  unreasoned
      or unsupported by  evidence  and  the  failure  to  make  findings  on
      relevant matters this decision is plainly inadequate and  vitiated  by
      significant errors of law.

   4. I set aside the decision to be remade.

     5. When I have set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  s.12
        (2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case  to  the  First-
        tier with directions or remake it for ourselves. Where the error of
        law is such as in this case and the facts are disputed or unclear I
        conclude that the decision should be remitted to a First-tier judge
        to determine the appeal.

     6. If in so far as the appellant seeks to file additional  documentary
        evidence,  no  doubt  the  appellant  will  make  the   appropriate
        application to the First-tier Tribunal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard afresh  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge (not judge D Dickinson), no findings of  fact
    preserved.



[pic]

                                    Date 1st April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
