
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA000532015
                                                                 AA000542015
                                                                 AA000552015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 March 2016                              |On 23rd May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                                     SR
                                     JA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saddiq, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal Kempton allowing an appeal on asylum and human
   rights grounds.  The appeals were brought before the First-tier  Tribunal
   by the three  respondents,  who  are  hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the
   claimants".

2) The claimants are a family from Sudan, comprising a  mother,  father  and
   daughter.  The father, who is the first claimant, maintains that  he  was
   persecuted in Sudan as a Massaleit from Darfur.   His  wife,  the  second
   claimant, also claims to fear persecution as a member  of  the  Massaleit
   tribe from Darfur.  Both parents consider their daughter will be at  risk
   of FGM if returned to Sudan.  In December 2014 all three  claimants  were
   given discretionary leave until 17 June 2017 but their asylum claims were
   rejected.  The  claimants  then  appealed  under  section  83(2)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3) The first and second claimants  had  previously  each  had  separate  and
   unsuccessful  appeals  against  the  refusal  of  asylum.   Neither  gave
   evidence in the other's appeal.  At the time of the appeal by  the  first
   claimant, his wife was not in the UK.  When  the  appeal  by  the  second
   claimant was heard, her husband did not give evidence, seemingly  because
   in his appeal his evidence had been found not to be credible.

4) In the current  appeals  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  heard
   evidence from both of the first two claimants.  The judge referred to the
   case of Devaseelan (second appeals - ECHR - extra-territorial effect) Sri
   Lanka *[2002] UKIAT 00702 and the guidelines set out therein.  The  judge
   accepted that the determinations in the earlier appeals were the starting
   point for the assessment of the current appeals.  The judge  nevertheless
   considered that there were good reasons to depart from the findings  made
   in the previous appeals  because  neither  claimant  had  previous  given
   evidence in the other's appeal.  The judge considered that she had before
   her what was effectively new evidence from the other claimant in each  of
   the claimant's appeals.  The judge also had  an  expert  report  on  each
   claimant by Mr Peter Verney.  Mr Verney had given evidence in the case of
   MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 and this case itself cast a  new
   light on the situation in Sudan for non-Arab Darfuris.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted on the evidence before  her
   that the first claimant would be regarded as a non-Arab Darfuri,  because
   his mother was a Massaleit and he was brought up in a  Massaleit  village
   after the death of his father.  The second claimant would be at risk as a
   Massaleit.  The third claimant, their daughter, would face a real risk of
   having to submit to cultural pressures to undergo FGM and might  even  be
   kidnapped for this purpose.  As a non-Arab  Darfuri  the  third  claimant
   would not receive any state protection.

6) In the application for  permission  to  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State
   submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for
   departing  from  the  previous  adverse  credibility  findings   in   the
   determinations in the earlier appeals by the first and second  claimants.
   The first claimant had been found in his previous appeal to be a Sudanese
   Arab.  The second claimant was found not  to  have  shown  that  she  was
   either Massaleit or even Sudanese.  The reasons given by the Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal in the  current  appeals  for  departing  from  these
   findings were that the previous  judges  did  not  have  the  benefit  of
   hearing the evidence of both claimants, and secondly they  did  not  have
   before them the expert report by Mr Peter Verney.

7) The grounds continue that in her decision, at  paragraph  29,  the  judge
   recorded that according to Mr Verney he could not state that  the  second
   claimant was from the Massaleit tribe but she was nevertheless at risk of
   persecution because she had claimed asylum abroad.  This was contrary  to
   the country guideline case of MM.  The judge further recorded  Mr  Verney
   as stating that there was no simple or absolute way to  establish  ethnic
   identity to non-Sudanese outsiders and the matter had to be addressed  in
   the round.  The  furthest  he  could  state  in  relation  to  the  first
   claimant's account was that it was plausible  and  in  keeping  with  the
   available evidence.  This was not a sufficient basis on which  to  depart
   from the findings made in the previous appeals in relation to  ethnicity.
   It was submitted on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  current
   appeals that it was not clear whether Mr Verney  had  seen  the  previous
   determinations and the judge had not taken this into account.

8) The Secretary of State contends that there was no  reason  given  by  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal why Mr Verney's report,  or the evidence
   of the second claimant, would have led  to  a  departure  made  from  the
   findings made in respect of the  first  claimant  by  the  judge  at  his
   previous appeal.  It was not sufficient to rely merely  on  corroboration
   and consistency for this purpose.

9) The Secretary of State further contended that  in  relation  to  FGM  the
   judge had failed to have regard to the case of FM (FGM) Sudan  CG  [2007]
   UKAIT 00060, although this had been  referred  to  in  the  Secretary  of
   State's refusal letter and in the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
   Secretary of State.  The judge  had  relied  on  Mr  Verney's  report  in
   relation to the pro-FGM stance taken by the Vice President of  Sudan  but
   this did  not  provide  good  reasons  for  departing  from  the  general
   proposition that the risk of  FGM  from  extended  family  members  would
   depend on a variety of factors, including the age  and  vulnerability  of
   the woman concerned, the attitude and whereabouts of her parents, and the
   location and "reach" of the extended family.  The findings  made  by  the
   judge in respect of FGM were dependent on her findings on  ethnicity  and
   therefore could not stand in isolation.

10) In the grant of permission  to  appeal  it  was  accepted  that  it  was
   arguable that the judge had not given adequate reasons for departing from
   the findings made by the tribunals  in  the  previous  appeals.   It  was
   stated in Devaseelan that the Tribunal should treat with caution evidence
   that could have been made available at the date of an earlier hearing but
   was not provided.  The first claimant was in the UK at the  date  of  the
   second claimant's first appeal but did not give evidence.  It was further
   arguable  that  Mr  Verney  did  not  have   access   to   the   previous
   determinations and the judge did not address the weight to  be  given  to
   the submission on behalf of the Secretary of State that this  might  have
   affected Mr Verney's report, in accordance with  SS  (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]
   EWCA Civ 155.  It was further arguable that the judge failed to  consider
   the country guideline case of FM in assessing the  risk  of  FGM  to  the
   third claimant.




Submissions

11) In her submission on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Ms  Saddiq
   referred to the issues arising from the Devaseelan decision.  The  second
   claimant was not in the UK at the time of her husband's  appeal  but  her
   husband was in the UK at the time of her appeal hearing and did not  give
   evidence in it.  The first claimant had been found in his earlier  appeal
   to be untruthful.  The second claimant had been found untruthful  in  her
   earlier appeal.  It was absurd to suggest that  the  credibility  of  the
   first two claimants was improved because they had now given  evidence  at
   the same hearing.  The two witnesses appearing at the  same  hearing  did
   not constitute new evidence.  The judge did not give  sufficient  reasons
   for departing from the previous  decisions.   The  judge's  decision,  at
   paragraph 24,  had  the  hallmarks  of  disagreement  with  the  previous
   decision in respect of the first claimant.

12) Turning to the report by Mr Peter Verney, Ms Saddiq submitted  that  the
   expert witness, although stating that the second claimant was from Sudan,
   did not state that she was of Massaleit ethnicity.   It  was  beyond  his
   expertise to assess whether the second claimant was from  Darfur.   Again
   the reasons given by the judge for departing from the  previous  findings
   were not adequate.

13) Turning to the issue of FGM, Ms Saddiq submitted that the judge had  not
   found that there were family members in Sudan who would seek to interfere
   with the parents' wishes.  The findings made by the judge in  respect  of
   the risk of FGM were not safe.  The judge had  considered  Article  8  at
   paragraphs 35 and 36 of the decision but this was not  competent  as  the
   appeal was brought under section 83 of the 2002  Act  and  was  therefore
   limited to the Refugee Convention.

14) Ms Saddiq submitted that she would seek remission of the appeal  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal to be heard before a different judge.

15) On behalf of the claimants, Mr Forrest  helpfully  referred  to  a  note
   that he had prepared and submitted.  The previous  appeal  by  the  first
   claimant was in 2005 and that of the second claimant in 2009.  At neither
   of those hearings had evidence been given  by  the  other  claimant.   Mr
   Forrest acknowledged that this might mean that six years later the couple
   had got their stories right.  However, there  was  a  continuity  in  the
   evidence given.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  analysed  this
   at paragraphs 22-24 of her decision.

16) Mr Forrest referred to the sixth guideline in Devaseelan, which  applies
   where before the second judge an appellant relies on facts that  are  not
   materially different from those before the earlier  Tribunal  and  relies
   upon the same evidence.  According to the guidelines,  the  second  judge
   should regard the issues as settled and make findings in  line  with  the
   earlier decision.  In the  current  appeals  the  judge  could  not  make
   findings in line because the evidence  was  presented  essentially  in  a
   different way.  At paragraph 24 the judge had a "light bulb"  moment  and
   gave reasons why she was able to look at the  evidence  differently.   As
   was said in the seventh guideline of Devaseelan, the significance of  the
   sixth guideline was greatly reduced if there was some  very  good  reason
   why relevant evidence was not adduced before the earlier  Tribunal.   The
   second claimant was not to be blamed because her husband was  not  called
   as a witness in her appeal.  At paragraph 28 of her  decision  the  judge
   had given cogent reasons for departing from the earlier findings.

17) Mr Forrest further submitted that there were facts before the  judge  in
   the current appeals that were not before the  Tribunals  in  the  earlier
   appeals. He referred to the second guideline in Devaseelan, stating  that
   facts occurring since the first  decision  could  always  be  taken  into
   account by the second Tribunal.  Mr Forrest  submitted  that  the  expert
   report by Mr Verney fell into this category.  This was evidence  properly
   given by an expert who was aware of the  limitations  on  his  role.   Mr
   Forrest referred, in particular, to paragraph 81 of Mr Verney's report in
   respect of the first claimant, where Mr Verney pointed out  that  at  the
   time  of  the  first  claimant's  previous  appeal  there  was  far  less
   information available about the state of affairs in Darfur.  He had  seen
   numerous early refusals of asylum applicants from Darfur which were later
   overturned  in  the  light  of  more  accurate   and   detailed   country
   information.  At paragraph 99 Mr Verney pointed out  that  the  situation
   had worsened after the failed May 2008 coup in  Sudan  attempted  by  the
   Darfur based Justice and Equality Movement (JEM).  This organisation  was
   blamed by the government for street protests in September 2013.

18) There was then some discussion of the first claimant's knowledge of  the
   Massaleit language.  Mr Verney recorded at paragraph 28  that  the  first
   claimant did not speak this language and at paragraph 29 that although it
   was a long time since  the  first  claimant  heard  it  spoken  he  might
   recognise a few words.  In the first claimant's previous appeal, heard by
   Judge Dennis, the first claimant was recorded at paragraph  6  as  having
   told the judge that the Massaleit  people  spoke  a  peculiarly  accented
   Arabic called Rotana, which he explained meant "mumbling".  The people in
   his village spoke both Arabic and  Massaleit  as  did  his  wife.   Judge
   Dennis then stated at paragraph 26 that, although the first claimant said
   that he had spent 34 years with a Massaleit-speaking mother and wife in a
   village where Massaleit was the common language, he  spoke  only  Arabic.
   The judge did not find this plausible.  Mr Forrest referred to  paragraph
   53 of the report by Mr Verney on the first claimant, where it  is  stated
   that  a  person  could  have  Massaleit  identity  without  speaking  the
   indigenous language.  In the current  appeals  at  paragraph  32  of  her
   decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal referred to this and  added
   from Mr Verney's report that only a minority  of  the  Massaleits  people
   speak their own language, or Rotana.  Mr Forrest submitted  that  on  the
   basis of the reports by Mr Verney the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   was entitled to depart from the findings previously made.

19) Mr Forrest continued that the findings made by the Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal in relation to FGM were based on Mr Verney's report and the
   judge showed this in her findings and reasoning at paragraphs 33  and  34
   of the decision.

20) In conclusion Mr Forrest submitted that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was entitled to rely on the conjunction of the testimony of  the
   2 claimants and the evidence of Mr Verney, which had not previously  been
   available.

21) In her response Ms Saddiq referred to the so called "light bulb"  moment
   Mr Forrest had said the judge had had at paragraph 24  of  the  decision.
   Ms Saddiq said the judge's findings in this  paragraph  were  not  clear.
   Turning to the evidence of Mr Verney, Ms Saddiq referred to his  comments
   on what was known about the Massaleit tribe in 2003 but submitted that in
   referring to this Mr Verney  had  gone  beyond  his  role  as  an  expert
   witness.  Mr Verney had not addressed the clear negative findings made in
   the previous appeal in respect of language and ethnicity.   The  decision
   by the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  depart  from  the  previous
   findings was not justified and amounted to  an  error  of  law.   In  his
   report Mr Verney should have set out those previous findings then set out
   any evidence which should be set against these.  This had not been  done.
   The judge should not have given Mr Verney's reports the weight  she  gave
   them.

22) In relation to FGM Ms Saddiq submitted that the judge did  not  properly
   engage with the issues.  If the parents were against FGM they  would  not
   allow it to happen.  This matter was not addressed in accordance with the
   case law.

23) Mr Forrest briefly referred to a further case  on  which  he  sought  to
   rely, namely  AAW  (expert  evidence  -  weight)  [2015]  UKUT  673.   He
   acknowledged that this did not refer to subsequent appeals  by  the  same
   parties.  Ms Saddiq responded by saying that according to paragraph 25 of
   this decision an unsupported opinion was likely  to  be  afforded  little
   weight.

Decision

24) Mr Forrest was right to point out the significance  to  this  appeal  of
   the sixth of  the  Devaseelan  guidelines.   This  guideline  states  the
   following:

    "(6)   If before the second adjudicator the appellant relies  on  facts
    that  are  not  materially  different  from  those  put  to  the  first
    adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what  is  in  essence
    the same evidence as that available to the appellant at that time,  the
    second adjudicator should regard the issues as  settled  by  the  first
    adjudicator's determination and make his findings  in  line  with  that
    determination rather than allowing the matter to be  re-litigated.   We
    draw attention to the phrase "the same evidence as  that  available  to
    the appellant" at the time of the first determination.  We have  chosen
    this phrase not only in order to accommodate  guidelines  (4)  and  (5)
    above, but also because, in respect of evidence that was  available  to
    the appellant, he must be taken to have made his choice as about how it
    should be presented.   An  appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  present
    evidence of which he has no knowledge: but if (for example) he  chooses
    not to give oral evidence in his first appeal, that does not mean  that
    the issues or the available evidence in the second appeal are  rendered
    any different by his proposal to give oral evidence (or the same facts)
    on this occasion."


25) The relevance of this passage to the second claimant is clear,  although
   perhaps not quite in the way Mr Forrest intended.  In her previous appeal
   the decision was made for  the  first  claimant  not  to  give  evidence,
   although he was available to do so.  In the present appeal  he  did  give
   evidence.   It  does  not  follow  from  this,  according  to  the  sixth
   guideline, that the issues or the available evidence in the second appeal
   are rendered any different simply by the  first  claimant's  decision  to
   give evidence.

26) Mr Forrest referred me  to  the  seventh  guideline  in  Devaseelan,  as
   qualifying the sixth.  This states:

    "(7)   The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4) and (6)  is
    greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why  the  appellant's
    failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first adjudicator should
    not be, as it were, held against him.  We think such  reasons  will  be
    rare.  There is an increasing tendency  to  suggest  that  unfavourable
    decisions by adjudicators are brought about by error or incompetence on
    the  part  of   representatives.    New   representatives   blame   old
    representatives;  sometimes  representatives   blame   themselves   for
    prolonging the litigation by  their  inadequacy  (without,  of  course,
    offering the public any compensation for the  wrongs  from  which  they
    have profited by fees).   Immigration  practitioners  come  within  the
    supervision of the Immigration Services Commissioner under  part  V  of
    the 1999 Act.  He has power to register,  investigate  and  cancel  the
    registration of any practitioner, and solicitors and  counsel  are,  in
    addition, subject to their own  professional  bodies.   An  adjudicator
    should  be  very  slow  to  conclude  that  an  appeal  before  another
    adjudicator has been materially affected by a representative's error or
    incompetence; and such a finding should  always  be  reported  (through
    arrangements made by the Chief Adjudicator) to the Immigration Services
    Commissioner.


    Having said that, we do accept that  there  will  be  occasional  cases
    where the circumstances of the first appeal were such that it  will  be
    right for the second adjudicator to look at the matter as if the  first
    determination had never been made.  (We  think  it  unlikely  that  the
    second adjudicator would, in  such  a  case,  be  able  to  build  very
    meaningfully on the first adjudicator's determination; but we emphasise
    that, even in  such  a  case,  the  first  determination  stands  as  a
    determination of the first appeal.)"


27) Mr Forrest did appear to suggest at one point that the decision  not  to
   call the first claimant as a witness in the earlier appeal by the  second
   claimant would have been a decision by her representatives  at  the  time
   and the second claimant should not be prejudiced if  the  wrong  decision
   had been made then.

28) There was some discussion before me about why  the  first  claimant  was
   not called as a witness in the second claimant's  previous  appeal.   The
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the current  appeals  seems  to  have
   assumed that this was because the first claimant had been found not to be
   credible in his own previous appeal.  There may be some basis for  making
   this assumption but, if that was the reason why the  first  claimant  was
   not called to give evidence, it was a question of judgment and  does  not
   necessarily show any error or incompetence on  the  part  of  the  second
   claimant's representatives.

29) It seems to me that essentially what Mr Forrest was arguing  by  relying
   on the seventh guideline was that there must have  been  some  very  good
   reason why the first  claimant  did  not  give  evidence  in  the  second
   claimant's  earlier  appeal.   The  only  such  reason  which  has   been
   identified is the adverse credibility  finding  made  against  the  first
   claimant in his own earlier appeal.  This might well  be  regarded  as  a
   good reason why the first claimant did not give evidence  in  the  second
   claimant's appeal but it does not follow from this that where  the  first
   claimant then gives evidence in the later appeal,  this  earlier  adverse
   credibility finding is not taken fully into account.

30) The position here is complicated of course by the fact  that  there  was
   not one earlier appeal in these proceedings but two earlier  appeals,  as
   each of the first and second claimants have had a previous appeal.   Each
   was found not to be credible.  It was Ms Saddiq's submission on behalf of
   the Secretary of State that if each was found not to be credible  in  his
   or her previous appeal it was absurd to subsequently find their  evidence
   credible simply because they both gave evidence in their second  appeals.



31) To be fair to the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  this  was  not  the
   full extent of her reasoning.  She did seek to justify why  the  evidence
   of the appellants should be believed when it was given before  her,  when
   it had not been believed in the 2two separate earlier appeals.  The issue
   is whether the justification the judge gave was strong enough.

32) In relation to this Mr Forrest submitted that at  paragraph  24  of  her
   decision the judge showed that she had had a  "light  bulb"  moment  when
   examining the evidence of both appellants.  Paragraph 24 of the  decision
   reads as follows:

    "That is very important, as his interview was in 2005 and he  describes
    having a wife and an aunt in Sudan at that time.   His  wife  made  her
    claim in 2009 and flew from Egypt and it has  been  maintained  by  the
    respondent up to this time that she is from  Egypt.   However,  if  the
    appeals  had  been  cross-referenced,  it  would  be  clear  that   the
    appellant's wife was in fact in Sudan.  In addition, he gave an account
    of his parents' marriage and how he ended up in Massaleit territory  in
    his mother's village after his father died.  It had been  his  father's
    wish that he learn  Arabic,  which  he  did.   However,  he  does  also
    understand Rotana, as spoken by his mother.  However,  they  did  speak
    Arabic in the home.  The appellant's claim in 2005 was refused  by  the
    respondent  in  a  short  4  page  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The
    determination refusing his asylum claim goes into some detail about his
    claim and it was found that it was fundamentally implausible  that  the
    appellant would not speak  Massaleit  having  spent  34  years  with  a
    Massaleit speaking mother and a wife where that is the  common  village
    language (paragraph 21 of Judge Dennis' decision of 2005).  This  would
    explain why he was not asked to give evidence in his wife's appeal,  as
    it was not accepted that he came from the village where he said he  was
    from or that he was a Massaleit, which is why he states she is."


33) On reading paragraph 24 I find  it  difficult  to  ascertain  any  fresh
   evidence or particular fact to which the judge refers which justifies her
   departure from the findings by the earlier tribunals.  All that  she  has
   done is seek to interpret the evidence in a different way.  As Ms  Saddiq
   rightly pointed out, the findings that she makes at paragraph 24 are  not
   themselves clear.  She refers to the findings made  at  paragraph  21  by
   Judge Dennis in his decision  of  2005  but  does  not  state  why  those
   findings may be wrong.  If she were  to  find  in  favour  of  the  first
   claimant it was incumbent upon her to give sufficient reasons to show why
   the findings made by Judge Dennis at paragraph 21 of  his  decision  were
   wrong but she does not do so.

34) It was not enough for the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
   present appeals to say that in accordance with Devaseelan  she  took  the
   previous decisions as her starting point.  She actually had  to  look  at
   the Devaseelan guidelines and assess the effect they would have  on  what
   evidence was  before  her  when  compared  with  the  evidence  that  was
   available at the previous hearings.  She failed to do this and she failed
   to give adequate reasons for overriding the findings made in the previous
   appeals.  This amounts to an error of law.

35) I will now address briefly the question of Mr Verney's expert  evidence.
    Mr Forrest sought to argue that this fell  into  the  second  Devaseelan
   guideline, which states:

    "(2)   Facts happening since the first adjudicator's determination  can
    always be taken into account by the second adjudicator.  If those facts
    lead the second adjudicator to the conclusion that, at the date of  his
    determination and on the material before him, the appellant  makes  his
    case, so be it.  The previous decision,  on  the  material  before  the
    first adjudicator and at that date is not inconsistent."


36) Of course, in Mr Verney's reports there are facts  which  have  occurred
   since the first claimant's appeal in  2005  and  even  since  the  second
   claimant's appeal in 2009.  These could of course be taken into  account.
   They will not necessarily, justify overturning  the  adverse  credibility
   findings already made in those earlier appeals but this is a  possibility
   which ought to be considered.

37) In the current appeals, the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
   rely upon Mr Verney's evidence alone as justification for overturning the
   previous findings.  Had she done so she would have  had  to  address  the
   further point made on behalf of the Secretary of State,  namely  that  it
   had not been established that Mr Verney had had access to those  previous
   decisions.  This was a potentially significant point, which  was  put  to
   the judge in submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State  but  which
   the judge appears to have ignored.  It is a point which will have  to  be
   borne in mind in any future proceedings in relation to these appeals.

38) Also relevant to the evidence of Mr Verney may be the  fifth  Devaseelan
   guideline, which states:

    "(5)   Evidence of other facts - for example country evidence  may  not
    suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but should be  treated
    with caution.  The reason is different  from  that  in  (4).   Evidence
    dating from before the determination of  the  first  adjudicator  might
    well have been relevant if it had been tendered to him: but it was not,
    and he made  his  determination  without  it.   The  situation  in  the
    appellant's own country at the  time  of  that  determination  is  very
    unlikely to be relevant in deciding whether the appellant's removal  at
    the time of the second adjudicator's  determination  would  breach  his
    human rights.  Those representing the appellant would be better advised
    to assemble up-to-date evidence than to rely on material  that  is  (ex
    hypothesi) now rather dated."


39) In referring to this guideline I do not wish to exclude the  possibility
   that there may be material in Mr Verney's reports which  casts  light  on
   claims made by the first claimant at the time of his earlier appeal or by
   the second claimant at the time of hers.  However, in the current appeals
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal ought to have  had  regard  to  this
   guideline in examining Mr Verney's evidence but she made no reference  to
   it.

40) Overall the position is this.  The Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the present appeals was not entitled to depart from the findings made  in
   the earlier appeals for the reasons which she gave.  In  particular,  she
   did not give satisfactory reasons why because both the first  and  second
   claimants gave evidence at the same hearing before her, the findings made
   on the basis of evidence they had each given previously at their separate
   hearings should be overturned.  The findings made in the earlier  appeals
   were based on the evidence and supported by proper reasons at that  time.
   They could only be overturned for a good reason  and  the  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not supply strong enough reasons.

41) It does not follow from this that the  appeals  must  necessarily  fail.
   There is material in the reports by Mr  Verney  which  may  lead  to  the
   making of different findings, provided of course the point  is  addressed
   as to whether Mr Verney had himself access to the previous decisions,  or
   what significance  that  might  have  if  he  did  not.   The  claimant's
   themselves might have explanations to offer which were  not  fully  taken
   into account by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

42) The appropriate course in these proceedings is  for  the  appeal  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, as submitted by Ms Saddiq on  behalf
   of the Secretary of State.  The appeals will be heard before a  different
   judge with no findings made by Judge Kempton preserved.

Conclusions

43) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

44) I set aside the decision.

45) The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  before
   a different judge with no findings made by Judge Kempton preserved.

Anonymity

46) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  order  for  anonymity.   Having
   regard to the continuing nature of these proceedings I consider that such
   an order should be made in the following terms.  Pursuant to rule  14  of
   the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  make  an  anonymity
   order.  Unless the tribunal or a court directs otherwise,  no  report  of
   these proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify the original  appellants.   This  order  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this order could
   give rise to contempt of Court proceedings.






Signed                                             Date 23 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

