
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00342/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2015                 |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Rezwan Sidiqi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen
For the Respondent:    Mr R O' Ryan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    "the Secretary of State" and to the Respondent as "the Claimant".   The
    Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Myers)  promulgated  on  10  August  2015
    allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 5th December 2014 refusing to  vary  leave  to  remain  and
    deciding to remove him from the UK by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant, who was born on 3rd August 1996, is
    a national of Afghanistan.  He entered the UK illegally, on a  date  in
    2009, and on 16th September 2009 applied for asylum.  The thrust of his
    claim was that he was from the Baghlan Province and that he was at risk
    there because of a feud between his tribe (the Lar Kwari Tribe) and the
    Andarabi Tribe.  He said, in particular, that his family were  in  fear
    of the Andarabi Tribe.  The Secretary of State did not believe  he  had
    given a true account regarding his claim to be at risk at the hands  of
    the Andarabi Tribe but accepted that he  is  an  Afghani  national  and
    accepted that, at the  time  he  came  to  the  UK,  he  was  a  minor.
    Accordingly, therefore, the Secretary of State  did,  on  18th  January
    2010, refuse his asylum claim but  did  also  grant  him  discretionary
    leave to remain in the UK, pursuant to her  policy,  until  3rd  August
    2013.  The Claimant sought further leave, maintaining his contention to
    be at risk upon return and this led to the Respondent's above  decision
    concerning the refusal of further leave and removal.  The Claimant then
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal held an oral hearing at which both parties were
    represented.  It heard oral evidence from the Claimant  and  also  from
    his brother.  It found the evidence of the Claimant and the brother  to
    be credible.   It  attached  particular  importance  to  the  brother's
    evidence that he had received information to the effect that the family
    in Afghanistan had recently been attacked and a cousin of the  Claimant
    had been murdered.  It concluded that the Claimant was at risk  in  his
    home area of Baghlan, that he would not be able to relocate by going to
    live with his sister and her family  (the  sister  having  remained  in
    Afghanistan) and that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  him  to
    relocate to Kabul.  Accordingly, it was concluded that he had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution "for a Convention  reason",  that  being  a
    reference to the 1951 Refugee Convention.  His appeal  was,  therefore,
    allowed on asylum grounds.  It was also allowed on human rights grounds
    for the same reasons as it had succeeded on the asylum grounds and also
    under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  as
    incorporated in the Immigration Rules, specifically Rule 276ADE.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There were four separate Grounds  of  Appeal  which  may  be
    briefly summarised as follows;

      i) the First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to  resolve  conflicts
         in the evidence;

     ii) it had erred in failing to specify any applicable  1951  Convention
         reason;

    iii) it had failed to adequately explain  why  the  Claimant  could  not
         relocate at his sister's home in Afghanistan;

     iv) it had failed to adequately explain why the evidence of the brother
         was accepted.

 5. On 28th August 2015 permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The salient part of that grant reads as follows;

         "Although there appears to be little merit in ground 1 which  seems
         to be no more than a complaint that the judge accepted the evidence
         of the  Appellant's  brother,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge's
         approach to internal relocation was  flawed,  and  that  failed  to
         follow the current country guidance without  any  adequate  reasons
         for departing from it.  Moreover since the judge appears to  accept
         that the Appellant could live in safety with his married sister and
         her family, the mere fact that it was  not  traditional  to  do  so
         would arguably not offer any adequate  reason  why  he  should  not
         reasonably be expected to  do  so.   The  international  protection
         threshold would not be met merely because the  Appellant  preferred
         not to have to do so either long-term, or short-term whilst he  re-
         established himself."

 6. A hearing was  convened  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  explore  the
    question of whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such  that
    its decision ought to be set aside.  At that hearing Mr  O'Ryan  raised
    an initial argument to the effect that permission had only been granted
    in respect of ground (c), in light of the wording of the grant  as  set
    out above.  However, he decided not to pursue  that  in  light  of  the
    content of Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.  Following the
    wording of Rule 34(4) and (5) it is the case that  where  a  permission
    application is determined by the First-tier Tribunal and permission  is
    granted only on limited grounds, notification of the right to  make  an
    application to the Upper Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal  must  be
    given  in  respect  of  the  unsuccessful  grounds.   Here,   no   such
    notification had been given which amply supported the proposition that,
    in fact, the grant of permission to appeal was intended to be  and  was
    unlimited.  There was a further issue in that  it  appeared,  from  the
    wording of the grant, that the granting judge had identified what would
    have been a fifth ground to the effect  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had, in considering the  internal  flight  alternative,  departed  from
    applicable  Country  Guidance  without  sufficiently  explaining   why.
    However, Mrs Pettersen indicated that that was not a matter  she  would
    seek to pursue before me.  She also indicated, quite  correctly  in  my
    view, that she would not pursue grounds (a) or (d), those being no more
    than mere disagreement with the findings.  This, then,  left  only  two
    remaining grounds.  I heard submissions from the representatives  about
    those and have taken them fully into account.

 7. As to ground (b)  it  was  clearly  the  intention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum   grounds.    Indeed,   it
    specifically said at paragraph 37 of its  determination  that  that  is
    what it was doing.  It is true that it did not say, in terms, which  of
    the five available 1951 Convention reasons it had identified  as  being
    applicable.  Mr O' Ryan pointed  to  the  Claimant's  evidence  to  the
    effect that his parents, two brothers and two sisters had  been  killed
    in a blood feud with the Andarabi Tribe, that there was  an  additional
    element to the conflict because his father had been involved with Hezb-
    e-Islami and that the First-tier Tribunal had found that he was at risk
    in his home area of Baghlan because of the adverse history  his  family
    had in that area with that particular tribe.  Mr O Ryan submitted that,
    in these circumstances, it was obvious that  the  judge  was  accepting
    that he was at  risk  because  of  his  membership  of  his  family  (a
    particular social group) and that he was also at risk on the  basis  of
    imputed political opinion (with respect to his father's  claimed  links
    with Hezb-e-Islami).

 8. Essentially, for the most part, I accept Mr O Ryan's submissions on the
    point.  The First-tier Tribunal  clearly  did,  as  I  have  indicated,
    accept the oral evidence as given to it and accepted that the  Claimant
    was at risk on the basis of his family's difficulties with the Andarabi
    Tribe.  I am not sure it can properly be said  that  it  also  accepted
    risk on the basis of his father's association with Hezb-e-Islami but  I
    am satisfied that it was finding, albeit it did  not  express  this  in
    precise and clear terms, that  there  was  risk  as  a  result  of  the
    Claimant's membership of a particular social group.

 9. As  to  the  question  of  internal  flight,  I  accept  Mr  O'  Ryan's
    submissions to the  effect  that  the  draughtsperson  of  the  grounds
    misunderstood what the First-tier Tribunal was saying at  paragraph  29
    of its determination.  It was not saying that the Claimant was  stating
    he would choose not go to live with his sister  for  cultural  reasons.
    It was, in fact, finding that, for cultural reasons, his sister and the
    family into which the sister had married would not allow  him  to  live
    with them.  It seems to me that that  finding,  on  the  evidence,  was
    clearly open to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mrs  Pettersen  did  not,  in
    fact, urge me to read paragraph 29 in a  different  way  but,  instead,
    suggested that the First-tier Tribunal had  merely  speculated  on  the
    point that the sister and his family would not allow him to live there.
     I do not accept that.  It had evidence from  the  Claimant,  which  it
    found to be credible, to the effect that he would  not  be  allowed  to
    live in the sister's household and it  had  to  take  a  view  on  that
    evidence.  That is what it did and what was required of it.  There  is,
    in any event, a further point.  As Mr O' Ryan  again  points  out,  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  the  area  where  the
    sister lived was also in Baghlan Province, the same province where  the
    First-tier Tribunal had found risk for the Claimant existed.  As  such,
    the sister's home was not a potential place of safety.   Mrs  Pettersen
    sought  to  make  some  more  general  challenges  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning with respect to internal flight,  suggesting  that
    it had failed to take into account his advantage of having had a United
    Kingdom education and the availability of a support  package  available
    for persons being  repatriated.   However,  its  consideration  of  the
    question of an internal  flight  alternative  was,  to  my  mind,  most
    thorough and holistic.  That consideration appears in  a  passage  from
    paragraph 31 to 36 of  the  determination.   It  carefully  balanced  a
    number of factors including his having become fluent  in  English,  his
    having done well at school and the availability of  a  support  package
    but it also noted that the support package was intended  to  help  only
    with immediate costs, that he had no personal recollection of living in
    Afghanistan, a country which he had left as a 5 year old  child  albeit
    that he had returned at the age of 12 for a period of some  two  weeks,
    and evidence of a lack of basic infrastructure for displaced persons in
    Kabul.  There was, as I say,  no  maintained  challenge  regarding  any
    contention that there had been an  insufficiently  explained  departure
    from country guidance. As such, the consideration  of  internal  flight
    was free of any properly identified legal error.

10. In light of all the above  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    reached findings and conclusions which were clearly open to it  on  the
    evidence and which were all properly explained.  Further, what it  said
    when read in its totality was sufficient to identify an applicable 1951
    Convention reason for the persecution it found the Claimant would face.



11. In light of the above the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  and
    its decision shall stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  make  no
anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

The Claimant has succeeded.  In any event no fee is paid or payable.   There
can, therefore, be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
