
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00214/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|Prepared on 21 October 2015          |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. H.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally, and on 13  June
         2014 the Appellant claimed asylum  as  a  citizen  of  Sudan.  That
         application was refused on 18 November 2014, and in  consequence  a
         removal decision was made in relation to him. Since the  Respondent
         accepted that the Appellant could not  be  returned  in  safety  to
         Sudan as a member of the Berti tribe, and thus  an  individual  who
         would be perceived to be  from  Darfur,  she  proposed  instead  to
         remove the Appellant to Ethiopia. He is not a citizen of  Ethiopia,
         but the Respondent took  the  view  that  he  could  reasonably  be
         expected to settle there in safety with his wife and  child  there,
         who are Ethiopian citizens.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against the removal decision
         and his appeal was heard on 12  February  2015,  and  dismissed  by
         decision of Judge Mark-Bell, promulgated on 2 March 2015.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, was refused by Judge  Grimmett  on  31  March
         2015 on the basis it was no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
         Judge's decision. Undaunted the  application  was  renewed  to  the
         Upper Tribunal with the same grounds, when it was granted by Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain on 16 July 2015.

      4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 17 August  2015  in  which
         she noted the Appellant had expressed the desire to go to  Ethiopia
         to be reunited with his family, and argued that the Judge had given
         sound reasons for his rejection of the Appellant's  claim  that  he
         would face a risk of harm in Ethiopia.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of Law?

      6. The Appellant is not, and never  has  been,  stateless.  Ms  Brakaj
         accepts that before me. There is therefore no merit in that part of
         her grounds which complain that he is, and that  the  Judge  should
         have made such a finding.

      7. There was no issue before the Judge over the Appellant's claim that
         he would face a real risk of harm in the event that he was  removed
         from the UK to Sudan [20].  The  sole  issue  in  relation  to  the
         asylum/Article 3 appeal was whether he would face a  real  risk  of
         harm in the event that the Respondent was able  to  remove  him  to
         Ethiopia.

      8. Ms Brakaj accepts before me (as  her  predecessor  did  before  the
         Judge) that the Judge was not concerned with the practicalities  of
         how the  Respondent  would  effect  the  proposed  removal  of  the
         Appellant to  Ethiopia,  given  that  he  had  consistently  denied
         possession of any passport. It might be that he would refuse to co-
         operate  with  the   Sudanese   authorities,   or   the   Ethiopian
         authorities, or it might be that they would  refuse  to  co-operate
         with the Respondent, in the process of obtaining a travel  document
         and entry clearance to Ethiopia - but that was not a matter for the
         Judge, and the matter has not yet been explored by  the  Respondent
         because of the pursuit of the appeal. Absent a travel document  and
         entry clearance it is difficult to see how the Appellant  could  be
         physically removed from the  UK  to  Ethiopia,  but  as  the  Judge
         correctly noted the practicalities of that  removal  were  not  for
         him.

      9. There was no issue before the Judge over whether the Appellant  had
         married  an  Ethiopian  citizen  following  a   marriage   ceremony
         undertaken  in  Greece.  The  Appellant  had  produced  a  marriage
         certificate issued following that ceremony, and the Respondent  had
         not challenged its validity. If the Appellant wished to  pursue  an
         argument before the Judge to the effect that this marriage was  not
         one that would be recognised by the Ethiopian authorities  once  he
         was in Ethiopia, so that he would then face a risk  of  removal  to
         Sudan by the Ethiopian authorities, then he  needed  to  articulate
         clearly the reasons why he suggested this would be  their  reaction
         to the marriage at that point, and, provide some credible  evidence
         to support that argument. He did not do so.  There  is  no  obvious
         reason why the Ethiopian authorities would take that stance if they
         had permitted him entry to  their  country  as  the  spouse  of  an
         Ethiopian citizen. Moreover, as the Judge  found,  the  Appellant's
         father in law had attended the wedding and was  a  witness  to  the
         marriage, so he could be expected to assist in  demonstrating  that
         this was a genuine marriage.

     10. I am satisfied that there was no reliable  evidence  placed  before
         the Judge to suggest  that  if  the  Appellant  was  granted  entry
         clearance as the spouse of an Ethiopian citizen he would thereafter
         face a real risk of being  removed  from  Ethiopia  to  Sudan.  The
         argument that such a risk existed was described by the Judge  as  a
         mere assertion [28], and there was no error in his doing so. Indeed
         I would go further and describe it as pure speculation.

     11. As the Judge noted, the Appellant had  consistently  expressed  the
         wish to go to Addis Ababa to join his wife and daughter there.  His
         claim that he faced a risk of harm in Ethiopia from members of  his
         wife's family was obviously a late invention, and it was  duly  and
         properly dismissed by the Judge  as  false  in  the  light  of  the
         evidence that his wife's father had been able to attend the wedding
         in Greece and had stood as witness to it [28]. I note Ms Brakaj has
         offered no criticism of that aspect of the decision.

     12. Accordingly the Appellant has failed to  demonstrate  any  material
         error of law in the Judge's approach. On the  hypothesis  that  the
         Appellant could be removed to Ethiopia, he faced no  risk  of  harm
         once in Ethiopia from either  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  or  non
         state agents.

    Conclusion

     13. I am satisfied that the Appellant has failed to establish any error
         of law on the Judge's part in the course of his assessment  of  the
         evidence. The approach taken by the Judge to the  evidence  in  his
         decision does not disclose any error  of  law  that  requires  that
         decision to be set aside and remade.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2
    March 2015 contains no error of law in  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 October 2015

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 October 2015
