

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
AA/00570/2014
                                                               AA/00610/2014
                                                               AA/00609/2014
                                                               AA/00611/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 10 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    MFFAZ
                                    ARHAJ
                                    NMFAZ
                                    MMFAZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by McGarvey Immigration and
                    Asylum Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
      amended).

Introduction

   2. The first appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born  on  1  February
      1968.  The second, third and fourth appellants, respectively the  wife
      and children of the first appellant, are also citizens of Iraq.   They
      were born on 4 December  1972,  7  August  1998  and  28  August  2000
      respectively.  They arrived in the United Kingdom from Baghdad  on  21
      November 2013.  The third appellant entered  as  a  Tier  4  (Student)
      Migrant with leave valid until 18 January 2014.  The other  appellants
      entered as her dependents.  They claimed asylum on 27  November  2013.
      On 13 January 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellants'
      claims for asylum and made decisions refusing to vary their  leave  to
      remain.

   3.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination dated 8 March 2014, Judge  C  J  Woolley  dismissed  the
      appellants' appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  and
      under Arts 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  Permission to appeal was initially
      refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  on  2  May  2014  the  Upper
      Tribunal (UTJ Storey) granted the appellants permission to appeal.

   4. The appeal initially came  before  me  on  9  September  2014.   In  a
      decision dated 22 September 2014,  I  concluded  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'  appeal  on  asylum
      grounds involved the making of an error of  law.   I  set  aside  that
      decision and directed that the appeal should be relisted in the  Upper
      Tribunal in order that the decision could be remade.  My  reasons  are
      set out in full in my written decision and I do not repeat them  here.



   5. The appeal subsequently came before me on 25 November 2014.

The Appellants' Claims

   6. The appellants' claims for asylum are  based  on  the  fact  that  the
      second appellant was an academic at the Al-Kindi  Medical  College  in
      Baghdad.  The second appellant (together with her husband  and  (then)
      two children) came to the UK in 2008 in order for her to study  for  a
      PhD at Plymouth University.  She was awarded that degree in July 2013.
       In October 2013, the family returned to Iraq and the second appellant
      to her job as a lecturer in Baghdad.    She claims that  she  suffered
      discrimination and was threatened as she was the only Sunni Muslim  in
      her department which consisted of Shi'a Muslims and the  influence  of
      the Shi'a militia,  the  Al-Mahdi  army.   She  claims  that  she  was
      unnecessarily searched on arriving at the University  when  she  first
      returned and was threatened and, in effect, it was made clear  to  her
      that she was not welcome.  She feared she would be harmed as  a  Sunni
      academic.

   7. The appellants claim that, shortly, after her problems in the  College
      began after her return from the UK, on 9 November 2013 their home  was
      targeted at about 5.30 am when shots were fired at their house.   They
      did not see the perpetrators but they heard them and a  vehicle  speed
      away and the house had bullet holes in it.  The family  left  to  stay
      with the second appellant's family in Baghdad.   The  first  appellant
      was arrested by Government forces  on  13  November  2013  whilst  the
      family was staying at the house of the second appellant's father.  The
      first appellant was detained  and  questioned  about  his  links  with
      terrorism.  Subsequently he was released after his father-in-law found
      individuals  who  were  able  to  mediate  with  the  authorities  and
      establish that he had nothing to do with terrorism.

   8. The appellants left Iraq and arrived in the UK on  21  November  2013.
      The second appellant entered as a Tier 4 student on a visa granted  on
      9 May 2013 and valid until 18  January  2014.   The  other  appellants
      entered as her dependents.

   9. The appellants fear that they face a risk of  persecution  or  serious
      ill-treatment based upon the fact that the second appellant is a Sunni
      Muslim academic who is at real risk of being targeted,  together  with
      her family, by Shi'a militia or others on return.

The Hearing

  10. At the hearing, Mr Hodgetts who represented the appellant provided  me
      with a subjective and an objective bundle of documents.  Those bundles
      contain  updated  witness  statements  from  the  first   and   second
      appellants, an expert report from Dr Fatah dated 18 November 2014  (at
      pages 50-71 of the subjective  bundle)  and  a  number  of  background
      documents at pages 52-77 of the objective bundle that were not  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Richards, who represented the Respondent,
      indicated that  he  had  no  objection  to  this  new  evidence  being
      admitted.  I considered proper to admit the evidence in  the  exercise
      of my discretion under rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

  11. In  addition,  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first  and  second
      appellants who both adopted their witness statements contained in  the
      subjective bundle.  Both representatives made oral submissions and, as
      will  become  clear  below,  the  issues  I  have   to   decide   were
      substantially narrowed as a result  of  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
      Richards on behalf of the Respondent.

  12. Neither representative relied explicitly  upon  the  country  guidance
      case of HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC).
       Mr Richards, however, drew my attention  to  [138]  where  the  Upper
      Tribunal recognised the background evidence showed a trend in 2010  of
      increased  targeting  of  a  number  of  groups  in   Iraq   including
      "educational professionals".

The Law

  13. The burden of proof is upon the appellants to establish that there  is
      a reasonable likelihood or real risk that if  returned  to  Iraq  they
      would be subject to persecution for a Convention reason or subject  to
      serious ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR or a real risk
      of death contrary to Article 2 of the ECHR.

  14. In relation to internal relocation, para 339O of the Immigration Rules
      provides that:

           "(i). The Secretary of State will not make:

                    a) A grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin
                       a person  would  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
                       persecution,  and  the  person  can   reasonably   be
                       expected to stay in that part of the country;

                 ....

             ii) In examining whether a part of the  country  of  origin  or
                 country  of  return  meets  the  requirements  in  (i)  the
                 Secretary of State, while making his decision on whether to
                 grant  asylum....,  will  have  regard   to   the   general
                 circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to
                 the personal circumstances of the person.

            iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return
                 to the country of origin or country of return."

Discussion and Findings

  15. In his submissions, Mr Richards indicated that  he  did  not  seek  to
      challenge the truthfulness of the evidence before me.  He  also  noted
      that a  number  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  were
      preserved.

  16. In the light of this, I do not set out the detailed evidence which the
      second appellant gave orally or the  briefer  evidence  given  by  the
      first appellant.  I only set it out as necessary,  together  with  the
      other subjective and background evidence, as  necessary  to  reach  my
      findings in these appeals.  I accept what those witnesses said in both
      their oral  and  written  evidence.   The  second  appellant  was,  in
      particular, a most impressive witness and I have no doubt she (and her
      husband in his brief evidence) was seeking to tell me the truth.

  17. The scope of the issues and matters of  dispute  between  the  parties
      were reduced considerably by Mr Richards in his  submissions.   Having
      accepted the truthfulness of  the  witnesses,  he  accepted  that  the
      objective evidence supported the second appellant's claim that she had
      encountered hostility at her college where  she  was  the  only  Sunni
      lecturer in an otherwise Shi'a dominated college.   Further,  he  also
      accepted that it was understandable  that  the  appellants  could  not
      identify who had carried out the shooting on 9 November  2013  outside
      their home.  He accepted that, nevertheless, in their minds  it  would
      be linked to the other incidents which the second appellant  said  had
      occurred shortly before in her  college,  namely  that  she  had  been
      threatened  and  treated  aggressively  including  being  subject   to
      unwarranted searches on entering the college.   Mr  Richards  accepted
      that given the evidence, in particular of the second  appellant,  that
      there had been no other shootings in their area and that the  shooting
      incident followed on fairly closely from the problems and  threats  in
      her workplace that, applying the low standard of proof, it was, in his
      words, "not an enormous leap of faith" to  conclude  that  the  second
      appellant (and with her family) had been targeted.

  18. I agree.  I accept the evidence of the first and second appellants but
      they do not, of course, know who fired upon their house.  Mr  Richards
      did not suggest, as had been postulated  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge,  that  the  shots  came  from  a   near-by   checkpoint.    The
      unchallenged evidence of the first and second appellants was that  the
      checkpoint was some distance away.

  19. The background evidence shows  the  targeting  of  academics  in  Iraq
      including  shootings  and  targeting  of  their  homes.    The   UNHCR
      "Eligibility Guidelines for Iraq 2012" at page  23  (page  37  of  the
      objective bundle) sets out the situation as follows:

           "b)   Academics

           According to various sources, hundreds of  professors,  teachers
           and academics have been killed since 2003 and many  others  have
           been kidnapped, arrested or threatened.  In 2010 and 2011,  such
           attacks have been reported  again  with  higher  frequency,  and
           continued also in 2012, including in Al-Anbar,  Babel,  Baghdad,
           Diyala, Ninewa, Kirkuk and Salah Al-Din Governorates.   In  most
           cases, loss of life has resulted from shootings,  often  in  the
           victims'  home,  or  by  "sticky  bombs"  attached  to   private
           vehicles.  Some academics have been killed  after  returning  to
           Iraq from abroad.

           Students and schoolchildren have also been targeted and in  some
           cases killed and injured in bombings, shootings and  abductions.
           In central and southern Iraq, there are reports that faculty and
           administrators of schools and universities have been  threatened
           by  armed  anti-government  groups  to  adapt   programmes   and
           activities and promote certain students.  Academic  institutions
           have reportedly practiced  self-censorship  in  order  to  avoid
           violence.

           University personnel are also reported to have been  demoted  or
           fired from their employment, often in an  arbitrary  manner,  as
           part of ongoing "De-Ba-athification" campaigns. "

      Likewise, the US Department of State Report 2012 on Iraq  at  page  25
      (page 5 of the objective bundle also identifies a continuing targeting
      of academics, albeit there are fewer reports than in  previous  years,
      as follows:

           "There were reports, although fewer than in previous  years,  of
           threats by extremists and sectarian  militants  against  schools
           and universities, urging them to  modify  activities  or  favour
           certain students, or face violence.  Academics continued  to  be
           targeted in attacks during the year.  For example,  on  July  2,
           unknown gunmen  killed  Mohammed  Jasim  Al-Jubouri,  a  faculty
           member  at  Imam  Adham  College  in  Mosul  outside  his  home.
           Terrorist  attacks  even  targeted   elementary   schools.    On
           September 24, four children were killed and  six  injured  in  a
           suicide bombing outside an elementary school in Hit.   Academics
           self-censored and educational  institutions  at  times  modified
           their activities accordingly."

  20. The evidence of the continued risk to academics and attacks  in  2010-
      2012 is not, in  my  judgement,  contradicted  by  the  Freedom  House
      Report, "Freedom in the World 2013- Iraq" (at page 27 of the objective
      bundle) when it states:

           "Academic institutions  operate  in  a  highly  politicized  and
           insecure environment.  Hundreds of professors were killed during
           the peak of sectarian and  insurgent  violence,  and  many  more
           stopped working or fled the country, though there have been some
           reports of scholars returning to their jobs  following  relative
           security improvements in the last several years."

  21. In his expert report, Dr Fatah deals with the  risk  to  academics  in
      Baghdad in section 5 at paras 47-60.  At paras 47-51 he  identifies  a
      number of attacks against academics in 2014 as follows:

           "47.  This section explores  the  risks  to  academics  in  Iraq
                 today, with particular focus on Baghdad,  the  Al  Zandee's
                 home city.

             48. On 17 October 2014, the condemnation on Facebook  by  Iraqi
                 female university professor, Hana Mohammed al-Baghdadi,  of
                 ISIS atrocities in Mosul led to her arrest by  that  group.
                 She was sentenced to death and beheaded  in  front  of  her
                 family (including her children), which was told not to have
                 a funeral for her.

             49. 03  October  2014,  it  was  reported  that  Shiia  militia
                 supported by the Iraqi government  kidnapped  a  university
                 lecturer close to his home in southern part of the city  of
                 al-Basara.  Wamidh Khalid Hamud abducted near to  his  home
                 in Dur al-Baladiya, and taken to an unknown destination.

             50. On 22 May 2014, ISIS members attacked the car of  a  female
                 university lecturer and a former candidate for the election
                 in the city of Mosul.  Ms Faliha Salih was  killed  in  the
                 attack.

             51. On 11 May 2014, a university professor was  injured  in  an
                 armed attack on his home in the centre of Baquba, Diyala."

  22. Those incidents, of course, relate to events  outside  Baghdad.   They
      nevertheless show the general risk to academics throughout Iraq.

  23. At para 52, Dr Fatah identifies a specific incident of an attack  upon
      an academic in Baghdad as follows:

           "On 03 February 2014, the head of the Iraqi  University  escaped
           an assassination attempt in north Baghdad.  Usam Hassan al-Atabi
           escaped as unidentified assailants threw a hand-grenade into his
           car in the al-Adhamiya Quarter of Baghdad.

  24. At para 53 of his report, Dr Fatah sets out in tabular form  a  number
      of attacks, often fatal, upon academics including a number of  attacks
      in Baghdad including on 18 May 2014 that  an  academic  from  the  Al-
      Nahran University Baghdad was killed at home and  on  1  July  2013  a
      professor at Baghdad's College of Medicine had a bomb placed under his
      car.  At paras 58-60, Dr  Fatah  sets  out  the  deaths  of  academics
      between 9 April 2004 and 25 September 2012 as follows:

           "58.  Between 09 April 2004 and 25 September 2012  the  Brussels
                 Tribunal  recorded  the   assassinations   of   472   Iraqi
                 academics,  PhD  students,  engineers,   faculty/department
                 managers.  A rough tally of  the  locations,  where  it  is
                 explicitly stated, show that 179 our  472  were  killed  in
                 Baghdad.   The  Brussels  Tribunal  records  seven   female
                 academics killed in that period.  Specific mention is  made
                 of religion on few occasions:  Sunni (three  times),  Shite
                 (once).  The following are annual death tolls tallied  from
                 the Brussels Tribunal site.




           |2012      |5            |
|2011      |16           |
|2010      |13           |
|2009      |10           |
|2008      |18           |
|2007      |64           |
|2006      |113          |


          59. And from 22 March 2003 to 28 May 2010, the Brussels  Tribunal
              records another 120 deaths of individuals from  the  rest  of
              Iraq's  education  sector   (teachers,   school   principals,
              students, education officials).  30 of these were  killed  in
              Baghdad.  20 of them were women.

          60. While these are historical statistics,  they  are  useful  in
              demonstrating how the risk to academics  (as  well  as  other
              particular groups) ebbs and flows according  to  the  general
              security situation in the country.   In  addition  they  also
              serve to give some sense of proportion to the risk to  female
              academics and to academics in Baghdad."

  25. At paragraph 61, Dr Fatah concludes that:

           "...Academics in many parts of  the  country,  including  female
           academics, could be at risk of targeted violence.  Academics  in
           Baghdad specifically, are also targeted."

  26. At paragraph 62, Dr Fatah recognises the difficulty of identifying the
      perpetrators of such acts as follows:

           "It is impossible to state whether this risk is enhanced by  the
           academic in  question  being  a  Sunni  Muslim,  or  necessarily
           whether the risk increases  in  sync  with  sectarian  tensions.
           Because the motive for each  attack  is  never  given  and  only
           rarely hinted at, and the perpetrators are  hardly  ever  known,
           patterns cannot be detected.  Most sources mention the fact that
           identifying the culprits - even by exploring patterns,  victims,
           etc - is impossible because the victims are mixed (in  terms  of
           sect, area of expertise, affiliation with the Baath Party),  and
           the   perpetrators  were  either  -broadly  identified  -  Shiia
           militias and Sunni insurgents, or not identified at all."

  27. Then at para 64, Dr Fatah concludes:

           "The evidence does, however, indicate that gunmen attack (would-
           be) victims in their houses, as well as other places."

  28. Mr Richards did not challenge the contents of Dr  Fatah's  report.   I
      have no reason to doubt his  recitation  of  facts  or  to  doubt  his
      opinions are other than genuinely and reasonably held.  I  accept  the
      contents of his report.

  29. In addition, Mr  Hodgetts  drew  my  attention  to  two  news  reports
      concerning attacks on  academics  in  Baghdad.   At  page  68  of  the
      objective bundle,  there  is  a  report  dated  22  June  2014  of  an
      assassination of a professor of Nuclear Physics at the  Al-Mustansyria
      University who had been executed by militia after detaining him at his
      home in the Al-Jameaa District in the centre of Baghdad.   The  second
      appellant told me in her evidence that she  did  not  personally  know
      this professor but he lived a few streets from her home  in  the  same
      district in Baghdad.

  30. Then, at page 65, in translation, is a news report dated  1  September
      2014  of  an  attempted  assassination  of  the  Dean  of  the  second
      appellant's college, Dr Al-Mukhtar.  He, it is reported, was  targeted
      by a terrorist explosion outside his home as he was leaving to  go  to
      college but he was unharmed although his car suffered some damage.  As
      Dr Fatah points out in his report (above), the risk  to  academics  is
      not restricted to those who are Sunni.  Shi'a academics could also  be
      at risk from Sunni insurgents.

  31. The background evidence does, in my judgement, show a pattern of  risk
      to academics in Iraq including Baghdad.  The attacks can occur at  the
      individuals' homes.  The background evidence is wholly consistent with
      the appellants' account of an attack on their home on 9 November  2013
      and that  the  second  appellant  was  targeted  because  she  was  an
      academic.  The attack occurred shortly after she had returned to  Iraq
      from the UK and to her college where she had  been  subject  to  clear
      discrimination and adverse treatment because, in my judgement, she  is
      a Sunni Muslim academic who was working in a Shi'a dominated  college.



  32. Consequently, I accept that there is a real risk that  if  the  second
      appellant returns to her home area she will be targeted as an academic
      with a Sunni religious background.  That risk is not  negated  by  any
      suggestion that she could avoid the risk by not returning to  work  in
      the Shi'a dominated college.   First,  given  the  second  appellant's
      professional commitment to her work, including coming  to  the  United
      Kingdom and obtaining a PhD from the University of Plymouth which  she
      was awarded in 2013, it would not be reasonable to expect  the  second
      appellant not to return to the job which she has held for many  years.
      Secondly, in any event, her past  history  demonstrates  that  she  is
      known in her own area as an academic and, in my judgement,  she  would
      remain at  risk  from  those  who  would  well  know  her  background.
      Thirdly, the risk to academics in Baghdad is general and  wide-spread.
      Fourthly, Mr Richards did not suggest that the Iraqi state was in  any
      position to provide a level  of  protection  from  insurgents/militias
      that would meet a reasonable level of protection and obviate the  need
      for international protection.

  33. The substance of Mr Richards' submissions  was  not  directed  to  the
      issue of whether the appellant had established a real risk in her home
      area.  Instead, he focussed upon her possible internal relocation.  Mr
      Richards accepted that, in the  current  situation  in  Iraq  and  the
      conflict with  ISIS,  it  was  not  possible  for  the  appellants  to
      internally relocate outside Baghdad.  He did not pursue the point,  or
      rely upon HM and others, that the appellants could internally relocate
      within the KAR in the north of Iraq.  Given the current  situation  in
      Iraq and the absence of any evidence  that  the  appellants  have  any
      family or friends in the KAR, in my judgement, Mr  Richards'  approach
      was  entirely  realistic  and  correct.    It  would  simply  not   be
      reasonable to expect, or safe for,  the  appellants  to  move  outside
      Baghdad.

  34. With that in mind, Mr Richards submitted  that  the  appellants  could
      internally relocate within Baghdad.  He submitted that the risk to the
      second appellant was heightened by the fact  that  she  was  the  only
      Sunni member of staff  at  an  otherwise  Shi'a  college.   By  taking
      herself outside of that heightened risk category, the  risk  would  be
      greatly reduced by moving to a different Sunni part of Baghdad and  by
      the family being supported by the first appellant's employment who,  I
      was told, is an engineer.  Mr Richards submitted  that  there  was  no
      reason why the second appellant would be at any greater risk than  the
      general Sunni population in Baghdad as  a  consequence.   He  accepted
      that it  was  not  possible  to  say  that  the  appellants  would  be
      "completely safe" but it would mean that there would be no longer  any
      reason for them to be targeted if the second appellant were no  longer
      an academic.

  35. Mr Hodgetts submitted that it was a "leap of faith" to  say  that  the
      appellants would be safe in an unspecified area of Baghdad given  that
      they had previously been targeted.  He  relied  upon  the  two  recent
      reports of academics being targeted in Baghdad including the  Dean  of
      the second appellant's own college.  He relied upon paragraph 67 of Dr
      Fatah's report that the appellants would "stand out because  of  their
      name or 'otherness'" and so would be at risk.  Mr Hodgetts also relied
      upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that the first  appellant
      had been arrested under the anti-terrorism law because he had been not
      in his  own  registered  area.   The  second  appellant,  Mr  Hodgetts
      submitted remained at risk of being targeted as a  terrorist  if  they
      move to another area and, even if registration could be obtained, that
      would necessarily take time.   Mr  Hodgetts  relied  upon  the  expert
      report which, he submitted identified a risk to Sunni Arabs (see,  for
      example para 32) within Baghdad.

  36. Further, Mr Hodgetts submitted that it was not  reasonable  to  expect
      the appellants to relocate.  Although they were both  well  qualified,
      he submitted that it would be difficult for  the  first  appellant  to
      obtain employment and he relied upon the expert's report at  paragraph
      75 that the chances  of  the  second  appellant  obtaining  employment
      outside her college should be "regarded      as slim".  He relied upon
      the expert view that recruitment processes were not  transparent  and,
      if the appellants  "do  not  have  the  right  connections,  accessing
      employment maybe difficult" (at para 74).

  37. In my judgement, the  possibility  of  safe  and  reasonable  (or  not
      'unduly  harsh')  internal  relocation  within   Baghdad   is   purely
      speculative.  I have set out above the background evidence and  expert
      report of Dr Fatah in relation  to  the  risk  to  academics  in  Iraq
      including Baghdad.  The reach of the  militia  or  others  who  target
      academics cannot be restricted to the home area of the  appellants  in
      Baghdad.   The  background  evidence  shows  a  wide-spread  risk   to
      academics within Baghdad.   As I have already found, it would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the second appellant  to  give  up  her  academic
      life, in particular her current job.  It is  entirely  reasonable  for
      her to continue as an academic and she  has  worked  at  the  Al-Kindi
      College since 2002 and her evidence was that,  when  she  requested  a
      transfer, it was refused.  There is no real prospect that she would be
      able to work as a lecturer elsewhere in Baghdad.  In any event,  being
      an academic would obviously, bearing in mind her history, present  her
      as a future target for those who seek out to harm academics,  and,  in
      the case  of  Shi'a  militia,  in  particular  Sunni  academics.   The
      prospect  of  safely  relocating  within  Baghdad  has  no  evidential
      foundation.  I accept the evidence of the expert that  the  appellants
      would "stand out" both because of their  name  and  their  "otherness"
      which would,  in  my  judgement  include  the  fact  that  the  second
      appellant (together with her family) would have returned from the  UK.
      It was, of course, shortly after her return from the UK last time that
      the targeting of her home by gunmen took place.

  38. I also accept that  there  is  a  risk  to  the  first  appellant  (in
      particular) of being subject to detention under the anti-terrorist law
      if the family moved to a different registration area from  their  own.
      Mr Hodgetts  did  not  draw  my  attention  to  any  material  dealing
      specifically with the difficulty of registering in a  different  area.
      When the first appellant was last detained he was, obviously,  outside
      his own area  when  he  was  staying  in  his  father-in-law's  house.
      Although this risk may exist, it does not have any real bearing on  my
      finding that the appellants are entitled to international  protection.
      It is the risk of being targeted because  of  the  second  appellant's
      academic background which, in my judgement, creates  a  real  risk  of
      persecution for a Convention reason, serious ill-treatment contrary to
      Art 3 or of being killed  contrary  to  Art  2  of  the  ECHR  in  any
      (unspecified by the respondent) Sunni area of Baghdad other than their
      home area.

  39. For that reason, internal relocation is not open to the appellants.

  40. However, it would also, in my judgement, be  unreasonable  or  'unduly
      harsh' to expect the appellants to relocate having regard to all their
      personal circumstances Januzi [2006] UKHL 5; AH(Sudan) [2007] UKHL  49
      and para 339O(b) of the Rules).  The first and second  appellants  are
      both professionals and the background evidence and Dr  Fatah's  report
      to which I was referred by Mr Hodgetts, in my judgement,  demonstrates
      that even if they  were  to  seek  other  employment  there  would  be
      considerable difficulties which do not make that a realistic option in
      order to support themselves as a family.  If the second appellant were
      to obtain employment in another university that  would  simply  create
      the circumstances for the real risk to  her  and  her  family  in  any
      event.  Mr Richards explored  with  the  second  appellant  in  cross-
      examination the possibility of her being a  vet  in  Baghdad  but  she
      quite clearly stated she lacked the qualification; even though she had
      some background, she was now specialised in physiology.   Mr  Richards
      did not purse this possibility in his submissions.

  41. For these reasons, therefore, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant
      have the option of internally relocating within Baghdad which  is  the
      only possibility put forward by the Secretary of State.

  42. Thus, the appellants have established that there is a real  risk  that
      if returned to Iraq  they  would  be  subject  to  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason or a breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

  43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
      appeals on asylum grounds and under Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR
      involved the making of an error  of  law.   Those  decisions  are  set
      aside.

  44. The decision to dismiss the appeals under Article 8 is not  challenged
      and stands.

  45. I remake the decisions allowing the  appeals  on  asylum  grounds  and
      under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    9 December 2014




