
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00993/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 16 July 2013                                 |On 30 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                               SANNA EL-KHATIB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Marshall, Barry Clark Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sanna El-Khatib, was born on  24  July  1945  and  is  a
    citizen of Lebanon.  The  appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Sarsfield) against a  decision  of  the  respondent  to
    remove her from the  United  Kingdom,  having  refused  her  claim  for
    asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a determination promulgated  on  4
    April 2013, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that, in August 2012, masked men had come to  the
    home of her husband's parents  in  Lebanon  and  the  family  had  been
    accused of being involved with spying for Israel.   The  appellant  and
    her husband had fled to the United Kingdom. They are now estranged, the
    husband having returned to Lebanon.

 3. Judge Sarsfield's findings are set out [12] of the determination.   The
    first finding reads as follows:

         "On her own evidence the  appellant  had  no  problems  in  Lebanon
         before July 2012 when she said they began when masked men  came  to
         the Lebanon home of her husband's parents (Q56); this was on 3.7.12
         (SCR 4.1/C1) but she also said that they 'came at home  and  talked
         to my father'; she also said the visit was on  6  or  7  July  2012
         (Q54) and she, her children, husband and the parents  were  present
         (C1).  As an important part of her  account,  it  is  difficult  to
         accept that she would err over such an important date or whose home
         it was or who was spoken to."

 4. Judge Sarsfield appears to have overlooked the refusal  letter  of  the
    respondent at [24]:

         "You have given differing accounts of who was present at the  house
         when the masked men came.  You have  provided  an  explanation  for
         these discrepancies  and  therefore  it  is  deemed  they  are  not
         sufficiently significant..."

 5. Judge Sarsfield should have  taken  account  of  that  passage  of  the
    refusal letter in reaching  his  own  findings  of  fact.  The  passage
    (although  not  entirely  clear)  appears  to  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation for the discrepancy in this  part  of  her  evidence.   The
    judge's failure to, at the very least,  refer  to  and  deal  with  the
    apparent concession  was, in my opinion, an error in law.

 6. At [13], Judge Sarsfield  went  on  to  find  that  "[the  appellant's]
    husband returned to Lebanon in July 2012. I  consider  it  implausible,
    given the background material, that if he considered there was any risk
    he would return at all." He went on to find that, "there is no evidence
    that her husband has suffered on return or evidence from  him".   Judge
    Sarsfield appears to have overlooked the fact that  the  appellant  and
    her husband are estranged.  The appellant has said that  the  husband's
    return to Lebanon was a highly dangerous and  irrational  act  but  one
    which should have no impact  upon  her  own  claim  for  asylum.   That
    appears to me to be prima facie a  reasonable  argument  and  one  with
    which the judge should have engaged. What is certainly unreasonable  is
    that Judge Sarsfield should have expected  to  see  evidence  from  the
    husband given that he has returned to Lebanon and is estranged from the
    appellant.   Further, there is no  particular  reason  why,  given  the
    state of their relationship, the appellant would have  any  information
    as to whether or not her estranged husband has  "suffered  on  return".
    There were no grounds for supposing (as I believe the judge did)  that,
    because the husband had returned to  Lebanon  and  there  had  been  no
    reports of his having suffered persecution there, it is  now  safe  for
    the appellant herself to return.

 7. I find that the First-tier Tribunal's  analysis  of  the  evidence  and
    assessment of the credibility of the appellant's account is flawed. The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   It  will  be
    necessary for the next Tribunal to consider the matter afresh; none  of
    the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are  to  be  preserved.
    In those circumstances, I consider it appropriate to remit  the  matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is allowed.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Sarsfield) to remake the decision.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
