


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00163/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 23 July 2013                             |On : 25 July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, instructed by K Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3 October 1975. He left  Sri
Lanka and arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 November 2010,  together  with
his daughter, with a student dependant visa issued on 25  October  2011  and
valid until 17 October 2011. He joined his wife, who had entered the  United
Kingdom on 16 January 2010 with leave to enter as a student.  The  appellant
claimed asylum on 14 October  2011,  with  his  wife  and  daughter  as  his
dependants, and was interviewed on 14 November 2011. His claim  was  refused
on 14 December 2011 and a decision was made by the respondent  on  the  same
day to remove him from the United Kingdom. The  appellant  appealed  against
that decision and his appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  by  Judge
Emerton on 3 February 2012 and was dismissed. Permission to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal was granted on 26 March 2012. At an error of law  hearing  on
6 July 2012, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell  and  I  found  that  Judge
Emerton had made errors  of  law  in  his  decision  such  that  the  entire
decision had to be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's claim

The basis of the appellant's claim is that he fears  persecution  on  return
to Sri Lanka as a result of his  previous  involvement  with  the  LTTE.  He
claims to have been forced to join  the  LTTE  in  2002  and  to  have  been
trained by them and then sent to work from time to time as a  border  guard.
From April 2006 until the end of 2008 he worked at Kilinochchi  hospital  in
the LTTE medical ward looking after injured people. At the same time he  was
working as a laboratory assistant in a government  school.  He  married  his
wife in August 2006. In June 2008 he went to the government controlled  area
and was arrested by the army police in Kandy on 9 June 2008.  He  was  taken
to court the following day and from there sent to prison, where he was  held
for one week and ill-treated. He was released through the court on  16  June
2008 when his uncle bribed a CID officer. He then  returned  to  Kilinochchi
to the hospital where he was living. At the end of 2008 he  moved  with  the
medical  department  to  Vattakachchi,  as  the  army  were   advancing   on
Kilinochchi, and he then moved to Thiramapuram and then to Visuamadu. On  20
February 2009 he surrendered to the army and was taken to  an  IDP  camp  in
Vavuniya. He remained there for three days without registering  and  managed
to escape. He stayed in Velikulam for one week.  He  feared  being  arrested
because his ID card showed that he was from Kilinochchi and so  he  went  to
Colombo where his brother  was  living.  He  stayed  in  the  house  of  his
brother's friend, a Muslim, who assisted him in obtaining his  passport.  On
24 June 2010 he was identified by someone and was captured by  the  CID.  He
was detained for two months. During the first month he  was  questioned  and
beaten until he admitted to  being  LTTE  and  signed  a  document.  He  was
released on 21 August 2010 when his brother and uncle paid a  bribe  and  he
stayed in Colombo until he came to the United Kingdom. On two occasions  CID
officers came looking for him. On 11 November 2010 the Muslim man  took  him
to the airport and assisted him leaving the  country.  He  joined  his  wife
whom he had sent to the United Kingdom in January 2010.

The  respondent,  in  refusing  the  claim,  noted  discrepancies   in   the
appellant's evidence and, on that basis, and in view of the ease with  which
he managed to leave Sri Lanka, did not accept that  he  had  been  arrested,
detained and tortured. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  was
living in Colombo when he made  his  visa  application  and  considered  his
delay in claiming asylum undermined his  credibility  further.  It  was  not
accepted that he would be at any risk on return to Sri  Lanka  or  that  his
removal would breach his human rights.

For his appeal, the appellant produced the photographs  of  his  scars  from
torture,  as  previously  presented  to  the  respondent  when  interviewed,
together with  a  medical  report  on  the  scars  from  Mr  Andres  Martin,
Consultant in Emergency Medicine. Both he and his wife  gave  oral  evidence
before the judge.

In his determination, Judge Emerton  referred  to  the  medical  report  and
concluded that the evidence from the doctor was "equivocal", as it  was  not
consistent with the torture relied upon by the appellant in  his  claim.  He
accepted, from the report, that the  scars  on  the  appellant's  back  were
highly consistent with the  description  of  torture,  but  considered  that
there was no explanation as to why the  scarring  was  consistent  with  the
time span described, given that the  appellant  had  claimed  to  have  been
detained on two occasions, in 2008 and 2010, whilst the doctor had  referred
only to  the  appellant's  account  of  ill-treatment  in  2010.  The  judge
therefore considered that there was inadequate evidence that  the  appellant
was beaten at the time claimed and, whilst he accepted  that  the  appellant
may well have been beaten by the authorities, he did not  accept  that  that
was recent and that it post-dated the end of the civil war in May 2009.   He
did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  of  current  interest  to   the
authorities and considered that he would be at no  risk  on  return  to  Sri
Lanka.  He  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  on   asylum,   humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal against that decision was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge's approach to the medical evidence was unlawful.  The  doctor  was
aware of the appellant's claim to have been previously detained in 2008  and
his conclusions that the scars were consistent  with  a  detention  in  2010
were therefore not equivocal.

Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds raised.

At  the  error  of  law  hearing  DUTJ  Birrell  and  I  found  the  judge's
determination to be materially flawed, for the following reasons:

    "In deciding not to place any material weight upon the medical  report,
    Judge Emerton proceeded on the basis that the medical  expert  had  not
    been provided by  the  appellant  with  complete  information  about  a
    previous period of detention in  2008.  As  such,  he  found  that  any
    conclusions specifically attributing the scars on the appellant's  body
    to a period of detention in 2010 were not reliable,  having  failed  to
    take account of the possibility that the injuries had occurred in 2008.
    However it appears that Judge Emerton fell into error in his assessment
    of the information available to the medical expert and did not consider
    Mr Martin's comment at the beginning of his report, that the history of
    the report was restricted to those aspects that he considered  relevant
    to the physical findings and that the absence  of  a  reference  to  an
    incident did not necessarily mean that it was not described to him.  In
    addition, the  instructions  from  the  appellant's  solicitors  to  Mr
    Martin, which have now been produced to the Tribunal, clearly show that
    the doctor was made aware of the appellant's claim to have been  beaten
    during his 2008 detention.

    Furthermore, contrary to the Judge's finding at  paragraph  24  of  his
    determination, that the appellant gave no description in his  interview
    of being beaten on his back with blunt  instruments,  the  evidence  he
    gave at question 275 did not exclude such a description. As  such,  his
    conclusion at paragraph 24, that the medical report was not  consistent
    with the "torture" relied upon by the appellant in his asylum claim, is
    not one that is sustainable on the basis of the reasoning followed.

    For these reasons we find that the Judge's assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence was flawed. As acknowledged  by  Judge  Emerton,  the  medical
    report was a key piece of evidence and it was clearly integral  to  his
    overall credibility findings. As such, any error he made  in  assessing
    the medical evidence infected his overall assessment of the appellant's
    credibility and was a material one. We find, therefore, that a material
    error of law has been established and that  the  Judge's  determination
    cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety. All matters are  to
    be re-determined afresh."


Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 23 July 2013, by which time  there  was  a
new country guidance case, GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319. It was not considered that a panel was  required
to hear the appeal and a transfer order had been made to that effect.

Mr Tarlow initially applied for an adjournment of the hearing on  the  basis
that he had come prepared for an error of law hearing and was  unaware  that
that matter had already been resolved and that the appeal was  to  be  heard
again. I gave him some time to read the papers but he did not feel  that  he
had managed to get to  grips  with  the  case.  Mr  Muquit  objected  to  an
adjournment on the grounds that it was already more than a  year  since  the
error of law had been found and that it was unfair on the appellant  not  to
proceed, particularly as he was paying privately. I advised Mr  Tarlow  that
I was minded to proceed with the appeal, in particular given that  he  would
in any event have had to familiarise himself with  the  medical  report  and
the appellant's account of detention and torture in preparing for the  error
of law and ought thus to be prepared to some significant extent.  I  offered
him further time to read through the papers but he advised me  that  he  was
ready to proceed.

The  appellant  then  gave  evidence  before   me   through   the   official
interpreter. He adopted his statement and confirmed the evidence upon  which
he was relying. When cross-examined by Mr Tarlow he said that  he  was  with
Mr Martin for about four hours and he told him about what  had  happened  to
him in Sri Lanka. It was the doctor who had taken the photographs that  were
attached to the report. (Mr Muquit clarified that the  original  photographs
at pages 43 and 44 of the appeal bundle had been produced by  the  appellant
at his asylum  interview,  whilst  the  copy  photographs  attached  to  the
medical report had been taken by the doctor). With regard to  activities  in
the United Kingdom he had attended a commemorative  event  in  Rayners  Lane
last year, on 18  May  2012,  and  was  also  involved  in  the  Heroes  Day
celebrations on 27 November 2012. He confirmed  that  he  was  and  remained
sympathetic to the LTTE cause. When re-examined, he said  that  he  had  not
given any funding to the LTTE since coming to the United Kingdom because  he
had no one to send the money through.

In response to  my  further  enquiries  the  appellant  confirmed  that  the
scarring on his back was from the second detention. He  also  had  scars  on
his head and other places from being  hit.  He  had  scars  from  the  first
detention as he was beaten with a pipe and a screw  implement  was  used  on
his genitals, but the most severe torture occurred on the  second  occasion.
I asked the appellant to clarify how he managed to work for the  Sri  Lankan
government at the same time as working for the LTTE and  he  explained  that
he was working full-time for the LTTE but would only have to sign  somewhere
every month  or  two  months  in  order  to  receive  his  salary  from  the
government. He only managed to do that  because  the  area  was  under  LTTE
control.  He  stopped  working  as  a  government  laboratory  assistant  in
December 2008, at which time the army were approaching Kilinochchi and  they
all surrendered.

Mr Muquit then sought further clarification about the appellant's  work.  He
said that he started working for the LTTE in 2002 and would be sent to  work
for the border patrol for a month every three months up until 2006. He  also
used to dig bunkers and transport  injured  fighters.  In  2006  he  started
working full-time for the LTTE in their medical department. He did not  have
any other job apart from working for the LTTE  but  he  still  received  his
salary from the government job as he would go to  sign,  under  orders  from
the LTTE. He had been  appointed  to  that  job  by  the  Sri  Lankan  state
assembly in 1998 but up until December 2008 the Tigers controlled  the  area
and so it was effectively a job controlled by the LTTE.  He was arrested  in
June 2008 when  returning  back  to  Kilinochchi  and  held  for  one  week,
following which he resumed his work for the LTTE as he had no other choice.

The appellant's wife then gave her evidence. She adopted her statement  and,
in cross-examination, confirmed that she met the appellant in Vanni in  2004
and married him on 31 August 2006.  He  was  a  laboratory  assistant  in  a
government school in Kilinochchi, Vanni, and a member of the LTTE.  She  was
not a member herself but she helped  them  out.  Her  husband  worked  as  a
border guard from around 2002 before they met.  He  did  not  receive  money
from the LTTE but he received a salary from the government. In  response  to
Mr Muquit's re-examination she said that she used to  see  the  appellant  a
lot after they first met as she was working as a nurse  in  the  Kilinochchi
hospital at the time and he was  working  for  the  LTTE  in  their  medical
section.

In response to my further enquiries, the appellant's wife said that  he  was
working as a member of the medical department when  they  were  married  and
she believed that  he  stopped  working  as  a  border  guard  in  2004.  He
continued to receive a salary from the government. When I asked her why  the
government would pay him a salary for doing nothing she said that the  wages
only stopped if one of his seniors or other members of  staff  recorded  the
fact that he had been dismissed or had not turned up. Otherwise  the  salary
just continued, since everything was under  the  control  of  the  LTTE.  He
continued to get his wages at the time of his first  detention  but  at  the
time of his second detention they were in hiding and were too scared  to  go
and get his salary.

Mr Tarlow then made his  submissions.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant's
account was not credible  and  that,  even  considering  his  claim  at  its
highest, he did not fall within the risk factors identified in GJ.

Mr Muquit relied  on  the  medical  report  as  confirming  the  appellant's
account of detention and torture and referred also  to  additional  evidence
submitted from a  Clinical  Psychologist  in  the  organisation  "Positive",
within  Nottinghamshire  Healthcare  Trust.  He   asked   for   a   positive
credibility finding. He submitted that the appellant's  account  of  working
for the LTTE but continuing  to  draw  a  salary  from  the  government  was
consistent with the infrastructure of Sri Lanka at the time. He fell  within
the risk categories in GJ and would be put on a stop list or watch  list  if
returned to Sri Lanka.

Consideration and findings

There is no doubt that  the  appellant's  evidence  contains  discrepancies.
However, those discrepancies relate almost exclusively to dates, namely  the
years when he was detained and the year when he  surrendered  to  the  army,
and were corrected by  the  appellant  on  his  own  initiative  during  his
interview. Aside from those discrepancies it seems to me that  his  evidence
has remained consistent, throughout his eight to nine hour asylum  interview
and at both appeal hearings. He has provided a  consistent  account  of  two
periods of detention, giving consistent evidence as to the circumstances  of
his arrests, the length of the detention, the reasons for  his  release  and
his movements in between  and  thereafter.  His  account  of  his  movements
leading up to and following his first period of  detention,  his  return  to
the hospital to continue working  for  the  LTTE,  his  departure  from  the
hospital with the medical team as  a  result  of  the  advancing  army,  his
surrender to the army and his short  detention  in  an  IDP  camp,  are  all
consistent  with  the  background  information  relating  to   the   country
situation at the time.

The appellant has also provided a  consistent  account  of  his  involvement
with the LTTE, initially as a border guard and subsequently on  a  full-time
basis  in  their  medical  department  at  Kilinochchi  hospital,  where  he
latterly worked with his wife. Although his claim to have been  employed  as
a laboratory assistant in a government school and to have received a  salary
from the Sri Lankan government appeared to be at  odds  with  his  claim  to
have  been  working  full-time  for  the  LTTE,  the  explanation  that  the
appellant and his wife offered was consistent and was one that  I  consider,
following my own in-depth enquiries at the hearing, to be a plausible one.

Most significant, however, is the  medical  evidence  which  I  find  to  be
supportive of the appellant's account of his detention. It is not  disputed,
following  that  report,  and  in  the  light  of  the  photographs  showing
extensive scarring to  his  back,  that  he  has  been  tortured.  That  was
accepted by the First-tier Tribunal. What was not previously  accepted,  and
what the respondent continues to reject, is the appellant's account of  when
that torture occurred. However it  seems  to  me  that  Mr  Martin's  report
provides adequate corroboration of the appellant's account that it  occurred
during his second detention in 2010. It has now been  established,  contrary
to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  understanding,  that  Mr  Martin  had  been
provided with information about the  appellant's  ill-treatment  during  his
previous detention. He was therefore aware that the appellant  was  claiming
to have been beaten on both occasions. However, what he had  been  asked  to
do was to provide an assessment of the scars and  comment  on  whether  they
were consistent with the appellant's account. He was not  asked  to  comment
on the two periods of detention. His opinion, that  the  appearance  of  the
scars was consistent with the time span described by the  claimant,  clearly
demonstrates that he found the scars to be consistent with  the  appellant's
own claim that they resulted from torture during a period  of  detention  in
2010.

There is, in addition to the evidence previously submitted, further  medical
evidence  referring  to  the  appellant's  ill-treatment  during  his  first
detention. The appellant had not referred to that  previously,  although  it
was not inconsistent with the account he gave at question 125. I have  taken
that into account as further corroboration of the appellant's claim.

In the light of the above, and having  heard  from  the  appellant  and  his
wife, both of  whom  I  found  to  come  across  as  truthful  and  credible
witnesses, I accept that the appellant has presented a  genuine  account  of
his experiences in Sri  Lanka.  As  Mr  Tarlow  acknowledged,  much  of  the
reasons for refusal has fallen  away  with  the  new  country  guidance,  in
particular that relating to the ease with which the appellant  was  able  to
leave the country (paragraph 170 of GJ).  The  refusal  letter  acknowledged
the internal consistency of his evidence  but  rejected  his  account  to  a
large extent on the basis of an absence of verification. The reliability  of
the court document was previously doubted  solely  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant's account as whole was not accepted, but I find no reason  not  to
place weight upon it, given  my  overall  findings.  Indeed,  as  Mr  Muquit
submitted, there was no reason for  the  appellant  to  have  submitted  the
document given that the stated outcome of the police investigations did  not
particularly assist his case. With regard to the discrepancy  noted  by  the
respondent in the appellant's account of his whereabouts at the time of  his
arrest, I see no reason not to accept the  explanation  he  offered  and  to
accept that that was simply a misunderstanding of the question.

Having thus accepted that the appellant has provided a credible  account  of
involvement with the LTTE and arrest and detention in Sri Lanka, I  turn  to
the question of risk on return. It was Mr Tarlow's submission  that  he  did
not fall within any of the risk factors set out in  GJ.  However  I  do  not
consider that to be the case. I  would  not  go  so  far  as  to  accept  Mr
Muquit's suggestion that he would be detained at the airport as a result  of
his name appearing on a "stop" list. The appellant's evidence was  not  that
there was any outstanding court case  or  arrest  warrant  against  him  and
there is no reason to believe that his name would therefore  appear  on  any
such list. However I do accept  that  he  falls  within  the  risk  profiles
identified by the UNHCR and referred to at paragraph 290  of  GJ  and  that,
with regard to the categories identified by the Tribunal  themselves,  there
is a reasonable likelihood that his name would appear  on  a  "watch"  list,
given his previous level of involvement  with  the  LTTE  and  the  previous
interest shown by the Sri Lankan  army,  both  during  and  after  his  last
detention.  As  Mr  Muquit  submitted,  such  adverse  interest   would   be
heightened by the fact that he had not been rehabilitated and  that  he  had
spent over two years in the diaspora. I consider it reasonably  likely  that
he would be monitored when he returned to  his  home  area  and,  given  his
stated intention to continue to support a separate Tamil state,  when  taken
together with his expression, albeit limited, of such support in the  United
Kingdom and his previous involvement with the LTTE, there  is  a  reasonable
likelihood that he would be perceived to be a threat  to  the  integrity  of
Sri Lanka and that he would be subjected to persecution as a result.

In  the  circumstances  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been   able   to
demonstrate, to the lower standard of proof, that he would  be  at  risk  of
persecution if returned to Sri Lanka and his appeal is  accordingly  allowed
on asylum grounds and under Article 3  of  the  ECHR.  As  such  he  is  not
entitled to humanitarian protection.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
human rights grounds.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).










                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
