
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/00519/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                   |                                   |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 19 January 2018                 |On 24 January 2018                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                     L S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Greer counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1966 and is a national of Iraq.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is a resumed hearing  in  relation  to  a  decision  I  made  on  12
   September 2017 to set aside a  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Shergill in so far  as  it  related  to  relocation  to  Basra  for  this
   Appellant and her dependent husband and child. I preserved those findings
   made in relation to the inability of the Appellant to return to her  home
   area of Mosul or relocate to Baghdad.
5. Mr Greer and Mr McVitie agreed that there was no need  for  further  oral
   evidence. Mr Greer indicated that he would be relying on the lengthy  and
   detailed report of Mr George dated 31 October 2017.

Final Submissions

6. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that:

   a) It was clear now even from the expert report of Mr George  that  there
      were flights from Manchester to Basra via Baghdad so the mechanics  of
      travel were not in issue.

   b) He accepted that the Appellants ID card was  issued  in  Fallujah  and
      showed her place of birth as Alanbar Fallujah. He argued however  that
      she had family members,  connections  that  would  mean  she  was  not
      treated as an IDP and internal relocation because of those connections
      would be reasonable.

7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Greer submitted that :

   a) He accepted that it was now clear that there were  onward  connections
      from Baghdad to Basra. However in this case the issue was whether  the
      Appellant would be allowed to board the plane to  Basra  or  disembark
      and enter Basra itself.

   b) He referred me to paragraphs 164-165 of the expert's report.  He  said
      that this required a hypothetical assessment of what was  more  likely
      to happen on arrival. The expert referred to the  likely  attitude  of
      caution in relation t security issues and that  given  the  Appellants
      circumstances it was more likely  than  not  that  she  would  not  be
      allowed to enter Basra.

   c) What was relevant to the assessment of  the  Appellant  was  that  her
      place of registration: this was Fallujah,  she  would  be  treated  as
      coming from there.

Findings

8. I am required to look at all the evidence in the  round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.

9. The issue I have to determine in this case is a narrow one. Would  it  be
   unreasonable or unduly harsh for the Appellant and her family to relocate
   to Basra it being accepted that in their circumstances they cannot return
   to their home in Mosul or relocate  to  Baghdad.  The  reasonableness  of
   relocation must inevitably include not only whether  their  circumstances
   and personal profile make it reasonable but whether they  are  physically
   able to enter the city.

10.  The  Respondents  case  has  always  been  that  the  Appellant   could
   reasonably relocate to Basra which it described in the refusal letter  as
   her 'home area' as that was her place of birth. I note  from  the  asylum
   interview (Q32) that she lived in Basra until she married when she was 21
   and then moved to Baghdad where she lived until 1990 when  she  moved  to
   Fallujah, She remained there until 1995 when she returned to  Bagdad  and
   then in 2000 she moved to the UAE.  I note that the ID cards now produced
   before me show that the ID cards were registered  in  Fallujah  and  also
   show her place of birth as 'Alkarna-Basra'.  However  the  Appellant  had
   most recently lived and worked in Mosul before her flight to the UK.

11. The issue of relocation is addressed by Dr George at paragraphs  164-165
   of his report which is underpinned by material originating from a COI  of
   12 April 2017 on relocation. The report sets  out  the  circumstances  in
   which those originating from ISIS  held  or  conflict  areas  can  obtain
   security clearance and register as IDPs and regularize their stay in  the
   governate.

12. At paragraph 165 of the report Dr George addresses the issue of how  the
   authorities would view where the Appellant originates from on  the  basis
   of Rules summarised by UNHCR and her previous history including the  fact
   that she had not lived in Basra since her marriage and had lived in areas
   under the control of ISIS and that Basra lies in  what  he  describes  as
   'Shia heartland.'. All this information would be disclosed by  a  cursory
   examination of her ID card and any modest degree of enquiry that resulted
   therefrom. He concludes that they would be more likely  to  view  her  as
   being from Fallujah because that was where her ID  card  was  issued  and
   where she had lived previously. He  reaches  this  conclusion  given  the
   authorities 'tendency  to  caution  in  matters  of  security'  no  doubt
   reinforced by her Sunni religion and previous history.  On that basis and
   in the absence of evidence that the UNHCR had eased restrictions  on  the
   entry of displaced persons he concludes that she could not  live  legally
   in Basra.

13. I remind myself of the low standard of proof in  these  cases  and  note
   that the Respondent had no background material to show me that  disagreed
   with Dr Georges conclusion. His conclusions were not, I accept, expressed
   in the strongest terms but he gives reasons why although  in  theory  she
   could access Basra there are also reasons why the  authorities  in  Basra
   would not allow her access to the city. In those circumstances  I  accept
   that relocation to Bsra is not an option.

Conclusions on Asylum


14. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  her  to
   show that she has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
   recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the Appellant's removal
   would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Geneva
   Convention.





Conclusions on ECHR


15. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


16. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


17. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


18. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed                                                              Date
22.1.2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

