
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LP
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Lingajothy


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  I have  anonymised  this
         decision because it refers to his claim for asylum.

Procedural history

      2. In a decision dated 16 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lagunju
         allowed the  respondent's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   The  SSHD
         appealed against this decision, and in a decision dated 3 July 2015
         Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
         Judge's conclusions "regarding risk  on  return  are  perverse  and
         lacking in reasoning".

      3. The matter now comes before  me  to  decide  whether  the  decision
         contains an error of law.

Hearing

      4. Mr McVeety accepted that the grounds of appeal drafted on behalf of
         the SSHD are difficult to follow and  seek  to  disagree  with  the
         Judge's positive findings  of  fact.   In  these  circumstances  Mr
         McVeety sought permission to amend the grounds in  order  to  argue
         that the decision is inconsistent with GJ  and  others  (post-civil
         war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  After hearing from
         Mr Lingajothy I gave permission for the grounds to  be  amended  on
         the basis that they are straightforward, readily apparent from  the
         decision and arguable.  I offered Mr Lingajothy the opportunity  to
         adjourn the hearing in order to prepare in  light  of  the  amended
         grounds but he indicated that he was content to go ahead that  day.
         I stood the matter down for Mr Lingajothy to revisit GJ and MP (Sri
         Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

      5. When the matter resumed I heard submissions from  both  Mr  McVeety
         and Mr Lingajothy before reserving my decision, which I now provide
         with reasons.

Error of law discussion

      6. Mr McVeety submitted that the Judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the
         decision to allow the appeal was "in line"  with  GJ  and  MP.   He
         argued that the Judge's positive and negative findings of fact  are
         such that the respondent did not  come  within  any  risk  category
         identified in GJ.

      7. I accept that the Judge has provided succinct reasons for  allowing
         the appeal but I am satisfied that they are adequate and consistent
         with GJ and MP.

      8. Although the Judge rejected significant aspects of the respondent's
         claim [17-24] she accepted his evidence regarding: (1) his family's
         known involvement and activities on behalf of the LTTE [13],  which
         she described as "deep and entrenched" [26]; (2) these led  to  the
         respondent living in India as a refugee although he returned to Sri
         Lanka to  help  with  LTTE  activities  [14];  (3)  the  respondent
         attended a protest outside the embassy  [16].   These  findings  of
         fact were entirely open to the Judge and to the extent  that  these
         are challenged by the SSHD I find that  they  do  not  involve  any
         error of law.

      9. Having made those findings the Judge explicitly considered  GJ  and
         MP and concluded as follows:

             "I  find  that  in  line  with  MP,  that  the  [respondent's]
             attendance at the protest in the UK  coupled  with  what  [is]
             known about his family would  amount  to  'diaspora  activism'
             which may be viewed as a current and on-going  risk/threat  to
             the Sri Lankan authorities.  On this basis I find  that  there
             is a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  to  the  [respondent]  on
             return."

     10. I accept that the Judge has  perhaps  inelegantly  expressed  this.
         When the decision is read as a whole the Judge has clearly followed
         GJ and MP regarding the wider approach to the  issue  of  'diaspora
         activism'.  MP makes it clear that a person may be perceived to  be
         a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single  state  as  a
         result of diaspora activism together with 'more elaborate links'  -
         see [12, 16 and 50].  I accept that in  GJ  the  Tribunal  made  it
         clear that attendance at one or even several demonstrations in  the
         diaspora is not of itself evidence that a person is a committed  to
         promoting Tamil separatism [351].  However the Judge in  this  case
         found that the combination  of  the  matters  she  accepted  (which
         included diaspora activities and importantly  deep  and  entrenched
         family links to the LTTE) were sufficient to render this respondent
         at real risk in  line  with  MP  (which  accepted  there  might  be
         untypical cases and NT may be an example of this).  The Judge heard
         evidence from the respondent and accepted significant parts of that
         evidence.  The Judge clearly considered the GJ risk factors and was
         entitled to conclude that this was an untypical case in  line  with
         MP.  As accepted in GJ "the extent  to  which  past  links  predict
         future adverse interest will always be fact specific" [325].

     11. Indeed, the SSHD's original grounds of appeal appear to accept that
         the Judge's findings were not inconsistent with GJ  but  criticised
         the Judge for being "selective in [her] acceptance of the  evidence
         in order to bring the [respondent] under the umbrella of  the  risk
         categories in GJ".  I have already indicated above that  the  Judge
         was entitled to accept the evidence that she did  for  the  reasons
         provided.  I  also  accept  that  the  Judge  has  provided  enough
         reasoning to indicate why she considered the respondent  to  be  at
         real risk i.e. he came under the wide 'umbrella' of risk categories
         in GJ as clarified in MP.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and is not set aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 27 August 2015
