

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00119/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 12th September 2017             |On 14th September 2017                   |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     F B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza of Counsel, instructed by Migrant
                 Legal Action
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpretations:

Mr M Ghorani in the Farsi language

                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1974. She arrived in  the
       UK on 27th February 2012 and claimed asylum the same  day.  She  was
       refused asylum in March 2012, and appealed  against  that  decision.
       That appeal was dismissed on all grounds in June 2012 in a  decision
       of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever,  and  she  became  appeal
       rights exhausted on 24th May 2013.

    2. In May 2013 the appellant was baptised and confirmed into the Mormon
       church in Bolton. On 9th September 2013 the appellant  made  further
       asylum submissions based on a fear of return to  Iran  on  religious
       grounds due to her conversion from Islam to  Christianity,  and  was
       interviewed with respect to these submissions on 23rd November 2015.
       On 16th January 2016 the respondent refused this  fresh  claim.  Her
       appeal against this decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge M Davies in a determination promulgated on  the  10th  October
       2016.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Page on 23rd November 2016 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in conducting  a  procedurally
       unfair hearing due to  a  perception  that  he  was  biased  against
       Iranian asylum seekers. It was also found to be  arguable  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the bishop and former bishop of
       the Mormon Church and had an "overriding  desire"  to  increase  the
       size of their church membership, and in turn that  this  was  not  a
       finding based on evidence.

    4. For the reasons set out in the decision appended at Annex A I  found
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and set  the  decision
       aside. This is the remaking of the appeal.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

    5. In summary, the appellant's evidence in her written  statements  and
       in oral evidence, given through the Tribunal interpreter  (whom  she
       confirmed she could understand), is as follows. She has always  been
       a religious person. She was a practising Muslim  in  Iran.  She  was
       forced to flee from Iran in February 2012, and when in the UK at the
       end of April 2012 met a woman called LJ from an organisation  called
       Brass in Bolton. LJ encouraged her to go to her church,  the  Bethel
       Evangelical Church in Bolton, as she was sad  and  stressed  by  her
       situation in the UK. The appellant found attending church moving and
       calming, and was able  to  understand  a  little  from  other  Farsi
       speakers in the congregation. She also got a Farsi  version  of  the
       Bible from their library with the help of Father Nigel. She began to
       attend weekly prayer meetings and socialise over lunch on the second
       Sunday of the month. The appellant's sons also  attended  sometimes.
       She did not know the address but would meet LJ in Bolton city centre
       and walk to the church with her. The appellant did not  discuss  her
       Christianity with her first solicitor as she  had  not  changed  her
       religion at that time and that solicitor  did  not  ask  about  this
       matter.

    6. The appellant's sons, IN and EN, met missionaries  from  the  Bolton
       Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in March 2013,  both  of
       whom she believed were American. Her sons became more  engaged  with
       Christianity from this time, and the Mormon church was nearer to the
       appellant's accommodation. Her sons brought home a Farsi translation
       of the Bible. One of the missionaries wanted to  baptize  the  whole
       family, and the appellant liked the idea. At  this  new  church  the
       appellant felt she had a better understanding of  Christianity.  The
       church was also closer, being directly opposite their accommodation.
       The appellant was also assisted by  other  people  from  the  church
       including Tony when they lost their NASS  accommodation.   She  also
       understood that as Mormons there were two other holy books to follow
       other than the Bible: the Book of Mormons and the Book of Rules  for
       Mormons to follow. She and her sons were baptised on 18th  May  2013
       and confirmed on 26th May 2013, and her sons have been ordained into
       the  priesthood.  The  appellant  believes   she   gave   a   proper
       understanding of Mormon dietary rules, not drinking tea,  coffee  or
       alcohol at her interview.

    7. The appellant's son, IN, called his father  after  his  baptism  and
       shared their conversion with him. It seems that as a result of  this
       call the authorities knew about the family's conversion in  the  UK,
       and raided the appellant's parents'  home  as  that  was  where  her
       husband had been living and found Christian material there. At  this
       point the appellant's husband left this home. Both families rejected
       the appellant and her husband at this point. Her husband, SMN,  left
       Iran for Turkey and was baptised into the Christian  Iranian  church
       in Turkey in January 2014, and recognised as a  mandate  refugee  by
       UNHCR in that country in September  2014.  He  lives  in  Elazig  in
       Turkey, and attends a house church. She is in regular  contact  with
       her husband.

    8. The appellant had three weblogs she had written about her  political
       and religious views. The authorities have closed down two  of  them.
       She has also shared her views on  these  matters  on  Facebook.  The
       appellant has suffered from depression for the past four  years  and
       takes medication for this  condition,  and  has  not  pursued  these
       weblogs recently.

    9. The appellant then changed to attend the Mormon Church  in  Rochdale
       in November 2013 due to a further change in her address as a  result
       of her NASS support. She has now been attending  this  church  since
       that time. She does not know the address but  can  walk  there.  The
       appellant's English remains somewhat limited but her sons, who  also
       attend with her, speak well. She  can  communicate  with  others  in
       English using simple sentences however.

   10. The appellant maintains that she has truly converted to Christianity
       and practices her religion privately and  publicly.  She  reads  the
       Bible before bed; attends group prayer  at  church;  and  prays  for
       friends. She fasts on the first Saturday of every month. She attends
       church on Sundays. She does not drink tea, coffee or  alcohol.   She
       volunteers with  children  in  the  church  nursery,  assisting  the
       teachers. At interview the appellant was able to refer to her favour
       Bible  story  in  Matthew,  and  offered  to  look  it  up  for  the
       interviewer but was told this was not necessary.

   11. The appellant and her sons have all given her  husband's  name  from
       the time they arrived in the UK as SMN.   The  respondent  has  also
       written to the UNHCR in Turkey on 29th January 2015 stating that his
       wife is an asylum seeker in the UK. The appellant does  not  believe
       she can join her husband, who is a UNHCR recognised refugee in  that
       country, and  also  comments  that  he  cannot  be  open  about  his
       Christianity as there is a majority Muslim population in Turkey. Her
       son, EN, has also recently won his appeal before the Upper Tribunal,
       which was allowed on refugee and human rights grounds on  21st  June
       2017.

   12. The appellant believes that her  family  and  her  husband's  family
       blame her for the conversion of  the  family,  and  see  her  as  an
       apostate, and that her life would also be at risk if she were to try
       to join her husband in Turkey. She is however in some secret contact
       with her mother occasionally. The rest of her family  have  disowned
       her as they are under pressure from wider family.

   13. Mr Frank James Smith attended the Tribunal and gave  oral  evidence.
       His written and oral evidence is, in summary,  as  follows.  He  has
       known the appellant since November 2013 as he is the  Mormon  bishop
       of the church she attends in Rochdale. He is a British  citizen  and
       owns an architectural firm in Rochdale. He has  seen  her  regularly
       once a week over this time.  The  appellant  almost  always  attends
       worship on Sundays and assists Ms Hutton with the  younger  children
       with their activities after the main service. He  communicates  with
       the appellant in English. The appellant also helps  out  with  other
       church  and  community  activities.  The  appellant  attends  church
       generally with her sons. He  believes  that  they  are  all  genuine
       Christians; that she genuinely enjoys attending church; and that she
       and her sons are a lovely and honest family.

   14. Ms Sharon Hutton attended the Tribunal and gave  oral  evidence.  In
       her written and oral evidence she says in summary, as follows.  That
       she is a British citizen who has been a Mormon most of her life. She
       has known the  appellant  for  about  three  years,  and  that  they
       communicate in English.  That  appellant  continues  to  attend  the
       Rochdale Mormon church, and assist with supporting the teachers  who
       teaches the 3 -5 year old children, and regularly attends church  on
       Sundays with her two sons. She gives  evidence  that  the  appellant
       attended a pageant put on by  the  Mormon  church  in  Chorley.  She
       believes the appellant to  be  sincere  in  her  faith,  and  to  be
       observant of the Mormon rules such as not drinking tea  and  coffee.
       She  also  confirmed  that  she  has  provided  photographs  of  the
       appellant at the Mormon Church in Rochdale with the children, and on
       religious outings.

   15. In submissions for the respondent Mr Nath relies  upon  the  reasons
       for refusal letter. In this letter the appellant's  nationality  and
       identity are accepted by the respondent. It was not accepted however
       that the appellant had genuinely converted to  Christianity  as  she
       was unable to give the addresses of the churches she  had  attended;
       had been inconsistent as to whether the two  missionaries  her  sons
       had encountered were both American; she had failed to  give  a  full
       account of the Mormon abstinence rules at her interview as  compared
       to her statement; because Mormon Bishop Frank James Smith  had  said
       she was able to speak English well, whereas she  said  she  did  not
       speak English well; and because she could not name the place in  the
       Bible of her favourite Bible story.  Further there was  no  evidence
       about her weblogs and no evidence that SMN is her husband. As it was
       not accepted that the appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity
       it is not accepted that she would be at risk on return to  Iran,  or
       that she had any other basis to remain due  to  her  ill  health  or
       period of residence in the UK.

   16. Mr Nath added further submissions arguing that the appellant is  not
       credible based on the fact that the appellant was unable to properly
       explain why she had not given all the things that  Mormon's  abstain
       from in response to the questioning at interview  rather  than  just
       the drinks that they abstain from; and  because  of  differences  in
       what she claimed were the key Mormon texts between  the  appellant's
       oral evidence and what she had set out in her statement in 2013.

   17. In submissions Ms Braganza for the appellant placed reliance on  her
       skeleton argument. She drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  was
       accepted by the respondent that the appellant had been baptised  and
       confirmed into the Mormon Church in 2013 and attended  the  churches
       in Bolton and Rochdale, see paragraph 54 of the reasons for  refusal
       letter. It was not accepted  by  the  respondent  that  she  attends
       regularly or that she is a genuine Christian convert.

   18. Ms Braganza argued that the appellant had given entirely  consistent
       evidence about her path to conversion  and  practice  as  a  sincere
       Christian. The witnesses were also consistent with her evidence.  At
       the most her history had a few instances where she had given more or
       less  information  at  different  points:   there   were   no   real
       discrepancies.  The  credible   witness   evidence   supported   the
       appellant's history that she has attended  church  consistently  and
       regularly since her conversion. UNHCR have also found her husband to
       be a refugee based on Christian conversion in Turkey.  She has  been
       absent from Iran since 2012, and will have to  answer  questions  on
       arrival, if sent to Iran, which are likely to reveal  that  she  has
       converted and attended church for the past four years, and  at  this
       point she will face a real risk of serious  harm  from  the  Iranian
       state. She therefore has a well founded fear of persecution.

   19.  The Upper Tribunal found her son EN to be a refugee in  a  decision
       dated 22nd June 2017, and  the  respondent  has  not  appealed  this
       decision and would now be out of time to do so, and  as  all  family
       members are in the same position this is further evidence  that  the
       appellant's appeal should be allowed.

Conclusions - Remaking

   20.  I  find  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  to   Mormon
       Christianity for the reasons I now set out below. It is accepted  by
       the respondent that she was baptised and confirmed into  the  church
       in 2013,  and  that  she  attended  both  the  Bolton  and  Rochdale
       churches. The evidence before me is that  she  has  attended  Mormon
       church with her sons on a very regular weekly  basis  for  the  past
       four years. I find both Mr  Smith  and  Ms  Hutton  to  be  credible
       witnesses who gave heart felt evidence  in  a  careful  and  helpful
       fashion straight forwardly answering  the  questions  put  to  them.
       Their oral evidence was consistent  with  their  written  statement.
       They both were able to confirm that since  November  2013  they  had
       seen the appellant at church on Sundays with her sons  on  a  weekly
       basis and seen her do additional church activities. Throughout  this
       long period of time they gave evidence that they were both convinced
       that she was genuine in her conversion  and  an  honest  person.  Ms
       Hatton's evidence was that the appellant lived her faith as well  as
       professed it, and that she had heard from others how  she  had,  for
       instance, abstained from tea and coffee with non-Mormon  friends  as
       well as following the rules within the congregation. In the cases of
       Dorodian (01/TH/01537) and SA (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2575  it  is
       emphasised that conversion should be evidenced by  consideration  of
       church membership rather than simple belief as this was  what  might
       lead to risk and because it is in any case the most rational way  to
       assess whether such a conversion has taken place.

   21. I accept that it is possible that the  appellant  was  not  entirely
       clear of the secondary holy books after the Bible and  the  Book  of
       Mormon for the Mormon faith. The evidence was however  confusing  as
       the appellant had translated versions in Farsi and  it  is  possible
       the names were slightly different in Farsi,  and  in  any  case  the
       Tribunal interpreter made it plain he was uncertain how to translate
       them into English. It would seem that the appellant had a beginners'
       explanatory book which she had probably included in the  key  texts.
       However, it was clear from her evidence that the appellant knew  the
       primary importance of the Bible and  the  Book  of  Mormon  and  was
       actively engaging with the relevant religious  literature,  and  was
       able to identify a favourite Bible story even if she could not  give
       the precise place it was found. I do not find it at all  significant
       that at interview she said that Mormons had  to  abstain  from  tea,
       coffee and wine, and thus gave a less complete answer  than  in  her
       statement where she said  tea,  coffee,  alcohol,  smoking  and  sex
       outside of marriage.  There was no  suggestion  that  the  appellant
       broke these rules in any way, and she plausibly explained  that  she
       had understood the interview question to be  just  about  the  rules
       relating to food and drink.

   22. I find that the fact that the appellant had made  a  previous  claim
       for asylum that  had  been  found  not  to  be  credible;  and  only
       converted to Christianity at the point  when  that  claim  had  been
       refused and the appeal dismissed means that  I  must  approach  this
       matter with care,  as  that  starting  point  might  indicate  other
       motives for the conversion and that in accordance with Devaseelan  I
       must take the previous First-tier Tribunal assessment that  she  was
       not a credible witness as my starting point. However,  the  evidence
       of the appellant's church commitment from witnesses whom I  find  to
       be credible and honest weighs heavily in her favour and leads me  to
       find her also to be a credible witness with respect to  the  genuine
       nature of her faith and religious observance. It  is  also  of  some
       relevance that the appellant's husband has converted to Christianity
       in Turkey, and been recognised as a UNHCR mandate  refugee  in  that
       country because it shows a family commitment to a similar  Christian
       religious path, which adds to her credibility particularly given she
       confirms that the marriage remains intact despite their geographical
       separation. The respondent clearly accepted that the  appellant  was
       the wife of this refugee in correspondence, in writing to UNHCR that
       he could not join her here as she had no status at  that  time,  and
       there is also his email evidence to the appellant.

   23. The reported case law on Iran (SSH and HR v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department (illegal exit - failed asylum seekers)  Iran  CG
       [2016] UKUT 308, BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran
       CG [2011] UKUT 36, and AB and Others (internet activity -  state  of
       evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257) finds  that  failed  asylum  seekers
       from Iran are likely to be questioned  about  what  they  have  been
       doing in the UK and will be  questioned  on  arrival  regardless  of
       whether they have a passport. It is clear from the  decision  in  HJ
       (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2011] UKSC 596 that the  appellant  should
       not be expected to lie or to conceal a matter which was  fundamental
       to her identity to avoid harm. I  find  if  the  appellant  were  to
       truthfully explain that whilst in the UK she had been  baptised  and
       confirmed into a Mormon Christian church and had been worshiping  in
       a Mormon Christian church regularly for the past four years that she
       would be subject, at the least, to further questioning and placed at
       a concurrent real risk of serious harm during this questioning,  see
       evidence cited at paragraph 23 of SSH and HR.

   24. As such I find that  the  appellant  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
       persecution based on her religion if returned to  Iran,  and  is  at
       real risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR  for  the  same
       reasons.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   3. I remake the appeal allowing the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds






    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant,  or  her  husband  who  is  a
    recognised refugee in Turkey or  her  adult  children  who  are  asylum
    seekers in the UK, from the contents of her protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date: 13th September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1974. She arrived  in  the
       UK on 27th February 2012 and claimed asylum the  same  day.  She  was
       refused in March 2012,  and  appealed  against  that  decision.  That
       appeal was dismissed on all grounds in June 2012  in  a  decision  of
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever, and she became appeal  rights
       exhausted on 24th May 2013.

    2. In May 2013 the appellant was baptised and confirmed into the  Mormon
       church in Bolton. On 9th September 2013 the  appellant  made  further
       asylum submissions based on a fear of return  to  Iran  on  religious
       grounds due to her conversion from Islam  to  Christianity,  and  was
       interviewed with respect to these submissions on 23rd November  2015.
       On 16th January 2016 the respondent refused  this  fresh  claim.  Her
       appeal against this decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge M Davies in a determination promulgated  on  the  10th  October
       2016.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Page on 23rd November 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in conducting a procedurally unfair
       hearing due to a perception that he was biased against Iranian asylum
       seekers. It was  also  found  to  be  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge found that the bishop and former bishop of the  Mormon
       Church and had an "overriding desire" to increase the size  of  their
       church membership, and that this was not a finding based on evidence.



    4. Directions for preparation of  this  hearing  were  issued  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 24th January 2017 and 22nd March 2017 which
       required a position statement from the respondent and all evidence to
       be provided to First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies,  and  for  him  to
       provide any response he felt appropriate to that evidence.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. Judge M Davies did not choose  to  comment
       beyond providing his typed record of proceedings.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. In the grounds of appeal it is firstly contend that  Judge  M  Davies
       conducted a hearing which created an appearance of bias  in  that  he
       said on more than one  occasion  that  "Iranians  in  particular  use
       conversion to prevent removal". In this connection Judge M Davies had
       not acknowledged that that the representative for the  appellant,  Ms
       Nollet, raised concerns about the "sweeping comments" about  Iranians
       made at the hearing in submissions and that the exchange  between  Ms
       Nollet and Judge M Davies is misrepresented at paragraph 78 and 81 of
       the decision as the Judge failed to acknowledge what he had said  and
       that Ms Nollet did not say  she  apologised  for  suggesting  he  was
       biased but simply said: "I apologise if my conduct offended  you."  A
       formal complaint was made about the conduct of the hearing by Judge M
       Davies to the President of the First-tier Tribunal  on  11th  October
       2016 and this complaint is being investigated.

    7. The second ground is that Judge M Davies misdirected himself  in  law
       with respect to the impact of the previous decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal by saying at paragraph 85 of his decision that "the whole of
       the Appellant's testimony is  predicated  on  the  findings  made  by
       Immigration Judge Lever", when in fact he could have  reached  a  new
       decision on her credibility based on the new evidence.

    8. The third ground advanced by  the  appellant  is  that  the  decision
       misrepresents the evidence of Bishop Smith of the  Mormon  Church  of
       Rochdale who said that in response to whether there are safeguards to
       check if a convert was genuine "It's a hard church to be involved  in
       in terms of commitment" not  "it  was  hard  for  the  church  to  be
       involved because of the level  of  commitment"  as  set  out  in  the
       decision at paragraph 49 of the decision. Further it was  erroneously
       not acknowledged that Bishop Smith also said that the appellant would
       have to have undergone lessons to  be  baptised  in  Bolton  because:
       "That's the protocol. You cannot be baptised without and then have an
       interview."

    9. The fourth ground is that given what is said at  ground  three  there
       was no basis for the conclusion at paragraph 86 of the decision  that
       in the Mormon  church  "baptism  and  confirmation  could  easily  be
       obtained"

   10. The fifth grounds is that Judge M Davies speculated at  paragraph  86
       of the decision about the appellant having been aware that conversion
       was a way to claim asylum from other Iranian asylum seekers and  that
       it would be easy to do this by joining the Mormon  church,  and  that
       Bishops Smith and former Bishop Knight had an "overriding desire"  to
       increase the size of  their  church  membership,  and  thus  in  turn
       responded to  the  appellant  wanting  to  join  their  congregations
       without any consideration as to whether she was  dissembling  genuine
       interest.

   11. The sixth ground is that Judge M Davies errs in  law  by  failing  to
       answer the two key questions which arise from the country guidance in
       R (on the application of SA (Iran)) v SSHD [2012] EWHC  2575  (Admin)
       and Dorodian  (01/TH/01537:  firstly  whether  the  appellant  was  a
       regular church attender and secondly whether she would be at risk  as
       a result of that fact.

   12. In a Rule 24 response the respondent states, firstly, that  there  is
       no evidence of Judge Davies forejudging  the  merits  of  the  appeal
       before him.  That it was neutral to assert at  paragraph  78  of  the
       decision that as Iranians would be persecuted for conversion that  it
       was a route which was open be subjected to abuse by asylum seekers.

   13. It is argued in the Rule 24 response that the second ground  did  not
       indicate an error of law either as the principles of Devaseelan  were
       properly adhered to: the appellant had been previously found to be an
       incredible witness who left Iran for economic betterment and this was
       the starting point for Judge Davies. It was open to him to  find  the
       appellant not to be credible given his findings about her evidence at
       paragraph 87 of the decision.

   14. Thirdly it is argued in the Rule 24 response that the genuine  nature
       of the conversion was a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal  and  not
       just whether the appellant attends church, and there is therefore  no
       error at paragraph 70 of the decision.

   15. In a  letter  dated  29th  March  2017  from  Mr  M  Diwnycz,  Senior
       Presenting Officer, he states from  the  records  of  the  presenting
       officer before the First-tier Tribunal there is no evidence that that
       the First-tier presenting officer found anything "exceptional" in the
       way Immigration Judge Davies  conducted  the  appeal,  and  that  the
       presenting  officers'  notes  are  not  evidence  of  the   behaviour
       complained of by the representatives.

   16. However, before me Mr Tufan accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had
       erred materially in law in the ways argued for by the appellant  with
       the exception of the contention of an appearance of bias. However, it
       became clear he did not have the additional  witness  statements  and
       emails before him which the appellant had  submitted  in  support  of
       this contention from Bishop Smith, Ms S Hutton and the appellant's GP
       letter.

   17. I informed the parties that having read the papers on file and  heard
       what Mr Tufan had to say I found  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have
       erred materially in law, and that I would set aside the  decision  of
       Judge M Davies as a result. I set out my reasoning below. I drew both
       parties' attention to the issue of the grant of refugee status to the
       appellant's  husband  in  Turkey  and  his  evidence   of   Christian
       conversion, documents relating to which  were  to  be  found  in  the
       appellant's and respondent's bundles that had been before the  First-
       tier Tribunal, which I found to be  material  documents  which  would
       have to be considered on any remaking. It was agreed that the  matter
       should remain in the Upper Tribunal for the remaking  hearing,  which
       was then adjourned due to lack of a Farsi interpreter and the absence
       of one key witness.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   18. In Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542  at  paragraphs  7
       and 8 Presidential guidance on the requirements for a finding  of  an
       appearance of bias is set out as follows: "Further refinements of the
       fair hearing principle  have  resulted  in  the  development  of  the
       concepts of apparent bias and actual bias. The  latter  equates  with
       the prohibition identified immediately above. In  contrast,  apparent
       bias, where invoked, gives rise to a somewhat more sophisticated  and
       subtle challenge. It entails the application of the following test:

           "The question  is  whether  the  fair  minded  observer,  having
           considered the facts, would  conclude  that  there  was  a  real
           possibility that the tribunal was bias."

                               See Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, at [103].

       In Re Medicaments [2001] 1 WLR 700, the Court of Appeal provided  the
       following exposition of the task of the appellate, or  review,  court
       or tribunal:

           "The Court must first ascertain all the circumstances which have
           a bearing on the suggestion that the Judge  was  bias.  It  must
           then ask whether those circumstances would lead  a  fair  minded
           and  informed  observer  to  conclude  that  there  was  a  real
           possibility  that  the   Tribunal   was   bias.   The   material
           circumstances will include any explanation given  by  the  Judge
           under review as  to  his  knowledge  or  appreciation  of  those
           circumstances."

       In Lawal v Northern  Spirit  [2003]  UKHL  35,  the  House  of  Lords
       reiterated the importance  of  first  identifying  the  circumstances
       which are said to give rise to apparent bias.

           "8. The authorities place due emphasis on the  requirement  that
           the hypothetical reasonable  observer  is  duly  informed.  This
           connotes that the observer is  in  possession  of  all  material
           facts. See, for example, Taylor v Lawrence [2002] EWCA  Civ  90,
           at [61]  -  [63].  Furthermore,  the  hypothetical  fair  minded
           observer  is  a  person  of  balance  and  temperance,  "neither
           complacent nor unduly sensitive or suspicious", per  Lord  Steyn
           in Lawal at [14]. Finally, it is appropriate to  emphasise  that
           the doctrine of apparent bias has its roots in  a  principle  of
           some longevity and indisputable pedigree, namely the requirement
           that justice not only be done but manifestly be seen to be done:
           see, for example, Davidson v Scottish Ministers [2004] UKHL 34."

   19. The Judge M Davies' record of proceedings largely  reflects  what  he
       sets out in his decision, and does not support what  the  appellant's
       representative, Ms Nollet, says was said either in  relation  to  the
       sweeping comments  about  Iranian  asylum  seekers;  or  the  alleged
       allegation of bias by Ms Nollet and apology for that; or in  relation
       to the evidence given by Bishop Smith about it  being  hard  for  the
       church to have safeguards  for  converts  because  of  the  level  of
       commitment which is recorded at paragraph 49 of the decision. Judge M
       Davies  has  not  provided  any  further  comments.  The   presenting
       officer's account is, I find, essentially neutral  on  the  issue  of
       what precisely happened as there is not a  verbatim  record  of  what
       happened available, although I acknowledge that  there  was  also  no
       record of anything untoward having  taken  place  in  that  officer's
       opinion.

   20. In the circumstances, I must decide therefore whether overall, in all
       the circumstances of the case,  a  fair-minded  observer  would  have
       concluded that in the hearing before Judge M Davies there was a  real
       possibility of bias, or whether the decision errs in law in the other
       ways the appellant has argued.

   21. In coming to my conclusion on the issue of apparent bias I take  into
       account the statement of Bishop Smith who says that he was  "appalled
       by the comments made by  the  Judge,  they  seemed  very  prejudicial
       towards both the appellant and Iranian people in general" and that of
       Ms Sharon Belinda Hutton, who also gave oral evidence at the hearing,
       and who says in an email to the appellant's legal representative sent
       on the day of the hearing after it had been concluded, and thus prior
       to the promulgation of the decision, that she was concerned that  the
       judge had made a comment that "Iranians use Christianity as a way  of
       staying here", and in her later statement commented  that  the  judge
       was "dismissive and in a hurry to get finished"  and  also  that  she
       "felt that the scales of justice  were  not  balanced  and  that  the
       appellant's fate had already been decided". Both these witnesses were
       found to be sincere in their evidence by Judge M Davies. I find it is
       also relevant that the appellant's GP has written to confirm that the
       appellant went to the GP in an upset  state  prior  to  the  decision
       being promulgated, but after the hearing, on 5th  October  2017,  and
       said that she was having nightmares about her time in court and  felt
       the judge had said she was "a liar like all people from Iran".

   22. Having considered all of this evidence including the transcript of Ms
       M Nollet, representative for the appellant, together with her witness
       statement I conclude that a fair minded and informed  observer  would
       have concluded that there was a real possibility that  Judge  of  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies  was  biased  having  witnessed   the
       appellant's hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  thus  that
       there was a procedural error of law which means that this matter must
       be reheard de novo.

   23. It is also the case that Judge M Davies has not been careful  in  his
       words with respect to the treatment, in accordance  with  Devaseelan,
       of the decision of the previous First-tier Tribunal decision of Judge
       Lever, in say  that  "the  whole  of  the  Appellant's  testimony  is
       predicated on the findings of Immigration Judge Lever"  at  paragraph
       85 of the decision. There ought to have been a clear  statement  that
       the decision the appellant was not credible was  the  starting  point
       but was it was possible that he could reach a different conclusion.

   24. I find that Judge M Davies has also  erred  in  law  as  he  has  not
       considered the evidence as set out in his own record  of  proceedings
       at paragraph 86 of his decision. Bishop Smith clearly  did  say  that
       the appellant and her family had  taken  the  relevant  tests  to  be
       baptised in Bolton as a Mormon, and that it was not  possible  to  be
       baptised without doing so because of the protocol, see page 6 of  the
       Record of Proceedings at E. There is also no evidence on which  Judge
       M Davies could have concluded that Bishop Smith  wished  to  increase
       the size of his church membership as set out at paragraph 91  of  the
       decision, or that conversion was easily obtained in the Mormon church
       as is said at paragraph 86 of the decision. It was also at the  least
       extremely unwise of Judge M Davies to have implied that other  asylum
       seekers may have  encouraged  or  suggested  to  the  appellant  that
       conversion to Christianity  might  win  her  asylum  as  is  done  at
       paragraph  86  as  again  there  is  no  evidence  to  support   this
       proposition.

   25. I find that it was correct to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  if  the
       appellant was a genuine convert to the Mormon Christian  church  then
       she would be at risk of persecution on return  to  Iran  as  this  is
       consistent with the country guidance provided in FS  &  Others  (Iran
       Christian converts) [2004] UKIAT 303 upheld in SZ and JM (Christians,
       FS confirmed) [2008] UKAIT 82.

   26.  However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  erred  in  law  for   not
       considering a material matter, i.e., whether  the  appellant  was  at
       risk of serious harm on return to Iran as her husband  is  a  refugee
       recognised in Turkey by UNHCR in September 2014, see documents  at  A
       41 and A42 of the respondent's bundle.  Although  the  basis  of  the
       grant is not stated there is also evidence at page A43 in the  bundle
       that the appellant's husband had converted to Christianity in January
       2014. This was evidence which clearly needed to be considered both in
       relation to the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim  for  refugee
       status in her own right  as  a  Christian  convert;  and  also  as  a
       separate issue of risk to her on return to Iran  as  the  wife  of  a
       recognised refugee; and further in terms of family reunion rights she
       may have as a wife of a recognised refugee under the 1951 Convention.



   27. Further it was an error of law not  to  have  considered  the  highly
       material matter of the appellant's attendance at church as  a  factor
       in her favour when her credibility as a genuine Christian convert was
       being determined: the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       that she has attended  church  regularly  both  Sunday  meetings  and
       Relief Society class since April 2012, a period of four  and  a  half
       years at the date of decision, and that  her  adult  sons  have  been
       ordained in to the priesthood since June 2013 and  also  attend  with
       her. This evidence is not determinative of the issue but  had  to  be
       considered given the honesty of the church witnesses who attested  to
       this attendance was not challenged.


          Decision:

   28. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

   29. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   30. I adjourn the re-make of the appeal.


Directions:

   1.  The matter is to be relisted before me on 12th September 2017 with  a
      time estimate of 3 hours.
   2.  A Farsi interpreter should be booked by the Tribunal Service.
   3.  Any new evidence to be relied upon by either party  should  be  filed
      with the Tribunal and served on the other side 7  days  prior  to  the
      hearing date, so by 5th September 2017.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant,  or  her  husband  who  is  a
    recognised refugee in Turkey or  her  adult  children  who  are  asylum
    seekers in the UK, from the contents of her protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 13th June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

