
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00446/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2016                   |On 23 November 2016                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Bindmans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

Immigration history

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Iran who entered the  UK  on  29  August
    2007 with entry clearance as  a  student,  which  was  valid  until  30
    September 2008. He made  several  applications  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student, which were either rejected or refused. He appealed
    against a decision to refuse further leave to remain made on 11 January
    2010. The appeal was dismissed on 13 July 2010. He remained in  the  UK
    without leave.

2.    The appellant claimed asylum on 27 November 2011. The first strand  of
    his claim was that he would be at risk as a result of his attendance at
    demonstrations outside the Iranian embassy in the UK. The second strand
    was that he would be at risk as a result of his attendance at  meetings
    and other associations with well-known Iranian  dissidents.  The  third
    element of his claim was that he feared he would be at risk because  he
    posted views critical of the regime on an  internet  blog  and  sent  a
    critical letter to the Iranian President via the official  Presidential
    website. The appellant claimed that the  secret  police  contacted  his
    family by telephone in July 2011. They appeared to be aware of his anti-
    regime activities in the UK.  They  also  raided  his  family  home  in
    October 2011 and took away political books and his computer.

Reasons for refusal letter

3.    The respondent did not find his account credible.  He  had  failed  to
    produce any evidence to support his claim that he acted as a steward at
    demonstrations in  the  UK.  The  respondent  considered  that  it  was
    unlikely that the appellant's attendance at demonstrations  in  the  UK
    would attract any  adverse  interest.  Even  if  his  presence  at  the
    demonstrations had come to the attention of the Iranian authorities, as
    a steward, it was likely he would  merely  be  seen  as  a  "logistical
    assistant" rather than a genuine protester. He had  failed  to  provide
    any evidence to support his claim to attend political meetings. He  was
    unable to  give  details  about  where  the  meetings  were  held.  The
    respondent did  not  accept  that  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    appellant showed that he  had  been  maintaining  a  blog  or  that  it
    supported his claim to have sent a critical letter  to  the  President.
    The respondent considered that it was  implausible  that  none  of  his
    family members were arrested if the secret service  raided  his  family
    home as claimed in 2011. There was no evidence to support  this  aspect
    of his claim. For these  reasons  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk if returned to Iran.

First-tier Tribunal decision

4.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N.J. Bennett ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 10 July 2012.

5.    The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  several  witnesses
    with whom he says he attended regular meetings. The  judge  found  that
    there was a lack of evidence to show on the low standard of proof  that
    the appellant attended a number of demonstrations in the UK as  claimed
    or that any attendance was likely to have come to the attention of  the
    Iranian authorities. Having heard from the witnesses he  accepted  that
    the appellant attended some meetings at K's house. He accepted  that  K
    was a well-known dissident who was associated with the Green  Movement.
    He considered  whether  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the  Iranian
    authorities had become aware of the meetings. He noted that  they  were
    held in a private place and  that  their  main  purpose  was  artistic,
    rather than political. He took into account the fact that  one  of  the
    participants of the  meetings  was  said  to  have  been  detained  and
    questioned in Iran but concluded that there was  insufficient  evidence
    to suggest that the  appellant's  participation  in  the  meetings  was
    likely to have come to the attention of the Iranian authorities. He was
    not satisfied that the Iranian authorities contacted his family or  had
    come to their home.

6.    The judge went on to  consider  the  appellant's  claim  that  it  was
    likely he had come to the attention of the Iranian authorities  through
    his blog and by posting a critical letter to the Presidential  website.
    The judge analysed the evidence that was before him but concluded  that
    there was insufficient evidence to support the appellant's  claim  that
    he had contacted Google and Facebook  to  complain  about  difficulties
    with his accounts. He said that  at  one  point  his  Facebook  account
    showed the Iranian Cyber Police logo, but he had failed to produce  any
    evidence to support  his  claim.  Most  of  the  blog  posts  were  not
    translated so he could not assess the content  except  by  way  of  the
    summary provided by Ms Enayat in her expert report. The judge concluded
    that it was not reasonably likely that the  Iranian  authorities  could
    monitor each and every blog and Facebook page  or  that  the  appellant
    would come to the adverse attention of the authorities on return.

Error of law decision

7.    In a decision promulgated on 29  April  2013  a  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal,  including  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McKee  and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Monson ("the  panel"),  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

8.    The panel concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
    findings on a  material  issue.  Having  accepted  that  the  appellant
    addressed a letter directly to the President, the judge failed to  make
    any findings as to whether this was likely to place him at risk.

9.    The panel went on to consider what findings could safely be  preserved
    and what aspects of the decision would need to be  remade.  They  found
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for finding  that  there  was
    insufficient   evidence   to   show   that   the   appellant   attended
    demonstrations or that such attendance was likely to have come  to  the
    attention of the authorities. While they considered  that  the  judge's
    findings relating to the risk emanating from the appellant's attendance
    at meetings with K were sustainable, the panel noted that he failed  to
    consider the appellant's associations with another  Iranian  dissident,
    which was dealt with in Ms Enayat's  report.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to consider the  risk  as  a  result  of  his  association  with
    dissidents in the UK in a holistic way. As such the  second  strand  of
    the claim was not preserved. With reference to the  third  strand,  the
    panel concluded that the judge's findings  were  open  to  him  on  the
    limited evidence before him but  observed  that  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to produce "further, better and updated evidence" relating to
    his internet publications when the appeal was reheard.

The current position

10.   The chronology of events discloses a lengthy delay between  the  Upper
    Tribunal finding an error of law  and  the  listing  of  the  case  for
    rehearing. I am told that the case was adjourned pending  the  decision
    in AB and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]
    UKUT. At a Case Management  Review  hearing  on  15  August  2016  both
    parties agreed that, given the delay, and in light of new issues raised
    by the appellant, it would be appropriate to conduct a fresh hearing of
    the appeal in which all issues could be assessed in the round.

11.   At the hearing on 12 October 2016 Mr Tufan sought to retract from  the
    respondent's previous position and argued that the  findings  preserved
    by the Upper Tribunal should stand. For reasons that will become  clear
    later in  this  decision  it  makes  little  difference  whether  those
    findings are formally preserved or not.

12.   Unsurprisingly, there have been further developments since the  First-
    tier Tribunal heard the appeal over four  years  ago.  The  appellant's
    case is now formulated as follows:

       i) He continues to assert that his attendance at  demonstrations  in
          the UK in 2009 form one part of his profile as someone who  would
          be  perceived  as  an  opponent  or  critical  of   the   Iranian
          authorities.

      ii) He continues to assert that his attendance at  meetings  and  his
          association with Iranian dissidents in exile in the UK also  form
          part of his risk profile albeit that he accepts that  he  stopped
          attending circa 2012 because he was busy  with  another  project.
          The meetings stopped altogether in 2015.


     iii) The appellant  accepts  that  he  stopped  working  on  his  blog
          although he is unclear when this happened. He continues to assert
          that the authorities are likely to view him as  critical  of  the
          regime after having posted a letter to the Presidential website.

      iv) An additional strand to the appellant's claim is his work on a TV
          programme about rap music, which was broadcast on a London  based
          satellite/internet TV station funded by an Iranian oppositionist.
          The appellant says that he made  about  85  programmes  with  two
          friends. He says that the Iranian authorities try to  clamp  down
          on underground music because the lyrics are often critical.

13.   I have had the opportunity of hearing evidence from the appellant.  He
    was the only witness. I have also taken into  account  the  submissions
    and written arguments made by both parties. The details of the  hearing
    are a matter of record.

Decision and reasons

14.   The  last  element  of  the  appellant's  case  is  arguably  now  the
    strongest. He has produced several pieces of evidence  to  support  his
    claim to have made a number of programmes for a London based TV station
    run by an oppositionist.

15.   The appellant has produced a number of print outs  of  screenshots  of
    the rap programme from YouTube. The screenshots  cover  a  period  from
    2013-2014. The programmes are clearly linked to the TV station named by
    the appellant. He has also produced a print out  from  the  programme's
    Facebook page, which shows the appellant as one of three administrators
    for the page. His administrator ID appears to be in his  own  name  and
    contains his photo.

16.   Ms Enayat produced an up to date report, which deals with this  issue.
    Her expertise has not been questioned. The evidence she  gives  in  the
    report was not challenged in any way at the hearing. She said that  rap
    and hip hop is immensely popular  amongst  young  Iranians  but  is  an
    underground genre. The restrictions imposed by  the  authorities  means
    that rappers cannot sell their albums on the open market so rely on the
    internet. Live performances are held in secret. The  state-owned  media
    often describes rap as a "satanic cult" and it is generally  viewed  by
    the authorities as a manifestation of Westernised culture.  The  lyrics
    of some pieces are critical of social conditions, and after 2009,  some
    rappers were openly political. In the period since 2009 there has  been
    intense harassment and intermittent persecution leading to  several  of
    the most prominent rap artists having to leave the country. Ms Enayat's
    evidence is broadly consistent with background news  reports  contained
    in the appellant's bundle.

17.   Ms Enayat gave an outline of the history of the TV  station  on  which
    the programme was broadcast. She confirmed that it  was  an  opposition
    Persian-language station that began broadcasting from London  in  2012.
    The owner shut the station in December 2014. She outlined some  of  the
    responses  to  the  TV  station.  In  particular,  an  English-language
    subsidiary of Iranian state TV is said to have described the channel as
    a "Western tool" to divide Iran. She outlines attacks on the founder of
    the TV station who  has  been  denounced  as  a  "seditionist",  "anti-
    Revolutionary" and an "Israeli spy".

18.   Ms Enayat said that she  viewed  five  of  the  TV  programmes  before
    writing her report. She confirmed that the appellant's pen name,  which
    is a thinly disguised adaptation of his  real  name,  appeared  in  the
    credits. The programmes she viewed dealt with the  history  of  rap  in
    general and the development of rap and  hip  hop  in  Iran.  The  fifth
    programme dealt explicitly with rap and  the  2009  demonstrations.  Ms
    Enayat concludes:

            "There can be no doubt that anyone who participated in making...
           such a programme would be viewed by the Iranian  authorities  as
           engaged in the cultural war against the Islamic  Republic.  Some
           parts of it would be viewed as out and out political propaganda,
           and much of it would be viewed as promoting obscene material (on
           account of  women  appearing  in  the  video-clips  singing  and
           dancing  without  a  hair  covering  in  Western,  often   quite
           revealing, clothes).


            Additionally the political context of the programme - the agenda
           of [TV station] and its principles - would put AM at  risk  were
           he to be returned to Iran."


19.   Ms Enayat went on to outline a number  of  examples,  cross-referenced
    to sources, of a number of popular musicians or music distributors  who
    had been harassed, arrested or detained. She  noted  that  one  of  the
    other makers of the programme was K's son, whose participation  in  the
    TV station was casually mentioned in an English language article  about
    his father in September 2014. Taken with the rap  programme's  Facebook
    account, which gives the appellant's full name, she concluded  that  it
    would not be difficult for the authorities to ascertain  who  made  the
    programme.

20.   I am satisfied that this evidence is sufficient to  show  on  the  low
    standard of proof that the appellant was involved  in  making  a  large
    number of programmes for a British based Iranian opposition TV channel.
    The subject and content of the programmes focus on an issue that  would
    not be seen as particularly controversial or  political  in  a  Western
    context. However, in  light  of  the  background  and  expert  evidence
    relating to Iran, it is clear that rap  and  hip  hop  is  seen  as  an
    underground genre that  challenges  the  revolutionary  values  of  the
    Iranian authorities. In the context of a theocratic state  the  content
    is inherently political in nature. I accept that  the  appellant's  pen
    name on the credits of the programme is only a thinly veiled attempt to
    disguise  his  identity,  which  would  readily  be  disclosed  through
    investigation of the programme's Facebook  page.  There  is  more  than
    sufficient evidence before me to show that the TV station was run by  a
    person who is viewed  as  an  oppositionist.  For  this  reason,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant's  association  with  the  TV  station  is
    likely to be viewed as an act of opposition to the Iranian regime.

21.   The decision in AB (Iran) was not designated as country  guidance  but
    was reported in order  to  set  out  the  evidence  considered  by  the
    Tribunal relating to internet activity in Iran. The Tribunal concluded:

            "466. It is very  difficult  to  establish  any  kind  of  clear
           picture about the risks consequent  on  blogging  activities  in
           Iran. Very few people seem to be returned unwillingly  and  this
           makes it very difficult to predict with any degree of confidence
           what fate, if any, awaits them. Some  monitoring  of  activities
           outside Iran is possible and it occurs. It is  not  possible  to
           determine what circumstances, if any, enhance or dilute the risk
           although a high degree of activity is not necessary  to  attract
           persecution.

            467. The mere  fact  of  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
           prolonged period does not lead to persecution.  However  it  may
           lead to scrutiny and there is clear evidence  that  some  people
           are asked about their internet  activity  and  particularly  for
           their Facebook password. The act of returning someone creates  a
           "pinch point" so that a person is brought  into  direct  contact
           with the  authorities  in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and
           inclination to interrogate them. We think it  likely  that  they
           will be asked about their internet activity and likely  if  they
           have any internet activity for that to be exposed and if  it  is
           less than flattering of the government to lead to  at  the  very
           least a real risk of persecution.


            468. Social  and  other  internet-based  media  is  used  widely
           through Iran by a very high percentage  of  the  population  and
           activities such as blogging may be perceived  as  criticisms  of
           the state which is very aware of the power of the internet.  The
           Iranian authorities in their various guises  both  regulate  and
           police the internet, closing  down  or  marking  internet  sites
           although  this  does  not  appear  to  be  linked  directly   to
           persecution.


            469.  The  capability  to  monitor  outside  Iran  is  not  very
           different from  the  capability  to  monitor  inside  Iran.  The
           Iranian authorities clearly have the capacity to restrict access
           to social internet-based media. Overall it is very difficult  to
           make any  sensible  findings  about  anything  that  converts  a
           technical possibility of something being discovered into a  real
           risk of it being discovered."

22.   I am  satisfied  that  this  issue,  taken  alone,  is  likely  to  be
    sufficient to give rise to a real risk on return for reasons of  actual
    or attributed political opinion. However, it is  necessary  for  me  to
    consider the other  issues  raised  in  order  to  conduct  a  holistic
    assessment of the evidence, albeit that it might not be necessary to go
    into the same amount of detail given my findings on the first issue.

23.   The appellant has not produced any significant new  evidence  relating
    to his claimed attendance at demonstrations in the UK in 2009. The only
    new piece of evidence appears to be an unsigned statement from a friend
    ("BR") who says that he attended demonstrations with the appellant. The
    statement can be given very little  weight.  It  is  unsigned  and  the
    witness did not attend for his evidence to be tested.  While  there  is
    nothing  inherently  implausible  about  the  appellant's  account   of
    attending demonstrations at a time when  there  was  a  great  deal  of
    protest about the elections, I conclude that there is no good reason to
    depart from the First-tier Tribunal judge's finding that the  appellant
    has produced insufficient evidence to  make  out  this  aspect  of  his
    claim.

24.   The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted  that  the  appellant  attended
    some meetings at K's house starting in 2011. The appellant accepts that
    he stopped attending meetings in 2012 when he became involved in the TV
    station. The judge heard evidence from K and was satisfied that he is a
    well-known dissident but concluded that there was insufficient evidence
    to show that the appellant  was  likely  to  have  been  identified  as
    someone who  attended  those  meetings.  However,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that the judge's findings were not sufficiently  well-rounded
    because no findings were  made  about  his  associations  with  another
    dissident, "M".

25.   While the appellant stopped attending meetings with K  in  2012  there
    is evidence to show that his association with the family continued. The
    appellant is a friend of K's son "S", who also  gave  evidence  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing. S is one of the group of three people  who
    made the rap programme for the TV channel. He is named as  one  of  the
    administrators on  the  Facebook  page.  The  appellant  says  that  he
    continues to have  some  contact  with  K  through  his  friend.  I  am
    satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to show  that  the  appellant
    has had continuing contact with the  family.  The  appellant  has  also
    produced a copy of an email confirming his place on a film course  that
    started in June 2016. The film school is named after M and runs out  of
    a recognised academic film institution in  London.  Ms  Enayat's  first
    report explains M's  background  as  a  prominent  film  maker  who  is
    associated with the opposition.

26.   The picture that develops is of a young man who has  connections  with
    the Iranian artistic and dissident community in the UK.  Over  time  he
    has developed his own artistic endeavours on a subject that  is  likely
    to be viewed in a negative way by the Iranian authorities.

27.   The First-tier Tribunal judge was not satisfied  that  his  attendance
    at meetings with K was likely to have brought him to the  attention  of
    the Iranian authorities, despite the fact that he  appeared  to  accept
    that  at  least  one  member  of  the  group  had  been  arrested   and
    interrogated. The appellant's account of the authorities coming to  his
    home is broadly consistent with the  background  and  expert  evidence,
    which shows that pressure  is  sometimes  brought  to  bear  on  family
    members of oppositionists abroad.

28.   In AB (Iran) the Tribunal noted evidence that suggested  Iranians  had
    been recruited to infiltrate the community in the UK and report to  the
    regime. Ms Enayat's up to  date  report  states  that  there  has  been
    substantial  evidence  over  the  years  to  show  that   the   Iranian
    authorities engage in surveillance of opposition activity abroad.

29.   The judge was correct to note that there was no evidence to  establish
    a direct connection between the appellant's attendance at the  meetings
    with K in the UK and his claim that the authorities visited his  family
    home in Iran. While I cannot discount the possibility that  this  might
    be  an  embellishment  of  his  claim,  there  is  nothing   inherently
    implausible about this aspect of his account if it is considered in the
    context of the evidence  outlined  above.  I  remind  myself  that  the
    appellant does not need to prove his case with any certainty. As  such,
    I am  satisfied  that  it  is  at  least  reasonably  likely  that  the
    authorities may have identified him as a person of interest as a result
    of his association with prominent members  of  the  dissident  artistic
    community in the UK.

30.    The  rest  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's   online
    activities, including the letter he sent directly to  the  Presidential
    website in November 2011, remains a  little  vague.  The  copy  of  the
    letter contained in the appellant's bundle appears to have been  posted
    on his blog. There appears to be no evidence to show that it was posted
    on the Presidential website. I note that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    was satisfied that he "probably" posted the letter to the President  on
    his blog to strengthen his claim in view of the fact that it was posted
    a week before his screening interview. The rest of the translations  of
    the blog appear to focus on the appellant's poetry and do not appear to
    disclose any overtly political content.

31.   In response to the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  the  appellant  has
    produced  further  evidence  in  the  form  of  a  statement  from  his
    solicitor. She says that she had conduct of the appellant's case during
    his initial asylum claim and subsequent appeal. She attached a copy  of
    a Facebook print out, which she said the appellant gave to  her  during
    the preparation of his appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    mistakenly omitted from the bundle for the hearing. The judge expressed
    some surprise that such evidence was missing. I am satisfied that  this
    is sufficient to explain why the evidence, which does  appear  to  have
    been printed out on 02  March  2012,  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

32.   The Facebook print out shows the appellant's name and his  photograph.
    The posts that are in  English  do  not  appear  to  show  any  overtly
    political content and are of the usual nature of messages with  friends
    and sharing links relating to film and music. What is of  note  is  the
    fact that his profile picture has been replaced with the  logo  of  the
    Iranian  Cyber  Police  (Persian  language  acronym  FATA).  Ms  Enayat
    confirms that the logo corresponds with the FATA logo, which was set up
    in early 2011. The logo is similar to evidence I  have  seen  in  other
    Iranian cases. While the evidence shows that  FATA  may  have  had  the
    capability to hack Facebook accounts at the time, and  the  possibility
    of his account being hacked cannot therefore be discounted, it  remains
    the case that there does not appear to be any evidence to show that  he
    made any complaint to Facebook  about  this  issue.  More  up  to  date
    evidence appears to suggest that the appellant is now able to  use  his
    Facebook account although Ms Enayat suggests that this does  not  meant
    that internet activity is not being observed.

33.   After having considered the  up  to  date  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's online activities I am not satisfied that the  evidence  is
    sufficient to show that this strand of his claim, if  taken  alone,  is
    likely to give rise to a real risk on return. However, I bear  in  mind
    what the Tribunal in AB (Iran) said about the point of return  being  a
    "pinch point" when further enquiries and investigations might be  made.
    Any more in depth search of the appellant's internet  activities  might
    reveal a copy of the letter he wrote to the former President on his old
    blog, which Ms Enayat says is still accessible on the internet.

34.   I accept that there may have been some cause  to  doubt  some  of  the
    initial elements of the appellant's claim. On his own  account  he  did
    not leave Iran in fear of persecution. He visited the UK in 2007 before
    returning on a student visa a couple of months later. Although it  does
    not form part of his asylum claim, it seems clear from the  appellant's
    own evidence that he did not want to  carry  out  military  service.  I
    accept the respondent's submission that this may have been his  initial
    motivation for wanting to come to the UK.

35.   However, the claim has always been based on his sur  place  activities
    in the UK. The fact that the appellant did not enter the UK with a well-
    founded fear of persecution does not undermine the core aspects of  his
    claim. I accept that there is evidence to show that the  appellant  has
    long standing associations with  prominent  members  of  the  dissident
    artistic community in the UK, which included attending meetings as well
    as social and cultural pursuits.

36.   I accept that the appellant has produced sufficient evidence  to  show
    on the low standard of proof that he was involved in making a number of
    television programmes for a TV channel that has been  vilified  by  the
    Iranian  authorities.  The  content  of  the  programmes,  whilst   not
    controversial by UK standards, is likely to be viewed  by  the  Iranian
    authorities as a challenge to the cultural values  of  the  revolution.
    The background and expert evidence shows that some  artists  have  been
    arrested and ill-treated as a result of crackdowns on  those  perceived
    to contravene the cultural values of the Iranian regime.

37.   I have explained why some aspects of his claim, if  taken  alone,  are
    not reasonably likely to give rise to a real risk on  return.  However,
    when the appellant's profile is considered as a whole  I  am  satisfied
    that the different strands of his claim, if assessed  on  a  cumulative
    basis, are sufficient to show on the low standard  of  proof  that  the
    appellant is likely to be questioned when he arrives at a "pinch point"
    on return to Iran. His associations with well-known dissidents  in  the
    UK, as well as his own  creative  activities,  are  likely  to  form  a
    profile of someone who is opposed to the  regime  and  therefore  gives
    rise to a real risk of serious harm for reasons of actual or attributed
    political opinion.

38.   I  conclude  that  the  appellant's  removal  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would breach the United Kingdom's obligation under the Refugee
    Convention.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 22 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
