
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00216/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|On 28 October 2014                            |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 12 November 2014          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     j c
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Jeya and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because this is an international protection case and  it  is
    possible that the appellant could on some future occasion  be  at  risk
    because of publicity arising from this Decision.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  5  January  1981,
    against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent on 23 December  2013  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.  It is his case that he is  a  refugee  or
    otherwise  entitled  to  international  protection.   His  appeal   was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a determination  dated  26  May
    2014 but that decision was set aside for error of law by Upper Tribunal
    Judge King TD who gave a Decision and Reasons dated 15 September 2014.

 3. Judge King set aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because parts of the reasoning  were  explained  inadequately.  He  was
    particularly concerned that no clear findings had been made  about  the
    veracity of correspondence from a lawyer in Sri Lanka  confirming  that
    there was a warrant issued for the appellant's arrest.

 4. Judge King decided against re-determining the appeal  immediately  even
    though he noted many findings had been made in the appellant's  favour.
    He adjourned the case to give the parties  an  opportunity  to  produce
    further evidence if they so wished.

 5. Before me there was some further evidence from  the  appellant  but  no
    fresh material from the respondent.

 6. The evidence from the appellant comprised a  letter  from  the  British
    Tamils' Forum dated 20 October 2014 confirming that the  appellant  had
    joined the forum and a letter from  a  Sri  Lankan  solicitor  from  an
    address in Vavuniya dated 23 October 2014  written  in  response  to  a
    letter dated 25 September 2014 requesting clarification of his  earlier
    letter of 12 March 2014.  The author, Mr P Anton Punethanayagam said:

         "I confirm that as per the records and according to  my  Junior  Mr
         Thiruarul, Attorney-at-law, Mr J... C... was arrested on  16  April
         2012 on suspicion of being an LTTE member.  We requested for him to
         be released on bail.  The police raised objection  that  they  need
         more time for  further  investigation  and  the  judge  agreed  and
         refused the bail.  On 1 May 2012 based on our submission  to  grant
         bail with a condition, the judge granted bail on the  condition  to
         report at Vavuniya Police Station every three months."

 7. The letter is signed by P Anton Punethanayagam.  The letter is computer
    generated and  includes  an  unremarkable  letter  heading  using  what
    appears to be a font commonly available on word  processors.   It  does
    however bear a  red  ink  circular  stamp  identifying  the  writer  as
    "Justice of the Peace and an  Unofficial  Magistrate,  Attorney-at-Law,
    Notary Public and Commissioner for Oaths". Ms Jegarajah explained,  and
    I accept, that an "Unofficial Magistrate" in Sri  Lanka  is  the  broad
    equivalent of a Deputy District Judge in England and Wales.

 8. Ms Jegarajah decided not to call further  evidence.   She  set  out  to
    prove her case from  submissions  and  the  facts  already  established
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. As I am engaged in  a  continuance  hearing  I  incorporate  into  this
    determination Judge King's decision which highlights  the  areas  where
    binding findings have been made. It is set out at Appendix 1.

10. It is for the appellant to prove his case but it is  sufficient  if  he
    proves that there is a real risk of his being persecuted  or  otherwise
    ill-treated in the event of his return.

11. Although human rights are no doubt  a  consideration  they  really  add
    nothing to this case.  If the appellant is in  trouble  at  all  it  is
    because he risks persecution for a Convention reason  and  it  was  not
    suggested that removing him would be an unlawful interference with  any
    private and family life he has established in the United Kingdom.

12. I confirm that I made no findings until I had reviewed the evidence  as
    a whole and if a comment I make on the evidence or the order in which I
    have considered the evidence creates a contrary  impression  then  that
    impression is wrong.

13. Mr Wilding took no point on the very late submission of the letter from
    the Tamil Attorney.  In my judgment it is a letter that adds little  to
    the whole.  It is exactly the kind of letter that could be expected  if
    the appellant is making up evidence to  suit  his  case  or  if  he  is
    telling the truth.

14. There is nothing about the rubber stamp on the letter to  give  it  any
    kind of official quality.  It appears to be  a  straightforward  office
    stamp which no doubt is readily available from commercial stationers to
    legitimate and dishonest customers alike.

15. I similarly find that the appellant's membership of the British Tamils'
    Forum to be unhelpful.  Again his membership, proved by  the  document,
    is entirely consistent with a  person  genuinely  concerned  about  the
    plight of the Tamils or  mischievously  concerned  to  produce  further
    evidence to bolster an unmeritorious claim.  Again Mr Wilding  took  no
    point on the very late production of  the  document.   It  is  of  very
    limited evidential value.

16. The appellant travelled from Sri Lanka to the United  Kingdom  arriving
    in Heathrow in July 2012.  He claimed asylum on 23 January  2013.   The
    respondent accepted the appellant is a Sri Lankan of Tamil ethnicity.

17. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  had  worked  for  the
    LTTE.

18. Neither did the respondent accept that the appellant's  brother  was  a
    Major in the political wing of the LTTE.  Curiously at paragraph 27  of
    the decision letter  this  was  attributed  to  his  being  "internally
    consistent".  However there was no external  evidence  to  substantiate
    the claim.

19. The respondent did not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    arrested on three occasions but did accept that he had been arrested.

20. The respondent also accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  tortured
    whilst in detention.

21. It was further accepted that he was released from detention by paying a
    bribe.

22. The respondent however found that the appellant had not proved the case
    in the way the Rules said it should have been proved and  so  concluded
    that it was not satisfied the appellant's brother was a  Major  in  the
    political wing of the LTTE or that his brother had been arrested.

23. The Secretary of State found that even if the appellant had shown  that
    he was a member of the LTTE he had not shown  he  would  have  been  of
    interest to the authorities in the event of his return now.

24. I have looked particularly  carefully  at  the  letters  from  P  Anton
    Punethanayagam.  The letter dated 12 March 2014 confirms that there  is
    an open warrant for the arrest of the appellant and that a  person  the
    lawyer was prepared to identify as the appellant's brother was arrested
    on  28  January  2008  on  suspicion  of  possession  and  transporting
    explosives.

25. Mr Wilding submitted that the appellant was not to be believed.

26. He said that the lawyer had not provided evidence of the reason for the
    appellant being the subject of an arrest warrant.  It could be that  he
    was wanted for criminal activities which in no way  were  connected  to
    the LTTE.

27. In his interview in answer to question 164 the appellant  talked  about
    being stopped at a checkpoint  in  Vavuniya  where  he  had  inadequate
    identification.

28. Mr Wilding also drew  my  attention  to  an  alteration  that  was  not
    initialled on the lawyer's letter where  the  typed  date  "28  January
    2009" had been altered to say "28 January  2008".   He  submitted  this
    detracted from the credibility of the letter.  The claim that there was
    a warrant for the appellant's arrest was not supported, for example  by
    evidence that there was a  case  involving  the  appellant  before  the
    Magistrates' court.  That, he submitted, was the kind of evidence  that
    a lawyer might have been expected to have produced.

29. It was the appellant's case that he had signed something  that  he  was
    not able to read. I am satisfied that this was likely to  have  been  a
    confession or other incriminating document.

30. Ms Jegarajah reminded me that there is evidence that communications are
    intercepted in and out of Sri Lanka and that the solicitors instructing
    her were cagey about what they  actually  asked  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    attorney.

31. As is so often the case in asylum appeals this is not a matter where  I
    feel able to give an entirely  satisfactory  answer  to  the  questions
    prompted by the evidence or raised in submission.

32. The Home Office had not made any enquires about  the  lawyer's  letter.
    They could, for example, have confirmed from their  contacts  that  the
    firm is practising and they could have perhaps asked  for  confirmation
    that the letter does come from the firm.  However, as these things were
    not really in issue they would have been of limited value.   I  am  not
    criticising the Secretary of State for not doing any more than she did.
     Rather I make the point that there was not very much she could do.

33. In his determination Judge King has pointed out how  Mr  Punethanayagam
    has made a good impression on the Tribunal on another occasion when  he
    gave evidence.  This is far from conclusive proof that he  is  reliable
    on this occasion but it is a pointer in favour of accepting what he has
    to say.

34. I find it probable that the lawyer's letter is written as it is because
    the appellant is subject to an open arrest warrant and is  the  brother
    of an LTTE activist as  Mr  Punethanayagam  asserts.   I  have  already
    addressed myself on the standard  of  proof.   I  do  not  have  to  be
    satisfied that the account is probably right but I am satisfied  it  is
    probably right.  It is the best explanation I can give for that  strand
    of evidence.

35. Unlike the Secretary of State I  think  there  is  a  broad  degree  of
    plausibility about the appellant's story.  He is a Tamil.  He has  done
    things for the LTTE.  He has got away from Sri Lanka.  He  returned  to
    Sri Lanka from India and attracted attention because it was at  a  time
    when the Sri Lankan may well have had genuine concerns about  how  much
    LTTE activity was going on in India.

36. I think I must accept Ms Jegarajah's submission that the lawyer in  Sri
    Lanka may have had some concerns about his post being  read  by  people
    who should not see it.  Nevertheless, he would have had  no  reason  to
    say that the appellant is the brother of a person who was in trouble in
    2009 unless he was being mischievous, or careless, or knew that  to  be
    the case.  He was not questioned before me but I  think  it  likely  he
    made reference to the  appellant's  brother  because  that  is  who  he
    thought the person was and he was likely to think that because he had a
    reason to think it.

37. The medical evidence clearly supports the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    been tortured.

38. I reflected very carefully on Mr Wilding's submission that  the  reason
    for the appellant being on an open arrest  warrant  is  uncertain.   Ms
    Jegarajah speculates that it is because the authorities have discovered
    something about the appellant and are anxious to see him.   Mr  Wilding
    speculates that the reasons are not explained because they are  not  to
    the advantage of the appellant's  case.   Each  of  these  explanations
    could be rights.  I find this  is  an  excellent  illustration  of  why
    asylum appeals have to be allowed if they are proved to the  real  risk
    standard.  The appellant has produced evidence that I  cannot  properly
    discount.  That evidence supports his case.

39. Putting everything together I find the appellant is a person who is  at
    risk.  He is actively wanted by the authorities now.  He has been  ill-
    treated in the past.  He  is  related  to  an  LTTE  activist  of  some
    prominence.

40. He has proved his case.  In the circumstances I allow the appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 November 2014                |

                                    [pic]
APPENDIX 1
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00216/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 August 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                  J... C...

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Jeya and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 5 January 1981.

2.   He claimed asylum on 23 January 2013 which was refused  in  a  decision
    of 23  December 2013.  The appellant  sought  to  appeal  against  that
    decision which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Britton on 16 May
    2014.

3    Although the evidence of the appellant's three  detentions  would  seem
    to have been accepted, it was  not  accepted  by  the  Judge  that  the
    appellant had such a profile as to render him at risk  on  return.   In
    those circumstances the appeal was dismissed as to asylum  and  in  all
    other respects.

4.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision contending  that
    the Judge's rejection of the evidence as to a  warrant  was  unreasoned
    and in error.  Also that adequate reasons were given for finding a lack
    of credibility or for rejecting the account of the appellant's profile.



5.   Permission to appeal was granted.  Thus the matter comes before  me  in
    pursuance of that grant.

6.   It was the case as advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  that  he  had
    been involved with the LTTE until  2004.  Further  his  brother  had  a
    significant profile for the LTTE.

7.   The appellant claimed that he had  been  detained  on  three  occasions
    whilst in Sri Lanka.  The first occasion was that in December 2005.  He
    was arrested at his aunt's house in Colombo but had not  registered  to
    live and work in Colombo.   He was ill-treated  and  detained  for  one
    day.  Thereafter he went to India, returning to Sri Lanka in  September
    2011.

8.   He was detained at the airport for overstaying in India and  questioned
    about his involvement with the LTTE.  He was detained for  seven  days,
    questioned and tortured in the terms as set out in the report  prepared
    by the Medical Foundation which is in the bundle of documents.  He  was
    released from that detention on 20 September 2011.

9.   Thereafter he went to his aunt in Colombo where he continued  to  work.
    In April 2012 he went to Vavuniya and was stopped at a checkpoint.   He
    did not have an identity card with him so he was taken  to  the  police
    station and questioned.  He was further detained and  not  ill-treated.
    He went to court and was subsequently  granted  bail  to  attend  court
    three months later. He decided to leave the country thereafter.  He did
    not attend the subsequent bail hearing.

10.  Evidence was produced at the  hearing  from  an  attorney-at-law  Mr  P
    Unethanayagam, summarised in a letter of 12 March 2014 together with  a
    letter from attorney-at-law Thiruarul, dated 3 March 2014.  Such letter
    indicated that searches had been made of the relevant court records and
    that an open warrant  for  the  appellant's  arrest  was  in  existence
    because of a bail report to the police station after  three  months  as
    required.  It also confirmed the arrest of the appellant  on  16  April
    2012 and his detention until 1 May 2012.

11.  It is clear from the determination that the  three  detentions  of  the
    appellant were accepted. It was also accepted that  during  the  second
    detention the appellant was raped, kicked and beaten in  the  terms  as
    set out in paragraphs 57 to 61 of the medical report.

12.  So far as the warrant was concerned, the Judge dealt with  that  aspect
    at paragraph 42 in these terms:

         "The appellant said he stopped working for the LTTE in 2000, he was
         never a member o the LTTE. I accept he was a supporter and find  he
         had nothing to do with the LTTE since 2000. The  appellant  has  to
         produced an arrest warrant. The appellant has not produced a letter
         from a lawyer in Sri Lanka who is said to have examined  the  court
         records and an open warrant has been  issued  for  the  appellant's
         arrest. Without a copy of the arrest warrant  I  am  not  satisfied
         that such a warrant is outstanding. In any event if there is one in
         existence, it does not amount to persecution.   The appellant would
         be in breach of his bail conditions imposed by the court."

13.  Miss Jegarajah who represents the appellant  submits  that  that  is  a
    wholly  inadequate  way  of  dealing  with  important  or   potentially
    important evidence.

14.  In her grounds of appeal she cites paragraph 10.13 of  the  BHC  letter
    of 14 September 2010 which  indicates  that  it  is  difficult  for  an
    accused to be able to obtain  a copy of  his/her  own  arrest  warrant.
    When an arrest warrant is issued a copy is kept on a legal file and the
    originals handed to police.  The accused cannot apply for copies of  an
    arrest warrant to the relevant court.  In practice forged documents are
    easily obtainable throughout Sri Lanka."

15.  She submits that it is perhaps to the credit of the appellant  that  no
    warrant has been produced given the  difficulties  of  obtaining  them.
    That explains entirely the reason why it is necessary  to  instruct  an
    attorney-at-law to make those enquiries.

16.  My attention was drawn to the case of CJ and  Others  (Post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).     My  attention  was
    drawn in particular  to  paragraphs  146  and  275  of  that  decision.
    Reference is made to Mr Punethanayagam in that decision as a wide  data
    base of some 3,000 clients provided certain information to the Tribunal
    from that data base.   At  paragraph  275  it  is  recorded  that  that
    attorney's evidence is of a practitioner who has dealt with 3,000 cases
    of detainees in Colombo and Vavuniya.  The Tribunal found his  evidence
    on the processes of bribery to be particularly useful.   They  did  not
    have the opportunity of hearing him give oral evidence they found  much
    of his evidence to be useful and reliable.

17.  Miss Jegarajah submits that  it  is  wholly  inadequate  to  dismiss  a
    statement from such a witness without giving any reasons at all  as  to
    why that evidence should not be accepted.  It was  his  firm  that  had
    represented the appellant before the court and had  obtained  bail  for
    him.  It is therefore entirely understandable why it would be that that
    lawyer was motivated to make the statement that was made.

18.  In relation to the other aspect of  the  matter,  namely  that  it  was
    immaterial whether there was a warrant or not, my attention  was  drawn
    to paragraph 356(7)(d) of CJ and Others.

19.  That sets out the current categories of persons at risk of  persecution
    or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  Such includes:-

         "A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a 'stop' list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant.

20.  She submits that if an open warrant is in existence then the  appellant
    will be on a 'stop list' and will therefore fall within the category of
    individual at risk on return.  Thus she submits that the comments  made
    by the Judge are without legal foundation.

21.  She invites me to note the contents of the lawyer's letter  as  to  the
    profile of the appellant's brother which she submits  is  a  real  risk
    factor facing the appellant in any event.

22.  She also  contends  that  the  approach  taken  by  the  Judge  to  the
    appellant's profile lacks clarity and reason.  Indeed it matters little
    whether the appellant has an actual profile or whether it is  perceived
    that he has one for the principles of protection.  He  was  stopped  on
    returning from India and questioned about his involvement what the LTTE
    precisely because many of the LTTE fighters took  refuge  there.   Even
    without the authorities knowing the existence of his brother he was ill-
    treated and tortured as has been accepted.

23.  She submits that the fact that the appellant  was  not  ill-treated  in
    the last detention is to a large extent irrelevant because the risk  of
    ill-treatment must always remain an unpredictable environment.

24.  She also submitted in her grounds that the Judge erred in the  approach
    taken to the involvement of the appellant in the United  Kingdom  which
    was must greater than was thought to be the case.  It is also that  the
    error as to the warrant covers the finding made in paragraph 45 of  the
    determination where the Judge does not find that the appellant is on  a
    'stop list'.   Clearly that is in error in the light  of  the  findings
    set out by the Tribunal in GJ.

25.  Mr Avery relies upon the Rule 24 response  written  on  24  July  2014.
    The appellant was not aware that arrest warrants were not given out and
    that would tend not to support the suggestion that a  warrant  existed.
    If the appellant had been of any interest to the authorities any  event
    such as to require him to be released on bail after having been stopped
    at random and detained.  Thus it does not seem to me that those matters
    go to the heart of the issue which I have to determine at  this  stage.
    It is far from clear from reading the determination as a whole  whether
    or not the Judge accepted the release on bail.  By implication  of  the
    wording of paragraph 42 that would seem to have been accept.

26.  Mr Avery submits that the profile of the appellant is of importance  to
    his continued safety.  It is not accepted that he had  any  significant
    profile in the LTTE otherwise  he  would  not  have  been  released  so
    easily.  He was not ill-treated in the  last  detention  and  there  is
    little reason to believe that he would be ill-treated  were  he  to  be
    arrested at the airport for breach of bail.

27.  Miss Jegarajah in reality relies upon the wording  of  CJ  and  of  the
    risk of being arrested at the airport presents.

28.  It seems to me that the grounds of appeal have  considerable  merit  in
    this case.  There was on the face of the  matter  two  statements  from
    lawyers  who  had  dealings  with  the  appellant,  setting   out   the
    investigations which they made to locate the warrant.  The evidence  is
    detailed.  Or course it is open to a Judge  to  reject  that  evidence,
    reasons for doing so have to be given.  In this case  no  such  reasons
    were given.  I find that it could be safely concluded that  because  no
    warrant was produced the evidence of the lawyers must  therefore  be  a
    force.

29.  Equally I accept the argument that has been advanced that if a  warrant
    is in existence it constitutes a risk factor to the safety  of  return.
    The Judge has not analysed the risk  categories  set  out  in  CJ  with
    particular care even though the aspect of risk from Tamils  and  others
    is cited at paragraph 45 of the determination.

30.  It is also a matter of some concern to me  that  at  paragraph  49  the
    Judge finds that the core of the  appellant's  account  of  persecution
    lacks credibility and is a fabrication.  It is not entirely clear  from
    that what aspects are said to be false and what are  not  false.  Given
    the acceptance by the Judge of what may be argued  is  in  reality  the
    core of the claim, namely the torture, ill-treatment in 2011.  It would
     ... more to conclude that that is itself an accurate statement of  the
    position and it seems to me in those circumstances that there are clear
    errors of law in the approach taken by the Judge such that the decision
    should be set aside to be remade.

31.  Miss Jegarajah is content for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  the
    matter upon any rehearing and indeed invites me to  find  that  such  a
    rehearing is unnecessary in the circumstances of the case.  There is no
    reason to reject the credibility of the lawyer as to the  existence  of
    the warrant.  In such circumstances irrespective of the profile of  the
    appellant and that given his credibility he will be at risk  of  arrest
    at the airport and of ill-treatment.   She invites me to find therefore
    that even on that narrow basis it would be entirely proper  for  me  to
    allow the appeal outright.

32.  Mr Avery submits that that is a simplification of the issue. It is  far
    from clear on what basis  the  appellant  was  detained  on  the  third
    occasion, given that he was not ill-treated, it is highly unlikely,  he
    submits, that it was anything to do with the LTTE, rather not having an
    identity card.  He submits  that  this  is  therefore  prosecution  not
    persecution and that the appellant's arrest at the airport without  any
    significant profile in the eyes  of  the  authorities  is  unlikely  to
    result in  any  significant  ill-treatment.   He  invites  me  to  find
    therefore that it is entirely appropriate to evaluate  the  credibility
    of the appellant and of his profile in the eyes of the authorities.

33.  Miss Jegarajah points out that initially the lawyers sought bail on  17
    April but it was not until 1 May that bail was obtained.   She  submits
    that that in itself is indicative of a profile. She invites me to  find
    however that in the light of CJ the concerns raised by Mr Avery are  of
    little consequence.

34.  I recognise in the principle of fairness that both  the  appellant  and
    the respondent have  a  right  to  be  heard  as  to  their  respective
    arguments and develop matters according to the way in which each wishes
    to present the case.  With some reluctance, therefore, I have  come  to
    the conclusion that the fairest course is to list  this  matter  for  a
    rehearing, any fact to be preserved in fairness to the appellant  is  a
    finding as to his torture on the second  detention  and  an  acceptance
    that he was detained on three occasions.  The cause of those detentions
    may be a matter of further evidence or not.

35.  In that connection I note  that  the  attorney  who  wrote  the  letter
    represented the appellant, or least his subordinate did.  No  doubt  in
    those circumstances the reasons for his detention can be clarified with
    the attorney as also the reasons why bail is objected to  on  17  April
    and granted on 1 May.  Equally it is open to the  appellant  to  adduce
    further evidence as to the profile, particularly his activities in  the
    United Kingdom.

36.  It is unclear whether the appellant  would  be  required  to  give  any
    further evidence and  in  those  circumstances  those  acting  for  the
    appellant should  notify  the  Tribunal  within  three  weeks  of  this
    decision as to whether or not an interpreter in the Tamil  language  is
    required.

37.  I recognise that it is the case for the respondent that no warrant  has
    been issued. However  if  it  is  found  that  such  a  warrant  is  in
    existence I would expect the respondent to be in a  position  to  argue
    therefore that would not bring the appellant within the risk categories
    of GJ  and  why  therefore  GJ  should  not  be  acted  upon  in  those
    circumstances.

Signed Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
