
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00273/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. We make this order, which continues a  similar  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal, because the appeal concerns a claim for
    asylum and  we  want  to  avoid  the  possibility,  however  remote,  of
    publicity creating a risk for the appellant in the event of his return.

 2. This is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State refusing him leave to remain.

 3. The appellant says that he is gay, that gay people face a high degree of
    discrimination in Kosovo and that the level of discrimination is so high
    that it would be a major difficulty for him to reintegrate into  Kosovan
    society. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is  surprising  in  that  it
    makes no reference whatsoever to these points that were  clearly  relied
    upon by the appellant in his witness statement,  skeleton  argument  and
    background material.  He says that he should be allowed to remain if for
    no other reason on Article 8 grounds or under  paragraph  276ADE  of  HC
    395.

 4. We do not know how it came about that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  so
    comprehensively missed these points.  We are not entirely  unsympathetic
    because concerns arising from the appellant's sexuality were raised at a
    late stage.  They were certainly not before the Secretary of State  when
    she made the decision. This explains why they were not considered in the
    refusal letter but they were raised by the  appellant  and  should  have
    been considered. They were not and  it  follows  that  the  Decision  is
    deficient.

 5. We ask ourselves if this is something we should  remedy  by  considering
    the background material and submissions or further  submissions  and  we
    have concluded that we should not.  If the  applicant  chooses  to  give
    evidence, and it is very hard to see how he can prove  his  case  if  he
    does not, the Secretary of State will want to  cross-examine  him  about
    the reasons for not stating at an earlier occasion that  the  points  on
    which he now relies were of such considerable importance to him.   There
    might be an excellent explanation for that.  It might be  a  revealingly
    deficient one.  He may choose not to give evidence. We do not  know.  It
    is quite clear to us that there has to be a  substantial  rehearing  and
    that the appellant has not yet had a fair hearing because his  case  has
    not been determined by the First-tier Tribunal. In accordance  with  the
    Practice Direction we find it right to order  that  the  case  is  heard
    again in the First-tier Tribunal. Neither representative disagreed about
    this disposal or with any of the above.

 6. There is an  additional  slight  area  of  contention  that  has  to  be
    resolved.

 7. At paragraph 19 of the Decision the First-tier Tribunal the  judge  said
    "I do not find that [the appellant] has told the truth about the earlier
    asylum claim and its disposal".  Mr  Hopkin  argues  that  this  adverse
    finding should remain as part  of  the  overall  assessment.   Mr  Jafar
    argued to the contrary, pointing out that the finding was challenged, to
    some extent at least, in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. However, we are satisfied that  this  finding  is  not  a  finding  that
    various documents were served or not served;  rather  it  is  a  finding
    based on an overall assessment of the evidence that  the  appellant  did
    know that his former asylum appeal had been unsuccessful. That is as far
    as it goes.  How relevant it will be to the overall disposal remains  to
    be seen.  It may not prove to be very important at  all  but  we  regard
    this as  a  finding  that  was  permissible  and  stands  on  Devaseelan
    principles. It is for the First-tier Tribunal when deciding  the  appeal
    again to decide how much  of  that  finding  remains  and  how  much  it
    illuminates what comes next but it is  a  finding  that  stands  to  the
    extent that it is relevant which may prove not to be very much at all.

 9. Subject to that caveat we set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and order that the appeal be determined again in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed as indicated above. It has to be heard again.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 October 2015                 |

