
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00842/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 June 2017                        |On 22 June 2017                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    N I L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph instructed by Crowley & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    (DRC) who was born on [ ] 1977.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  3
    October 2013 and claimed asylum.

 3. On 12 December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.
     On 19 December 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision to  remove
    the appellant by a way of directions to the DRC.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 6 July 2015, Judge  Holder  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission and, in  a
    decision dated 5 May 2016 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb) concluded that
    the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  in  reaching  its  adverse
    decision and the appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the
    decision to be remade.

 6. Following the remittal, in a decision dated 5 October 2016, Judge  A  D
    Baker dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 7 December 2016, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Canavan)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 8. In a rule 24 notice dated 20 December  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that she did not oppose the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and, in essence, accepted that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside and remade.

 9. At the hearing before me, I raised with both representatives  the  fact
    that I had previously dealt with the appeal.  Both Mr Diwnycz, for  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Joseph for the appellant agreed that  it  was
    proper for me to deal with  the  appeal  as  the  Secretary  of  State,
    through Mr Diwnycz, accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    should be set aside and both agreed that  in  those  circumstances  the
    appeal should again be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be remade.

Decision

10. Consequently, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.  That decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing.   It
    was accepted by both representatives that  Judge  Holder's  finding  in
    para 32 that the appellant had been a member of Toges-Noires since 2000
    should stand.

12. Thus, I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and direct that  it
    be heard by a judge other than Judge Holder or Judge A D Baker.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  21 June 2017
