
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00426/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr CVD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Record, Counsel instructed by David A Grand


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is a citizen  of  Vietnam  and  his
    date of birth is 3 September 1974.

2.   The appellant committed a number of criminal offences between 1993  and
    1995.  Following his conviction at Aylesbury Crown  Court  on  24  July
    2009 on two counts of  production  of  a  class  C  drug  (the  trigger
    offence) the appellant was sentenced to 30 months and 23 months to  run
    concurrently. The offences were committed in  2006.  The  Secretary  of
    State made a decision on 18  December  2014  to  deport  the  appellant
    pursuant to paragraph 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  having  decided
    that he was excluded from protection of the Refugee Convention pursuant
    to section  72  of  the  2002  Act  (section  33  (2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention). In a decision of 19 December 2014 the Secretary  of  State
    ceased the appellant's refugee status pursuant to paragraph 339  A  (v)
    of the  Immigration  Rules  (Article  1  C  (5)  of  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention).

3.   It is a fact that the appellant came to the UK on 1 July 1989 with  his
    siblings as a dependant of his father, who  had  been  granted  refugee
    status in Hong Kong.  The  appellant  was  granted  refugee  status  on
    arrival here.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decisions of the Secretary of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  C  A
    Parker in a decision that was promulgated on 23 July 2015  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 7 July 2015. Permission was granted  to  the
    Secretary of  State  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer  on  21
    September 2015. Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Judge Parker made extensive findings.  In relation to Section 72(2)  of
    the 2002 Act the judge made the following findings:

         "53. Whilst these are all matters to which I must have regard,  and
             upon which the respondent places weight, I must also take into
             account that the most serious offence of which  the  appellant
             was convicted, and in respect of which he received a  sentence
             of 30 months, was committed in October  2006.   Generally,  in
             deportation appeals, the assessment  of  whether  an  offender
             represents a danger to society, is a matter of speculation  on
             the basis of available evidence.  That  evidence  may  include
             the offender's attitude to their offending; evidence of  steps
             taken towards rehabilitation; continuing presence of events or
             circumstances which gave rise to the offending;  views  and/or
             reports prepared  by  an  offender  manager.   In  this  case,
             however, rather than  making  an  assessment  of  whether  the
             appellant may reoffend, and thus represent  a  danger  to  the
             community, I can make conclusions based upon  the  appellant's
             actual behaviour since  his  last  offence  was  committed  in
             October 2006.  He was released from custody in April 2010  and
             there is no evidence  that  he  reoffended,  before  or  after
             deportation proceedings were belatedly commenced in mid  2014.
             Nor is there evidence that he reoffended between October  2006
             and his arrest in 2009.  In short, there is no  evidence  that
             the appellant has reoffended since October 2006.   He  was  in
             custody for approximately  18  months  but  was  otherwise  at
             liberty.  Whilst the appellant may still present some risk  to
             the public, I am not satisfied that he could now be  described
             as a 'danger to the community'.   Having  considered  all  the
             evidence in the round, including  the  offence  for  which  he
             received a sentence of 30 months (in excess of two years)  and
             the absence of evidence of  further  offending  since  October
             2006, I find that the  presumption  in  s72  of  the  NIAA  is
             rebutted.  I do not uphold the certificate."

6.   In  relation  to  the  cessation  of  refugee  status  the  judge  made
    extensive findings  and  for  the  purposes  of  this  decision  it  is
    necessary to quote the following:

         "67. I have had  particular  regard  to  the  absence  of  evidence
             concerning the reason for the grant of refugee status  to  the
             appellant's father, to which reference was made  by  UNHCR  in
             their letter of 26 September 2014.  The respondent stated,  in
             her letter of 19 December 2014: 'the specific reason  for  the
             grant of refugee status to you is not recorded  on  your  Home
             Office files, however it assumed to be the prevailing  country
             situation in Vietnam at  the  time  your  family  left'.   The
             respondent cites no  evidential  basis  for  this  assumption.
             Refugees are generally recognised on a case by case basis.  In
             the absence of any evidence of a policy being in place at  the
             time  of  the  appellant's  admission  under   which   certain
             categories  or  groups  of  Vietnamese  nationals  were  being
             admitted as refugees there was  no  evidence  to  support  the
             claim that the appellant and his family was  admitted  on  the
             basis of the 'prevailing country situation in Vietnam  at  the
             time his family left'.  Miss Barrow confirmed at  the  hearing
             that the respondent had no record of the basis upon which  the
             appellant and his family was granted refugee status.

         68.  In its background paper UNHCR states that even if  there  were
             fundamental and durable changes in the country of nationality,
             those changes may not have removed the basis of the  refugee's
             fear of persecution and such fear  would  continue  to  exist.
             UNHCR points out  that  even  regime  change  may  not  always
             produce a complete change in the attitude of  the  population.
             In other words, a refugee's circumstances may  be  such  that,
             even if there were significant and permanent  changes  in  the
             conditions in the country of nationality, it may still not  be
             safe for the particular person to return.

         69.  The appellant was too young to have known about  the  family's
             circumstances when he left Vietnam in 1981, at the age  of  7.
             He has not returned to Vietnam since he arrived here. I remind
             myself that the respondent bears  the  evidential  burden  for
             establishing that circumstances are such that  refugee  status
             should be ceased.  The appellant's father passed away in 2009,
             but the respondent has  not  requested  information  from  the
             appellant's older siblings about the family's circumstances in
             Vietnam nor established whether the appellant's siblings  have
             returned to Vietnam.  Such evidence may have shed  light  upon
             whether it would safe for this appellant to return.   However,
             there  is  no  evidence  as  to  the  basis  upon  which   the
             appellant's father and the family was granted  refugee  status
             or whether their circumstances are such that they could safely
             return.

         70.  Changes in country conditions in Vietnam since  the  appellant
             left may well be such that it would now be safe  for  many  to
             return.  However, this must depend upon the  circumstances  of
             the individual and the reason that s/he fled  Vietnam  in  the
             first place.  In the  absence  of  any  evidence  of  why  the
             appellant  and  his  family  left,  the  respondent  has   not
             established that it would be safe for him to return, even if a
             significant and permanent change  in  the  conditions  in  the
             country of nationality had been established.  The burden is on
             the  respondent  to  establish  that  there  are  grounds  for
             cessation  and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this   has   been
             established in this case."

The Grounds of Appeal

7.   I heard oral submissions form the parties.  The  first  ground  asserts
    that the judge  erred  because  her  findings  were  contradictory  and
    reference is made to paragraph 53.  The judge found that the  appellant
    "may still represent some risk to the  public"  which  contradicts  the
    finding that he had rebutted the  presumption  that  he  constituted  a
    danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

8.   The  second  ground  asserts  that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to
    cessation of the appellant's refugee status because the  appellant  was
    aged 7 when he left Vietnam and he did not have a subsequent  political
    profile.  It is asserted in the grounds that the  evidence  pointed  to
    his being one of the many 'boat people' who left Vietnam at  that  time
    and there was no evidence that  supported  the  proposition  that  boat
    people would be at risk on return to Vietnam.

Conclusions

9.   There is no merit in the  first  ground.   The  judge  made  clear  and
    unambiguous findings and properly took into account  that  the  trigger
    offence was committed in 2006 and that since  the  appellant's  release
    from prison (in 2010) he had not committed any further offences.   Some
    risk to the public is not, by any account, the same as  constituting  a
    danger to the community. The findings were grounded in the evidence and
    adequately reasoned.

10.  For the  purposes  of  second  ground,  it  is  necessary  to  set  out
    paragraph 339A (v), which is  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  (which
    faithfully transposes Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention):

         "He can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connection  with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of nationality."

11.  Whilst the grounds assert that the appellant was one of the many  'boat
    people' who left Vietnam at that time there was no persuasive  evidence
    before the Tribunal that this was indeed the case  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude,  in  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  that  the
    respondent had  not  established  the  circumstances  under  which  the
    appellant had initially been granted refugee status.   The  appellant's
    father died in 2009 and his mother  died  in  1981  and  there  was  no
    evidence  therefore  from  them  in  relation  to   the   circumstances
    surrounding the grant of refugee status to the family, and there was no
    evidence from the respondent on this  issue.  It  was  the  appellant's
    evidence that his father had sided with the Americans  during  the  war
    and the appellant believed that if he returned neighbours  and  friends
    in the local community would be against him as a result of his father's
    activities and a report would be made against  him  at  any  time  (see
    paragraphs 29 and 35 of the decision).

12.  The judge was entitled to attach weight  to  the  UNHCR  letter  of  26
    September 2014 in which it is concluded by UNHCR  that  although  there
    had been some  improvement  regarding  the  situation  in  Vietnam  the
    changes had not been fundamental or durable and that it should  not  be
    taken as conclusive that the appellant, whose case should be considered
    on an individualised set of facts, would not be at risk on return.   It
    is  also  concluded  that  the  human  rights  situation   in   Vietnam
    deteriorated significantly in 2013. The judge was entitled to  conclude
    that there was uncertainty surrounding the circumstances of  the  grant
    of refugee status and in the absence of evidence why the appellant  and
    his family had been granted refugee status it is difficult to  see  how
    the respondent could discharge the burden of proof.

13.  It was not a matter for the judge to consider risk on return as  though
    this were an asylum appeal and it was not  incumbent on  the  appellant
    to establish that he would be at risk on return.  The decision was  one
    that was open to the judge  and  the  findings  were  grounded  in  the
    evidence and adequately reasoned.  The grounds amount to a disagreement
    with those findings but do not disclose an error of law. In the absence
    of error, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  maintained.   My
    decision was communicated orally to the parties at the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge is maintained. The Secretary of State's appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 14 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

