
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00711/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2016                       |On 18 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               n v (sri lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Solanki, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davidge sitting at Columbus House,  Newport)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee  or   as  otherwise  requiring
    international or human rights protection.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 19 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         The grounds of application for permission to appeal are  too  long.
         The solicitors and Counsel should not have to  take  ten  pages  to
         identify and summarise what they consider  to  be  errors  of  law.
         Nonetheless I consider there to be substance to the five grounds on
         which the application for permission to appeal is based namely that
         the Judge erred in her approach to  the  witness  evidence  of  the
         appellant's father and his siblings, misinterpreted a  Home  Office
         concession by the respondent in relation to the appellant's role in
         the LTTE and gave little or no  consideration  to  the  appellant's
         medical evidence and photographs.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil, whose date of birth is [  ]  1987.
    He said he was abducted, along with his younger sister, in July 2007 by
    the LTTE who had come to  his  parents'  home  looking  for  his  older
    brother who was not there.  He and his sister were  taken  to  an  LTTE
    training camp where they were separated after two weeks.  The appellant
    spent a year in the camp at Sangamaankanni.  Whilst  he  was  there  he
    received training in communications.

 4. In 2008 he went to Colombo where he worked in global communications for
    about eight months.  He was housed by the LTTE in Colombo, in  a  house
    with others.  The LTTE opened a bank account for him, paid  money  into
    it and gave him instructions about the drawing and  depositing  of  the
    money into other accounts or handing it over to  others.   He  received
    telephone calls telling him where to  deposit  money  and  to  pass  on
    parcels.  He would collect money from [S] and deposit it in accounts as
    well as calling at shops and collecting money and delivering that money
    to [S].

 5. In March 2009 he stopped receiving phone calls giving him instructions.
     He waited until the end of March when he telephoned [S]  to  find  out
    what was going on.  [S] told him he had not received  any  phone  calls
    either and the appellant should not contact him because he did not want
    any trouble.  The appellant hid at his address in Colombo,  living  off
    the money that he had held for the LTTE.

 6. In about August 2009 he asked his father for help as his money had  run
    out.  His father came to Colombo in August 2009 and moved the appellant
    to a different address in Colombo.  His father told  him  that  he  had
    sent his younger sister to the United Kingdom.  Between August 2009 and
    May 2012 the appellant lived with the people his father had  introduced
    him to, studying English in the local area.

 7. In May 2012 the appellant went to a large shopping  centre  in  Colombo
    and ran into somebody he knew from the  LTTE  camp  at  Sangamaankanni.
    The appellant gave this person information as to his  current  address.
    A few days later he was abducted at gunpoint by four  men  in  civilian
    clothes.  He was held in a room and interrogated about what he had been
    doing with the LTTE, whether he had any weapons and whom he knew.  Four
    days later he was taken by three different people to Homangna.  The men
    who abducted him were part of the  Karuna  Group.   The  appellant  was
    taken to a CID office where he was fingerprinted,  before  being  taken
    back to Homangna.  He was detained for a week in Homangna and subjected
    to torture including being burned with cigarettes and a  heated  spoon.
    The men referred to [S] by name and told him that the  authorities  had
    raided his (the appellant's) room and taken all his (LTTE) documents.

 8. The appellant remained  under  CID  control  for  a  week.  His  father
    arranged his release using a Muslim contact who put him in  touch  with
    an MP who was able to locate him.  His release was on  the  basis  that
    the CID insisted he left the country so he could not cause problems for
    them, and in the meantime he had to move to and be kept at  an  address
    that they controlled.  In June 2012, because his wounds were  infected,
    two CID officers took him to hospital for treatment where  he  remained
    for two days.  His parents came to see him.  His father was allowed  in
    to see him because he had paid a bribe, but his mother  was  not.   His
    father  took  pictures  of  the  appellant,  which  the  appellant  had
    subsequently produced in evidence.

 9. In August 2012, the appellant applied for a visa with the help  of  the
    CID who took him to a visa building where he met his father and  agent.
    The appellant went through the same procedure in December 2012, leading
    to a successful visa application.  On 23 January 2013 two CID  officers
    told him that his journey to the United Kingdom had been organised.  He
    was taken to the airport where he met an agent, who was directed to use
    a specific check-in desk.  The appellant was thus able to exit Colombo.
     His older sister picked him up from Heathrow  Airport  on  24  January
    2013, and on 4 April 2013 he claimed asylum.

10. Since being in the UK, the appellant had been in touch with his  father
    who advised him that the police had attended the family home  requiring
    him (the father) to go to the police station for an investigation about
    the appellant.  His father had contacted his lawyer  who  extended  the
    date for questioning so that the lawyer could attend with his father.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Davidge,  who
    received oral evidence from the appellant and his older sister.

12. Having rehearsed  the  appellant's  claim  at  paragraph  [18]  of  her
    decision, the Judge addressed the sources of evidence relied on by  the
    appellant one by one: the photographs taken of  the  appellant  in  the
    hospital; Dr Lord's scarring report; a letter from the appellant's  GP;
    a number of letters from a Sri Lankan attorney written between  19  May
    2015 and 2 October 2015; a letter from the appellant's father;  and  an
    affidavit from the appellant's younger sister, who said she had arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2008 as an unaccompanied asylum seeking minor;
    a witness statement from the appellant's older brother; and  a  witness
    statement and oral evidence from the appellant's older sister.

13. The Judge then turned to address the evidence given by  the  appellant.
    I set out below verbatim her findings at paragraphs [38] to [46]:

         38.  The Appellant's account is undermined in  several  significant
             aspects.  There is incoherence in  his  description  of  being
             detained in 2012.  In his screening interview he says  he  was
             arrested but not convicted from mid-May 2012, in his interview
             he says he was abducted by the militia TMVP/Karuna and held by
             them for  four  days  before  the  CID  took  control  of  his
             detention,  in  the  screening  interview  he  said  that  his
             identity card was taken by the TMVP/Karuna group whilst in his
             witness statement at paragraph 22 he says that it was  in  the
             second period of his detention when he was with the  CID  that
             "they took my ID document" and that subsequently the CID  told
             him that they had raided his room and taken "all my  documents
             like my account number".  In his oral evidence to me  he  told
             me that his ID documentation had been in his room and  so   in
             that context his account of having gone through  some  "arrest
             process" involving the production of his  ID,  taking  of  his
             fingerprints,  and  signing  a  Singhalese  document   appears
             unreliable.  The Appellant's characterising this as an  arrest
             in his witness statement and explaining his failure to mention
             it previously is  that  he  was  nervous  and  scared  at  his
             interview.  That is an explanation which I find inadequate  in
             the context of an interview in which he was expressly asked to
             clarify whether he had been arrested or not and was clear that
             he had not been arrested it has the hallmarks of  a  statement
             made in an expedient effort to bring  himself  within  a  risk
             category of GJ.

         39.  The Appellant's description  of  his  role  in  the  LTTE  has
             emerged in a piecemeal fashion.  The Appellant complains  that
             he was not asked enough direct questions at his  interview  to
             enable  him  to  provide  the  sort  of  detail  that  he  has
             subsequently added in  response  to  cross-examination.   That
             fails to recognise that he had the full opportunity of setting
             out his case in his witness statement and  explaining  exactly
             what he did.  It did not assist him that it was only at  court
             that he mentioned that not only had he kept a book of all  the
             transactions for the LTTE in which he was involved, along with
             the instructions as to the account numbers that he had to  pay
             money into or  the  details  of  parcels  and  money  that  he
             received and then had to pass  on,  he  asserts  he  had  bank
             receipts, and the LTTE even opened the account for  him.   Mrs
             Williams'  point  to  him  in  cross-examination  that  it  is
             inconceivable that  he  moved  in  2009  taking  all  of  that
             information with him, and then retained it for three years  so
             that it was able to be discovered by the CID.  The Appellant's
             explanation that he simply took all of  his  possessions  with
             him and gave no thought to it is inconsistent with  his  claim
             that his movements when working for the LTTE  were  restricted
             in order to preserve security, and that even when  hostilities
             ceased, he remained effectively in hiding in the property.

         40.  In the Appellant's interview at Colombo for his  student  visa
             he indicated that he had taken A levels and  computer  courses
             in 2008 and that that  was  the  last  time  that  he  studied
             achieving O  and  A  levels  and  some  diploma  courses.   He
             explains a gap in studying between 2008 and the  time  of  the
             student application  in  2012  on  the  basis  of  a  lack  of
             finances, a position improved by remittances from  his  sister
             in Australia who is a nurse.  In the context of his appeal  he
             and his father assert that it was after he moved from the LTTE
             house in 2009 that he studied.

         41.  The Appellant did not seek in his oral evidence to resile from
             the answers set out in the interview notes of  his  attendance
             at the British High Commission in Colombo on 29th August 2012.
              In his appeal the Appellant says that he played virtually  no
             part in his student visa arrangements, having no contact  with
             his father prior to meeting him minutes before  he  went  into
             the embassy when he was handed his passport and  the  relevant
             documentation.  In his  interview  he  describes  attending  a
             seminar at BMICH  and  speaking  to  several  colleges  before
             choosing the one the subject of the student  plans  underlying
             the application.  He explained he had done a  written  English
             exam and was able to speak  in  some  detail.   The  interview
             notes sit uncomfortably with his account to me  the  documents
             were served at court on the day and I ensured that Counsel had
             a copy and I spent time  in  court  in  the  presence  of  the
             representatives reading the document  as  did  Counsel  and  I
             specifically raised the apparent inconsistent evidence between
             that of the Appellant, his father,  the  lawyer  and  the  VAF
             forms with regard to  the  period  following  the  Appellant's
             apparent leaving of the camp.  Ms Bhatt's submission aimed  at
             reconciling those differences was that even whilst  he  worked
             for the LTTE that would not have prevented him from  studying.
             The difficulty is that that is not his case.

         42.  In short,  country  information  whilst  consistent  with  the
             account of pre cessation recruitment, and reveals that in that
             context youth such as the  Appellant  may  have  come  to  the
             attention of the authorities  and  be  detained  and  suffered
             persecutory treatment, that would be pre rather than post  and
             cessation of hostilities.  Even accepting that  the  Appellant
             subsequently became a willing supporter or member of the LTTE,
             to the point that he was happy to  go  to  Colombo  and  moved
             about money at their request, on his own account, his role was
             limited.  There is no suggestion that post-conflict he had any
             involvement in the ongoing  political  struggle  so  that  any
             willingness  he  had  after  recruitment  fell  far  short  of
             political commitment or dedication to post-conflict separatist
             movement so as to be significant in  the  assessment  of  risk
             post conflict.  In that context his  claim  to  have  been  of
             interest to the authorities more than three  years  after  his
             last claimed involvement in March 2009 remains unexplained.

         43.  The Appellant made a late claim  for  asylum  and  that  is  a
             further matter which I  consider  adverse.   He  came  to  the
             United Kingdom he says in fear of his life and  yet  not  only
             failed to claim on arrival, but failed to do so even  when  in
             country having been met by family members.  His family have  a
             significant history of asylum seeking in the United Kingdom to
             the point that I find he knew the process.  His claim that  he
             was too frightened  to  claim  asylum  is  inadequate  in  the
             context of the support available to him and undermining of his
             credibility generally.

         44.  The high point of the evidence is that of the  lawyer  however
             it is not determinative.  Standing back  and  looking  at  the
             evidence in the round I find that the evidence as a  whole  is
             insufficient to establish that there is any real risk that the
             Appellant is on a stop list or a "watch list".  The  Appellant
             is not a Tamil activist  in  the  context  of  LG  and  on  my
             findings  of  fact  his  past  history  is  of  such   limited
             involvement he has not established that there is any real risk
             he  will  be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as
             indicating a present risk.

         45.  From the findings set out above it will  be  apparent  that  I
             have concluded that the Appellant has not  got  a  history  of
             action so as to bring him within Article  1F  of  the  Refugee
             Convention and Article 12(2) of the Qualification Direction.

         46.  In the context of the Appellant's Article  3  claim  based  on
             health I find that the evidence of the GP's letter  falls  far
             short of what is required to meet  the  Article  3  threshold.
             The evidence of the GP falls short of diagnosing the Appellant
             as  having  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  or  of  being  a
             significant risk of suicide.

The Rule 24 Response

14. Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled an extensive Rule 24
    response on 3 December 2015 opposing the appeal.   The  findings  which
    the Judge had made were open to her on the evidence, she  having  heard
    cross-examination and submissions.  He  relied  on  VHR  (unmeritorious
    grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT  367  for  the  proposition  that  appeals
    should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of  forensic  criticisms
    of particular findings of the First-tier Tribunal, whilst ignoring  the
    basic legal tests which the appellant  had  to  meet.   The  judge  had
    considered the core of the appellant's claim and clearly found that  he
    had embellished his evidence in an attempt to bring himself within  the
    current country guidance in GJ where the emphasis was on current/future
    risk.

15. Mr Melvin also relied on Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85 where it was held that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not
    normally set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal where  there
    had been no misdirection of law, the fact-finding process could not  be
    criticised and the  relevant  country  guidance  had  been  taken  into
    account, unless the conclusions the Judge had drawn  from  the  primary
    data were not reasonably open to him or her.   He  submitted  that  the
    challenges amounted to no more than an attempt to reargue  the  appeal,
    and revealed no material error in law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Solanki, who did not  appear  below,  developed  the  arguments
    advanced in the grounds of appeal.  She clarified  that  the  two  main
    error of law challenges were both procedural.  The first was that there
    was procedural unfairness in not allowing  the  appellant's  father  to
    give oral evidence by video link.  The  second,  on  which  she  placed
    greater weight, was a failure by the Judge to recognise and  apply  the
    concession which had been made in the refusal letter about  the  nature
    and scope of the appellant's LTTE activities.  This had led  the  Judge
    to make adverse credibility findings against the appellant  which  were
    procedurally unfair.

17. In reply, Ms Holmes adhered to the position taken by her colleague,  Mr
    Melvin, and she submitted that the two grounds  of  alleged  procedural
    unfairness did not stand up to scrutiny.




Discussion

The first alleged procedural error

18. The substantive hearing of the appeal was originally scheduled to  take
    place on 20 May 2015.  At the beginning of May  2015,  the  appellant's
    solicitors wrote to the Tribunal in Newport  requesting  a  video  link
    facility so as to enable the appellant's father to give  evidence  from
    Sri Lanka by video  link.   On  11  May  2015  the  Tribunal  sent  the
    following notice to both parties:

         Following your fax dated 8 May 2015, we have  placed  this  in  the
         file back in front of the IJ who has said, 'we  do  not  have  this
         facility and are unable to  transfer  to  another  court  for  that
         purpose.   Reps  to  produce  witness  statements  of   person   in
         question'.

19. Both parties were legally represented at the hearing on  20  May  2015.
    Ms Bhatt of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant and she was the
    same Counsel who later appeared at the hearing  before  Judge  Davidge.
    It is apparent from the Record of Proceedings that  Ms  Bhatt  did  not
    make an application for the appeal to be transferred to  another  court
    where a video link facility was available.  She was content to  proceed
    on the basis that the father's evidence would  be  conveyed  through  a
    witness statement.

20. The way the case is put by Ms Solanki is that it was  unfair  of  Judge
    Davidge to make adverse credibility findings about the evidence of  the
    father, based on inconsistencies between his written evidence and,  for
    example, what was said by the lawyer, when the father had been  willing
    to give oral evidence, and had thus been willing to have  his  evidence
    tested in cross-examination.

21. The task of the judge was to make findings on  the  evidence  that  was
    presented to her.  It would have been  entirely  improper  for  her  to
    speculate as to what the father might have said  in  cross-examination.
    Moreover, the mere fact that the father had been willing to  give  oral
    evidence did not give  his  written  evidence  an  elevated  status  or
    engender a presumption that his oral evidence would have been likely to
    dispel the inconsistencies which troubled the Judge.  It was reasonable
    for the Judge to treat the father's evidence with caution as he was not
    (as she held) an independent witness.  His  willingness  to  give  oral
    evidence by video link did not change this fundamental fact.

The second alleged procedural error

22. In  the  refusal  letter,  the  respondent  addressed  the  appellant's
    asserted LTTE membership at paragraphs 12 to 16.  The  respondent  made
    the following concession at paragraph 16:

         Due to the internal and external consistencies, this  part  of  the
         claim - that you were forcibly recruited and worked  for  the  LTTE
         until 2009 - has been accepted.

23. Although not canvassed in the  refusal  letter,  the  respondent  later
    raised in correspondence the question of whether the  appellant  should
    be excluded from refugee protection under Article 1(F) as the appellant
    had stated in his  asylum  interview  that  he  had  become  a  willing
    participant in the LTTE's activities.  One of the  directions  made  by
    the Judge at the aborted hearing of 20 May 2015 was for the  respondent
    to set out her case against the appellant under Article  1F(a)  of  the
    1951 Convention.

24. Ms Bhattt's skeleton argument for  the  hearing  before  Judge  Elvidge
    dealt extensively with the respondent's pleaded case on exclusion.   At
    paragraph 22 she began her submissions on this topic with the following
    introduction:

         If the appellant is found credible (my emphasis), the respondent
         seeks to rely upon Article 1F(a) of the 1951 Convention which
         excludes the appellant from protection.

25. Later, Ms Bhatt submitted:

         He transferred money as per instructions.  He did not know what the
         money was for and eventually the LTTE stopped contacting him and he
         was left to his own devices.  He cannot be considered as  a  policy
         maker and nor can he be said to have 'committed' a crime.

26. Ms Bhatt has made a witness statement for the purposes of the appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal to which she has annexed  her  typed  notes  of  the
    proceedings, excluding any submissions which were made at  the  outset,
    and excluding the closing submissions.  There is however a full  record
    of the appellant's cross-examination.

27. Initially,  the  appellant  indicated  in  cross-examination  that  the
    account into which money was paid was controlled by the LTTE, and  that
    it was not an account in his name, from which he could take out  money.
    The Presenting Officer asked him whether he ever  had  access  to  take
    money out of an account, and he answered no.  Later on, he  was  cross-
    examined as to why he  had  retained  incriminating  documents  despite
    having cut his ties to the LTTE in the summer of 2009.  At this  point,
    the appellant said that he had his own bank account.  He was told  when
    money came into his account and he was  asked  to  transfer  it  or  to
    withdraw it and hand it over to another person.  The Presenting Officer
    put to him that this was inconsistent with what he  had  said  earlier.
    The appellant said he was also maintaining  his  personal  account  and
    money went into it from the LTTE, not regularly, but occasionally.   He
    was asked why the LTTE would allow  him  to  pay  money  into  his  own
    account?  He said he did not know.

28. The exchange continued:

         Q.   It would appear that you are lying about money being paid into
             your account or you  held  the  position  or  authority  which
             allowed you to put money into your own account - which is  it?



         A.   It's not like that.  I had an account that's true.  Money  was
             paid into my account sometimes and I withdrew it  and  put  it
             into another account.  I acted on what I was told.

29. In her subsequent decision, the Judge gave the following self-direction
    at paragraph [11]:

         In the event I found the account credible,  the  issue  I  have  to
         decide is whether as a former member of the LTTE, as the respondent
         argues, the appellant through willing financial management is a co-
         perpetrator, i.e. more than a mere accomplice, who participated  in
         an extremely significant manner and  at  a  leadership  level,  and
         without a defence of duress.

    It will be noted that the Judge's self-direction is in line  with  what
    is contemplated by Ms Bhatt at paragraph 22 of her skeleton argument.

30. Ms Solanki submits that  the  criticisms  made  by  the  Judge  of  the
    appellant's evidence in  paragraph  [39]  are  unfair  and  irrational,
    having regard to the respondent's concession in the refusal letter  and
    the procedural history.  She also submits it was unfair  the  Judge  in
    paragraphs [40] and [41] to criticise the  appellant  for  inconsistent
    information in his Visa Application Form, as Ms Bhatt confirmed in  her
    witness statement that the Judge had not asked  any  questions  of  the
    appellant on this topic.

31. Ms Solanki's submissions do not stand up to scrutiny.   The  respondent
    conceded in the refusal letter that the appellant had  worked  for  the
    LTTE as a  result  of  being  forcibly  recruited  by  the  LTTE.   The
    respondent did not concede the truth of the appellant's account of what
    happened to him after the end of  the  civil  war  in  May  2009.   The
    respondent also did not  concede  that  the  appellant  was  a  willing
    participant in the  LTTE.   Although  the  distinction  between  forced
    recruit and willing participant was not drawn in  the  refusal  letter,
    this distinction was drawn long before the appeal hearing as it was the
    central building block for the respondent's case on exclusion.  Some of
    the answers which the appellant gave in his asylum interview, including
    his claim to have been a willing participant, rendered  him  vulnerable
    to exclusion from refugee protection under Article 1F(a).  This  opened
    up  a  legitimate  line  of  cross-examination   (notwithstanding   the
    concession at paragraph 16 of the refusal letter) on the related topics
    of (a) the appellant's state of mind, (b) his precise status  and  role
    within the LTTE network in Colombo and (c) his state of knowledge as to
    the purpose(s) of the money he was handling.

32. Ms Bhatt recognised that the exclusion issue raised by  the  respondent
    had a bearing on the credibility of the appellant's account of  exactly
    what he did for  the  LTTE,  notwithstanding  the  concession  made  in
    paragraph 16 of the refusal letter.  This is apparent from the  passage
    in her skeleton argument which I have cited above. If the appellant was
    credible in his account of being a willing participant, this provided a
    springboard for the case  that  he  should  be  excluded  from  refugee
    protection.  Conversely, if he was not credible in this aspect  of  his
    claim, and therefore had only been  given  a  role  and  responsibility
    commensurate with someone who had been coerced  into  working  for  the
    LTTE, the exclusion issue fell  away.  The  judge's  self-direction  at
    paragraph [11] reflected the understanding of  the  representatives  on
    both sides.

33. Ms Solanki relied on Kalidas (agreed facts - best practice) [2012] UKUT
    0327 (IAC) in which a panel chaired  by  Vice-President  Mark  Ockelton
    gave inter alia the following guidance:

    (i)  Parties should assist the First-tier Tribunal at  Case  Management
         Review hearings to produce written confirmation  of  issues  agreed
         and concessions made.

     (vii)   Judges look behind factual  concessions  in  only  exceptional
         circumstances.  If the scope of a concession  is  unclear,  or  the
         relevant evidence develops in  such  a  way  that  its  extent  and
         correctness need to be revisited, the Judge must draw that  to  the
         attention  of  the   representatives.    Adjournment   may   become
         necessary.

34. In Kalidas, the Judge's brief  handwritten  note  of  the  CMR  hearing
    included a note that the Home Office accepted that  the  appellant  had
    been threatened by her father.  A different Presenting Officer appeared
    at the substantive hearing of the appeal.  He  conducted  an  extensive
    cross-examination of the appellant, and in his subsequent decision  the
    Judge gave extended reasons  for  finding  that  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant was not credible.  The representative for the  appellant  who
    appeared  at  both  the  CMR  and  the  substantive  hearing  made   no
    intervention during cross-examination because he did not  believe  that
    the questioning went to core credibility, but only to the  geographical
    extent of the threat from the appellant's father and  the  practicality
    of internal relocation.  In his decision, the First-tier Tribunal judge
    recorded that he had mentioned very forcefully during the hearing  that
    he was not bound by the respondent's acceptance of a  purported  letter
    from the appellant's father.  The Upper Tribunal found that nonetheless
    the proceedings were vitiated by procedural unfairness for two reasons.
     Firstly, because there was communication between the appellant and her
    father not only by letter but also by telephone and through her sister,
    who gave evidence at the hearing.  Secondly, while the Judge's  warning
    was  correctly  issued,  it  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  alert   the
    representatives that any prior agreement on fact and credibility was no
    longer effective.

35. The facts of this case are very different.  Firstly, as explored above,
    there was a common understanding that, notwithstanding the  concession,
    there was a credibility issue with respect to the appellant's claim  to
    have been a  willing  participant.  Secondly,  there  is  not  a  stark
    inconsistency between the Judge's findings and the concession  made  in
    the refusal letter; or between the Judge's findings and the  case  that
    was put forward by  Ms  Bhatt  in  her  skeleton  argument  as  to  the
    appellant's low level involvement in the  handling  of  money  for  the
    LTTE.

36. If the Judge had rejected altogether the  appellant's  account  of  his
    work for the LTTE, there would have been arguable unfairness.  But  the
    Judge does not reject the appellant's account.  She simply observes  at
    the beginning of paragraph [39] that his description of his role in the
    LTTE emerged in a piecemeal fashion.   Ms  Solanki  submits  that  this
    observation is unfair, because it is only as a result of the respondent
    raising the exclusion issue  that  the  appellant  was  asked  to  give
    further and better particulars of his role in the LTTE.  But that  does
    not detract from the point that, once the exclusion issue  was  raised,
    it was open to the appellant to set out in a witness statement  exactly
    what he did for the LTTE so as to rebut the charge that  his  role  and
    state of knowledge was such as to render him liable to  exclusion  from
    refugee protection under Article 1F(a).

37. Furthermore, the main adverse credibility point which emerged from  the
    Presenting  Officer's  cross-examination  was  not   related   to   the
    appellant's answers about what he did for the LTTE, but about  what  he
    claimed to have done after the end of the civil war.  It  was  open  to
    the Judge  to  find  it  incredible  that,  when  he  moved  from  LTTE
    accommodation  in  August  2009,  the  appellant  took   all   of   the
    incriminating documents with him, and  then  retained  them  for  three
    years so they were able to be discovered by the CID.

38. It was not incumbent on the  Judge  to  ask  questions  about  apparent
    inconsistencies between what the appellant said in the interview  notes
    of his attendance at the British  High  Commission  in  Colombo  on  29
    August 2012 and what the appellant had said  by  way  of  appeal.   The
    Judge says in paragraph [41] that she specifically raised the  apparent
    inconsistent evidence of the appellant, his father, the lawyer and  the
    VAF forms with regard to the period following the appellant's  apparent
    leaving of the camp.  This is not denied by Ms  Bhatt  in  her  witness
    statement.  She says that she does not  recall  making  the  submission
    which is attributed to her at the end of paragraph [41], but she agrees
    that she did make a submission  which  was  aimed  at  reconciling  the
    differences which troubled the judge.

39. The Judge says she spent some time in court  in  the  presence  of  the
    representatives' reading the interview notes which were served at court
    on the day.  I infer from this that the exchange  between  her  and  Ms
    Bhatt took place before the appellant was called as a  witness,  rather
    than afterwards.  Thus Ms Bhatt had  the  opportunity  to  examine  the
    appellant in-chief on the interview notes, but declined to do so.

40. Accordingly, for the above reasons, I find that the two principal error
    of law challenges are not made out.  These are contained  in  ground  2
    (the  father's  witness  evidence)  and  ground  4   (the   appellant's
    evidence).  Both these  grounds  contain  some  additional  criticisms,
    which I find to be no more than  an  expression  of  disagreement  with
    findings that were reasonably open to the Judge for  the  reasons  that
    she gave.

The evidence of the Sri Lankan lawyer

41. Ground 1 is in essence that it was not  fair,  or  in  accordance  with
    applicable legal principles, for the Judge  to  suggest  that  the  Sri
    Lanka lawyer might not be telling the truth in asserting, for  example,
    that he had managed to obtain the release of the appellant's father  on
    the condition that, if the appellant  returned,  he  would  advise  the
    police accordingly, "to enable them to arrest and deal with him".   The
    Judge characterised this at paragraph [26] as being the high  point  of
    the evidence.

42. At paragraph [17], the Judge said she had in mind the case of  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1014 because she had correspondence  from
    a Sri Lankan attorney.  At paragraph [28], she found that the  evidence
    of the Sri Lankan attorney was not of the character and quality of  the
    documentary evidence provided by the attorneys in the case of PJ.   Not
    only  where  there  are  two  attorneys  in  that   case,   but   court
    documentation was available that was not amenable to the  influence  of
    bribery.   In  contrast,  she  found,  here   there   was   no   formal
    documentation provided in support  of  the  attorney's  correspondence.
    Without such  documentation  the  contents  of  the  letters  from  the
    attorney could not be verified.  The evidence of the lawyer was not  of
    a character to be determinative of the issue as to whether or  not  the
    authorities had any continuing interest in the  appellant  as  per  the
    risk categories set out in the case of  GJ.   Rather  it  was  somewhat
    limited evidence which was bound to be assessed in the  round,  as  per
    Tanveer Ahmed.

43. I consider the Judge has given adequate reasons for  finding  that  the
    evidence of the Sri Lankan lawyer,  although  the  high  point  of  the
    appellant's evidence, was not of sufficient weight to be determinative.

The evidence of the siblings

44. Ground 3 was not developed by Ms Solanki in oral argument, and  rightly
    so, as it is vexatious.  It is simply untrue that  the  Judge  did  not
    give reasons as to why she was attaching little weight to the  evidence
    of the appellant's siblings.  The Judge gave more than adequate reasons
    in paragraph [35], which takes up nearly half a page.

The medical evidence and the photographs

45. Ground 5 is that the Judge appeared to attach no weight to the  medical
    evidence in her overall assessment of  credibility,  citing  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  As previously noted, the Judge addressed the
    medical evidence and the photographs first, before going on to consider
    other pieces of evidence.  So the proposition that there has been  non-
    compliance with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga is
    wholly without merit.  The Judge acknowledged that the photographs were
    capable of corroborating the appellant's  account  of  having  suffered
    injury and receiving treatment in consequence.  The Judge  acknowledged
    Dr Lord's opinion that the scars observed  by  him  in  May  2013  were
    diagnostic of burns.  However, as the Judge also noted, Dr Lord said it
    was impossible to date the  injuries.   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    evidence of  the  appellant's  GP  was  capable  of  corroborating  the
    appellant's account of past ill-treatment, while  also  observing  that
    the issue as to the circumstances and timing of the same  were  matters
    which were dependent on his credibility.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

