
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00870/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2015                  |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rudd (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Flynn  ("the
    judge") in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 17 November 2014.  The
    judge found that the respondent's claim to be at risk on return to Iran
    was not made out.  She allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds, in  the
    light of the respondent's private and family  life  ties  here,  having
    taken into account the period of delay between the  respondent's  claim
    for  asylum,  13  January  2007,  and  the  decision  to  remove   him,
    accompanied by reasons, on 22 January 2014.

2.   In an application for permission to  appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the judge directed herself to section 117B of  the  2002
    Act but failed to apply the statutory provision in the correct  manner.
    Little weight was required to  be  given  to  family  or  private  life
    established by a person at a time when he  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and, similarly, little weight should  be  given  to  private
    life established at a time  when  a  person  is  here  with  precarious
    status.  The judge erred in proceeding to give  little  weight  to  the
    public interest in removal, in the  light  of  the  delay.   The  judge
    failed to explain why she concluded that the respondent had established
    family life with a girlfriend here, with whom  he  does  not  live  and
    further erred in finding that although the  respondent's  circumstances
    were not exceptional (paragraph 78 of the decision) the long delay  was
    exceptional and was an important factor in the balance.  The respondent
    had made a false claim for asylum and was  free  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom at any time.  In  summary,  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    public  interest  in  removal  was  "small"   amounted   to   a   clear
    misdirection.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 23 December  2014.   In  directions
    made by the Principal Resident Judge, the parties were advised that the
    forthcoming hearing  would  be  confined  to  determining  whether  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be  set  aside  for  legal
    error.

Submissions on error of law

4.   Ms Isherwood handed up a copy of the  judgment  of  the  ECHR  in  Y  v
    Russia [2008] ECHR 1585.  The judge found that the respondent was  born
    in 1991, irrespective of the age assessment showing his likely year  of
    birth as 1989.

5.   Reliance was placed upon the grounds.  The respondent was found not  to
    be a credible witness in relation to his  asylum  case  but  the  judge
    allowed the appeal on Article  8  grounds.   Having  been  referred  to
    section 117B of the 2002  Act,  the  judge  did  not  make  appropriate
    findings.  There was a delay in dealing with  the  respondent's  asylum
    claim and the main authority  on  this  remained  EB  (Kosovo).   Delay
    itself was not, however, a fundamental factor although it might lead to
    a person deepening ties here.  The finding at paragraph 71 was  flawed,
    in relation to family life between the respondent and his partner,  LM.
    The couple did not live together although they wished to do so  in  the
    future.  The appellant's private life ties were  established  while  he
    was here precariously and the  ECHR  judgment  in  Y  helped  with  the
    meaning of this phrase, at paragraphs 104 and 106 of  the  judgment  in
    particular.

6.   At paragraphs 76 and 78 of the decision, the judge concluded  that  the
    public interest in removal was small but delay was not  expressly  part
    of section 117B.  The decision contained  no  reasoning  regarding  the
    extent to which the respondent  had  or  had  not  integrated  here  or
    whether he was a burden on the state  and  other  factors.   The  judge
    found that the respondent's  circumstances  were  not  exceptional  and
    there was, overall, nothing  to  show  why  his  case  succeeded.   The
    immigration rules and case law on Article 8 showed  what  was  required
    and here the judge had made an express finding that there  was  nothing
    exceptional in the respondent's circumstances.

7.   Mr Rudd said that the Secretary of State disagreed  with  the  analysis
    but the judge was entitled to make her findings  and  conclude  as  she
    did.  She recorded the evidence given in detail by the  respondent  and
    LM  and  the  conclusions  reached  were  perfectly  open  to  her  and
    adequately reasoned.  There was no merit in the  Secretary  of  State's
    attack on the judge's  approach  to  section  117B.   The  judge  heard
    submissions on this aspect and paragraph 48 of the decision showed that
    she  was  fully  aware  of  the  Secretary  of   State's   case   here.
    Precariousness was relevant  to  the  assessment  of  private  life  in
    particular but, so far as family life was concerned, the respondent had
    never been here unlawfully.  His presence was lawful for so long as  it
    took the Secretary of  State  to  deal  with  his  asylum  claim.   The
    decision showed that the judge was fully aware of the submissions  made
    on the appellant's behalf and she clearly gave  weight  to  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control,  as  was  clear   from
    paragraphs 70, 73 and 77.  The  year  of  the  respondent's  birth  was
    immaterial.  The judge found that he was born in 1991  and  so  was  15
    when he arrived but even if the earlier year of birth  were  taken,  of
    1989, he was still a minor on arrival.  It took the Secretary of  State
    seven years to decide his case.  The judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant came here as a minor, under the direction of  agents  and
    that the delay in dealing with his case formed  part  of  the  balance.
    This was entirely correct.  Paragraphs 74  to  79  kept  the  focus  on
    family life, the determinative factor.

8.   The judge was entitled to find family life  even  though  the  evidence
    did not show cohabitation as such, although the respondent  spent  part
    of each week with his partner.  Cohabitation was not required in  order
    to show family life.  The judge took into account the written  evidence
    and what emerged at the hearing, in cross-examination.  Her summary was
    detailed.  She gave reasons for finding that family  life  existed  and
    accepted the evidence she heard.

9.   The judge agreed with the  Presenting  Officer  that  the  respondent's
    circumstances on their own were not exceptional but she  properly  took
    into account his partner's rights as well, when weighing the  competing
    interests.  Nothing in section 117B identified what  particular  weight
    was to be given to the public interest although the statute  was  clear
    that immigration control is in the public interest.  The balance is for
    the decision maker and the Tribunal.  The respondent was a  minor  when
    he came here and there was then a very long delay in dealing  with  his
    case.  This was clearly a relevant factor.  The only  evidence  bearing
    on section 117B(2) and (3) was what was recorded and found by the judge
    at paragraph 23, regarding support for the  respondent  from  charities
    and his partner.  On the evidence, the judge was entitled to find  that
    the public interest in removal was small  and  she  was  alive  to  the
    weight to be given to immigration control.

10.  In response, Ms Isherwood said that the judge  found  the  respondent's
    asylum claim not credible and dismissed it.  She went on to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds without properly factoring  this  in.   She
    made no findings regarding precisely the extent to which the respondent
    was a burden on the taxpayer or regarding how  he  managed  to  support
    himself if not receiving support from  the  government,  as  an  asylum
    seeker.  The judge did not properly assess whether the respondent could
    return to Iran to get entry clearance, if family life  did  exist  with
    his partner.  She only made a finding that it would not  be  reasonable
    to expect LM to return to Iran with him.  The  reasoning  at  paragraph
    78, for example, was insufficient.

Conclusion on error of law

11.   I  am  grateful  to  the  two  representatives   for   their   careful
    submissions.  I find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains no material error of law and shall stand.  I gave a summary of
    my reasons at the conclusion of the hearing.

12.  As Mr Rudd submitted, the judge made a careful summary of the  evidence
    she heard, in the early parts of her Decision and Reasons.  She set out
    succinctly the basis on which the respondent claimed to be at  risk  on
    return to Iran, his immigration history and the extent of the delay  on
    the Secretary of State's part in dealing with the asylum claim and  the
    evidence regarding family and private life ties claimed to exist  here.
    It is clear that her reasoning builds on findings of fact made  in  the
    light of that evidence.  There is a coherent structure to the decision,
    which is unsurprising given the experience of the judge who  wrote  it.
    Importantly, the judge recorded submissions  made  on  behalf  of  each
    party regarding section 117B of the 2002 Act, setting out factors to be
    taken into account in considering  the  public  interest  question  and
    balancing the competing interests.

13.  The judge was entitled to find that  family  life  exists  between  the
    respondent  and  his  partner,  even  though   the   relationship   was
    established relatively recently.  There  is  no  essential  requirement
    that the parties cohabit.  The evidence showed, in any event, that  the
    respondent spends a  substantial  amount  of  time  with  his  partner,
    spending a few days a week at her residence regularly and keeping  some
    belongings there.  Factors relevant in  assessing  the  weight  of  the
    respondent's case included the circumstances of his partner, LM and the
    judge made a clear finding that the she was a credible witness.  It  is
    also clear  from  the  decision  that  she  accepted  the  respondent's
    evidence regarding his circumstances here, although she disbelieved his
    core claims regarding events in Iran.

14.  The judge heard submissions  on  the  impact  of  delay.   As  the  two
    representatives before me accepted, the leading authority  remains  the
    decision of the House of Lords in  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41.   In
    essence, the House of Lords held in that case that delay is capable  of
    weakening the state's case that a person should be  removed  and  delay
    may also have the consequence that a person's ties here  are  deepened.
    The period of delay in EB (Kosovo) was less, by a considerable  margin,
    than the delay of some seven years in  dealing  with  the  respondent's
    asylum claim here.

15.  Having expressly taken into account section 117B of the 2002  Act,  and
    being acutely aware of the difference in approach required in  relation
    to private life and family life, as paragraph 73 of the decision  shows
    (for example), the judge returned to the key task at paragraphs  74  to
    79.  She did not err in taking into account the long delay and reminded
    herself, properly, of the importance of the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control.  The judge concluded that the public  interest  in
    removal was reduced by the very long delay,  to  the  extent  that  the
    balance was tipped in the respondent's favour  and  the  weight  to  be
    given to his family life with LM outweighed the public interest in this
    case.  It appears from paragraph  73  that  although  she  gave  little
    weight  to  the  private  life  ties,  she  gave  them   some   weight,
    nonetheless.  She did not err in doing so for the reasons given in that
    paragraph of the decision.

16.  Although other judges might have weighed the competing interests so  as
    to reach a different  conclusion,  the  judge  in  the  present  appeal
    carefully took  into  account  the  evidence  before  her,  made  clear
    findings of fact which were open to her, directed herself correctly  in
    relation to the law and gave cogent reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appeal fell to be allowed.  No material error of law has been shown and
    so the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

ANONYMITY

The judge made an anonymity direction.  She did so because of  the  relative
youth  and  vulnerability  of  the  respondent  and  LM.   I  maintain  that
direction, which shall continue in  force  until  varied  or  discharged  by
another court or Tribunal.



Signed        Date 16 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

