

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers:
AA/00231/2015
                                                              AA/00232/2015








                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2016                                |On 15 July 2016              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                 A C and S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I/we make an anonymity order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.  This  direction
      applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Background

   2. The appellants are citizens of Angola who were born respectively on  [
      ] 1994 and [ ] 1992.  They arrived in the United Kingdom on 3  October
      2012 and, two days later, made claims for asylum.  There followed  the
      usual screening interviews and asylum interviews.  Their  applications
      were refused in decisions taken on 15 December 2014  and  16  December
      2014 respectively.

   3.  They  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  in  a   decision
      promulgated  on  5  May  2015,  Judge  A  Cresswell   dismissed   both
      appellants' appeals on all grounds.  They sought permission to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal.  Following an initial refusal by the First-tier
      Tribunal, on 12 August 2015 the Upper Tribunal  (DUTJ  Davey)  granted
      the appellants permission to appeal.

   4. On 2 September 2015, the respondent filed a rule 24 notice seeking  to
      uphold the decision.

   5. Thus, the appeals came before me.

The Claims

   6. The  basis  of  each  appellants'  claims  are  twofold.   First,  the
      appellants claimed that they had been trafficked to the UK.  Secondly,
      the appellants claimed that their father was an activist  in  FLEC-FAC
      in Angola (in fact a General) and the cause  of  Cabinda  independence
      from Angola.  The appellants claimed that they were at risk on  return
      because of their father's political involvement and also because  they
      had been involved, for example, in  distributing  leaflets  supporting
      the Cabinda cause.

The Judge's Decision

   7. Judge Cresswell did not accept  the  appellants'  evidence  and  their
      account.  First, he did not accept that they had  been  trafficked  to
      the UK having previously gone to the Netherlands only to  be  returned
      to  Angola  by  the  Dutch  authorities  in  2010.   He  rejected  the
      appellants'  account  that  it  was  implausible,  if  they  had  been
      trafficked, that they would have been left at the airport in the UK by
      their traffickers and been told to say they  were  minors.   This  was
      implausible, the judge reasoned,  as  it  was  bound  to  attract  the
      attention of the authorities.

   8. Secondly, the judge did not accept the appellants' account that  their
      father was an activist in FLEC-FAC as claimed.  The  judge  identified
      inconsistencies in the appellants' evidence; did not accept  that  the
      evidence of an expert (Dr Tallio) assisted the appellants' claims  and
      rejected the evidence, relied on by the appellants, to establish  that
      their father was politically active as they claimed.  The  judge  also
      drew adverse inferences against the appellants based upon a television
      interview which, in contrast to their claims, did  not  show  them  in
      circumstances of hardship or poverty.



The Appellants' Grounds

   9. Mr Simmonds of Duncan Lewis,  Solicitors  represented  the  appellants
      before me.  They had previously been represented by a  different  firm
      of solicitors.  The grounds of appeal, upon which the appellants  were
      granted permission, were not drafted by the appellants present or past
      legal  representatives.    Although   they   lacked   the   focus   of
      professionally drafted grounds, DUTJ Davey nevertheless  saw  arguable
      merit in the points raised.  However, to  assist  the  Tribunal,  when
      granting permission  DUTJ  Davey  invited  the  appellants  to  submit
      shortened or condensed grounds for the UT hearing.  Mr Simmonds  duly,
      and helpfully, did so in his  skeleton  argument.   In  that  skeleton
      argument he raised eight grounds of appeal.  I would  summarise  those
      grounds as follows.

          1.      The  proceedings  were  unfair  as  the  appellants   had
              difficulty  in  understanding  the  interpreter  when  giving
              evidence.

              Reliance is placed upon the evidence of "ED" (at page  13  of
              the UT bundle) who attended the hearing and was told  by  the
              appellants  after  the  hearing   that   there   were   "many
              difficulties" with the interpreter and that  they  felt  that
              the interpreter was "not interpreting correctly".

          2.     The judge erred in law in finding that the appellants were
              not at risk because of political activity by themselves.

              Reliance is placed upon a leaflet (which they claim  to  have
              distributed in 2007 prior to leaving Angola) contained within
              the UT bundle at page 15 and in translation in an  additional
              bundle at page 3).

              Further, the judge wrongly discounted the  expert's  evidence
              (Dr Tallio) in  support  of  their  claim  based  upon  their
              father's involvement in FLEC-FAC.

          3.     The judge erred in law by wrongly  concluding  that  there
              were inconsistencies in the evidence  of  the  appellants  at
              their screening interviews and subsequently at  their  asylum
              interviews given that they had accepted  that  they  lied  in
              their screening interviews because  they  had  been  told  by
              their traffickers to give the same story as  they  had  given
              previously in the Netherlands.

          4.     The judge erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  supporting
              evidence, which it was said linked the appellants' father  to
              FLEC-FAC, was evidence from a bona  fide  political  opponent
              and, in any event, concerned the appellants' father.

              Reliance is placed  upon  copies  of  the  appellants'  birth
              certificates and a web page that shows that the author of the
              evidence is part of FLEC-FAC (see  pages  25-27  of  the  FtT
              bundle).

          5.     The proceedings were  unfair  as  the  appellants'  (then)
              legal representatives failed to  produce  evidence  in  their
              possession from FLEC-FAC confirming that the  writer  of  the
              supporting evidence was connected to FLEC-FAC.

              In addition, in relation to the appellants' claims based upon
              trafficking, it was unfair that the respondent had failed  to
              put before the Tribunal the "First  Responder  Report"  which
              demonstrated that the appellants were under  the  control  of
              another person on arrival in the UK which was consistent with
              them being trafficked.

          6.     The judge had mistakenly taken the view that there was  an
              inconsistency between the appellants'  evidence  about  their
              living situation in Angola (as one of  considerable  poverty)
              based upon a photograph showing  them  wearing  clothing  and
              jewellery.

              Reliance is placed upon evidence from "LA" a  Dutch  national
              stating that she purchased the items for the appellants  when
              they were in the Netherlands.

          7.     The judge erred in law in concluding that  the  appellants
              had not been trafficked.  In  particular,  his  reasons  that
              their arrival in the UK,  when  they  were  told  to  present
              themselves as minors, was implausible was  not  supported  by
              the Home Office guidance, Safeguarding Children who may  have
              been  trafficked  at  para  2.14  that  in  some  cases  "the
              traffickers insist that the child applies for asylum".

          8.     The judge erred in  law  in  assessing  the  evidence,  in
              particular in taking into account that documents were only in
              copy  form;  relying  on   an   inconsistency   between   the
              appellants' evidence and that of "LA" as to  the  date  their
              father went missing; and in  taking  into  account  that  the
              appellants had "voluntarily returned" from the Netherlands to
              Angola in 2010 when, in fact, they had not  left  voluntarily
              but had been removed.

              Reliance is placed upon evidence from the  Dutch  authorities
              (at pages 94-104 of the UT bundle).

The Respondent's Submissions

  10. In his submissions, Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of  State,
      sought to uphold the judge's decision.

  11. At the outset, he accepted (in ground 3) that in para 21(xxv)  of  his
      determination the judge had wrongly identified an inconsistency in the
      evidence of the appellants in both  their  asylum  interviews,  namely
      that as part of their account they had, at one point,  been  collected
      from their school by their father's driver.  Mr Richards accepted that
      there were no inconsistencies in their asylum interviews on this point
      when, during the course of the submissions, the asylum interviews were
      subject to close analysis.  Nevertheless, he submitted that that error
      was not sufficient to overturn what was a well-reasoned  determination
      with defensible findings.

  12. First, Mr Richards submitted that the appellants had confirmed  during
      the hearing that they understood the interpreter (see para  2  of  the
      determination).   He  submitted  that  the  appellants  were   legally
      represented by Counsel and there was no record in  the  determination,
      nor was it suggested now, that Counsel had  intervened  because  there
      were difficulties with the interpretation.

  13. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the bulk of the grounds were,  in
      fact, no more than an attempt to assert errors of law  which  were  no
      more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  He submitted that
      the new evidence relied upon could and should not be admitted applying
      the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489 as it  could  have
      been obtained previously and  therefore  did  not  satisfy  the  first
      requirement in Ladd v Marshall that the new evidence could  not  "with
      reasonable diligence" have been obtained for use at the  hearing.   He
      reminded me that the appellants were professionally represented.

  14. Thirdly,  as  regards  the  "First  Responders  Report"  held  by  the
      Secretary of State, Mr Richards submitted that there was no unfairness
      in not producing this for the Judge as, subsequent to  this  document,
      there had  been  an  adverse  "reasonable  grounds"  decision  on  the
      trafficking issue.  The "First Responders Report" was,  therefore,  of
      little relevance.  The fact  that  there  was  now  a  reconsideration
      pending of that "reasonable  grounds"  decision  did  not  affect  the
      legality of the judge's findings and decision.

  15. Fourthly, Mr Richards accepted that the first appellant  had,  in  her
      evidence, given evidence about her appearance  in  the  photograph  in
      Angola which  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  in  doubting  her
      credibility.  She had said that the clothes and jewellery were  bought
      for her in the Netherlands and that her sister  helped  her  with  her
      appearance.  Nevertheless, Mr Richards submitted that this was  not  a
      material error.

  16.  Finally,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  in  reaching   his   adverse
      credibility finding, the judge was entitled to take into account  that
      documents were photocopies and he had given detailed reasons  in  para
      21(xviii)-(xxiv) for giving "little weight" to Dr Tallio's report.

  17. Mr Richards submitted that the  judge's  findings  and  decision  were
      legally sustainable.

Discussion

  18. As will be clear from the above, there are  a  wide  range  of  points
      raised by  the  appellants  challenging  the  judge's  decision.   The
      judge's decision is a detailed one with his reasoning running to  over
      30 paragraphs (see paras 21(i)-(xxxi)).  Although I do not accept  all
      of the grounds put forward by Mr Simmonds are made out, I do accept  a
      number of the grounds are made out and amount to  material  errors  of
      law when taken into account cumulatively.

  19. Before I turn to the submissions which I accept, I begin however  with
      Mr Simmonds first ground, namely  that  the  proceedings  were  unfair
      because the appellants could not  understand  the  interpreter.   That
      ground is not, in my judgment, made out.

  20. First, the judge himself noted that there was no difficulty  with  the
      appellants and interpreter understanding one  another  (see  para  2).
      Secondly, as Mr Richards pointed out in his  submissions,  during  the
      course of the hearing no objection was made by the appellants' Counsel
      nor was there any suggestion from the appellants themselves that there
      were difficulties.  Thirdly, there is  no  direct  evidence  from  the
      appellants, in the form of witness statements, addressing this  issue.
      The only evidence is  from  ED  who  reports  what  was  said  by  the
      appellants to  her  after  the  hearing.   The  only  matter  reported
      directly by her in that letter (at page 13 of the UT bundle)  is  that
      the first appellant answered some of the questions in English and  was
      told by the judge to use the interpreter.  That  is  not  an  uncommon
      practice giving the individual the opportunity to use  an  interpreter
      or give evidence in  English.   Switching  in  and  out  of  using  an
      interpreter and English can cause confusion at a hearing and  leave  a
      judge unsure whether, in the  absence  of  interpreted  questions  and
      answers, the individual has understood what is being  asked  of  them.
      Nothing more can, in my judgment, be read into what is reported by  ED
      in her letter.  Fourthly and most importantly, Mr Simmonds was  unable
      to point to any aspect of either appellant's evidence  which  was  not
      correct or in some way affected by a failure in the interpretation and
      which the judge took into account adversely to the  appellants.   Even
      if,  therefore,  there  were  difficulty  for  the  appellant  in  the
      interpretation as claimed it had no impact upon the  fairness  of  the
      proceedings or otherwise so as to amount to an error of law.

  21. I have begun with that ground, namely ground 1,  even  though  I  have
      rejected it because it raised a challenge to a fundamental aspect of a
      hearing, namely its fairness.  It is right, therefore, that despite my
      conclusion that the judge's decision cannot stand that  I  make  clear
      that this ground forms no basis for my conclusion and decision.

  22. I turn, then, to the other grounds relied upon by Mr Simmonds.

  23. Central to each of the appellants' claims was that their father was an
      activist in FLEC-FAC (a General) and as a result of that they were  at
      risk from the Angolan authorities.  The judge did not accept that  the
      appellants' father was such an individual as they claimed.

  24. In support of their claim, the appellants relied upon a letter from  a
      Mr "N" who attested that  their  father:  "is  one  of  our  activists
      working in the field  in  Cabinda  ...  and  is  currently  under  our
      protection in Mayombe Forest."

  25. Before the judge, Mr Nelson gave evidence about Mr  "N".   Mr  Nelson,
      together with his wife, were supporting and assisting  the  appellants
      in the UK.  At para 21(x) the judge summarised Mr Nelson's evidence as
      follows:

         "(x)     Mr Nelson told me that he had searched  the  Internet  for
               exiled Cabindans connected with FLEC-FAC and the name  of  Mr
               "N" had come up and a telephone number had  been  found.   He
               said that the  first  appellant  had  spoken  to  Mr  "N"  by
               telephone in Portuguese and she told him that he had told her
               that he knew of her father.  Mr Nelson told me that a  French
               friend of his from Bridgend had also spoken to Mr "N" and she
               confirmed to Mr Nelson what the first appellant had  said  to
               Mr Nelson, i.e. that he  said  he  knew  of  the  Appellant's
               father.  Mr "N" had told the French  friend,  Anne,  that  he
               would speak to the Directorate of the Cabindan Government  in
               exile and this subsequently led to the letter from Mr "N"."

  26. At para 21(xii) the judge examined the  evidence  and  concluded  that
      there was "no evidence" that Mr "N" was a representative of  "Cabinda"
      by which the judge meant FLEC-FAC as follows:

         "(xii)   I do have concerns about whether the information about the
               claimed father of  the  Appellants  actually  comes  from  an
               official source, note that there is no evidence that the  man
               referred  to  by  Mr  [N]  is  actually  the  father  of  the
               Appellants and note also my concern that Mr [N] would be able
               to provide the statement about Mr Candido that is provided in
               the affidavit.  I note that all of  the  documents  are  copy
               documents only.  Whilst there was a copy of a  passport  page
               of Mr [N], his name was spelt Mr [N2] whereas the name signed
               to on the attestation was spent Mr [N].  An earlier  part  of
               the attestation spells the name as Mr [N2].  It  would  be  a
               most unusual occurrence for a  person  to  misspell  his  own
               name, I find.  I am also provided  with  2  web  pages  which
               refer to Mr [N] on one and Mr [N2] on the other.   There  are
               no original documents from FLEC-FAC and I can see no evidence
               that Mr [N] or Mr [N2] is actually a bona fide representative
               of Cabinda.  Nor does it seem plausible  that  Mr  [N]  could
               locate the father of the Appellants and  yet  the  Appellants
               seemingly be unable even to this date  to  have  any  contact
               with their father."

  27. I have used "N1" and "N2" to reflect two  different  spellings  whilst
      maintaining anonymity.

  28. Mr Simmonds made two submissions in relation to this.

  29. First, (within ground 4) he submitted that there was evidence  linking
      Mr N to FLEC-FAC.  That was contained in the web pages copied at pages
      25 and 26 of the First-tier Tribunal bundle.   At  pages  26  and  27,
      there is a set of minutes of a meeting of  FLEC-FAC  in  Paris  on  27
      September 2014 referring to Mr N as a "press spokesman".  At para  27,
      the website refers to Mr N (albeit with a slightly different spelling)
      but clearly capable of being understood as being the same  man  as  an
      individual who "headed the  delegation"  received  by  the  Portuguese
      President in May 2003.  A photocopy of Mr N's passport is at page  25.



  30. In para 21(xii), the judge has,  in  my  view,  failed  to  take  into
      account the evidence before  him  that  links  Mr  N  to  FLEC-FAC  in
      disregarding his evidence that the appellants' father  is  a  FLEC-FAC
      activist.

  31. As part of his submission, Mr Simmonds pointed  to  the  photocopy  of
      birth certificates and their translations at pages 29-30 of the First-
      tier Tribunal bundle which, he submitted,  linked  the  appellants  to
      their claimed father.  In  truth,  these  documents  are  very  poorly
      photocopied and very  difficult  to  read.   Nevertheless,  there  was
      evidence from the appellants themselves and some  supporting  evidence
      from "LA" (at pages 31-35 of the FtT bundle)  which  were  capable  of
      linking the appellants to the man referred to by Mr N.

  32. Secondly, (within ground 5) Mr Simmonds relied upon evidence that,  he
      submitted, linked Mr N to the FLEC-FAC which had been submitted by the
      appellants to their previous legal  representatives  but  which  their
      legal representatives had not placed before the judge.   The  evidence
      in translation is at page 6 of an additional bundle submitted for  the
      UT hearing.  It is dated 23 December 2013 and is from Anzita Henriques
      Tiago, President of FLEC-FAC which refers to Mr N as  an  "Advisor  to
      the President of the FLEC-FAC".  Mr Simmonds drew my attention  to  an
      email (at pages 76-77 of  the  UT  bundle)  from  Mrs  Nelson  to  the
      appellants' previous legal representatives which,  in  addition  to  a
      number of  other  documents,  attached  this  document.   Mr  Simmonds
      pointed out that the appellants had made a complaint to their previous
      legal representative concerning the failure to submit this document to
      the judge in support of their claim.  He  drew  my  attention  to  the
      complaint at page 73 of the UT bundle.  As I understood him, there  is
      as yet no response to that.

  33. Mr Simmonds submitted that, albeit through no fault of  his  own,  the
      judge's finding was flawed.   This  evidence  was  now  admissible  to
      demonstrate that the proceedings were unfair.   Mr  Simmonds  accepted
      that the appellants could not fully comply with the  Ladd  v  Marshall
      principles  as  this  was  a  document  which  was  available  to  the
      appellants at the day of  the  hearing.   It  was  not,  therefore,  a
      document which could not be obtained by using  "reasonable  diligence"
      at the date of the hearing.  However, Mr Simmonds submitted  that  the
      proceedings  were  nevertheless  unfair  and   he   relied   upon   MM
      (unfairness; E &  R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  (IAC).   He  further
      submitted that the Tribunal should not "visit upon" the appellants the
      fault of their former legal representatives.  He relied upon the  case
      of FP (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 13.

  34. In  my  judgment,  the  evidence  from  the  President,  Mr  Tiago  is
      admissible in order to establish that the  judge,  albeit  through  no
      fault of his own, made a material error of fact amounting to an  error
      of law.  The Ladd v Marshall principles, allowing for the admission of
      material in an appellate hearing, require:

          (1)    The new evidence could not with  reasonable  diligence  to
              have been obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);

          (2)    The new evidence must be such that,  if  given,  it  would
              probably have an important influence on  the  result  of  the
              case (though it need not be decisive);

          (3)    The new evidence was apparently credible  though  it  need
              not be incontrovertible.

  35. That position was affirmed in public law  case  in  R  (Iran)  v  SSHD
      [2005] EWCA Civ 982, especially at [31]-[33].  The principles are  not
      an  inevitable   'straight-jacket'.    Departure   from   the   stated
      "principles"  for  admissibility  may  be  justified  in   exceptional
      circumstances in the interest of justice (see E&R at [91] and  R(Iran)
      v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 98. In admitting the evidence, the  "fault"  of
      the appellants' legal representative is relevant  in  determining  its
      admissibility (see FP (Iran)).

  36. Likewise, the principle that a mistake of fact may amount to an  error
      of law was recognised in E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49 especially at
      [63]-[66].  The requirements are that:

          (1)    There must be a mistake as to an existing fact,  including
              a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a  particular
              matter;

          (2)    The fact or evidence must have been  established,  in  the
              sense that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable;

          (3)    The  appellant  (or  his  advisors)  must  not  have  been
              responsible for the mistake;

          (4)    The mistake must have played a material  (not  necessarily
              decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning.

  37. The principles are helpfully drawn together and adopted by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in MM - to which I was referred by Mr  Simmonds  -  at  [14]-
      [23].

  38. Here, it is clear from the material that the appellants  provided  the
      relevant documentation to their  former  legal  representatives.   The
      former legal representatives did not  put  that  material  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The material was clearly relevant  to  his
      assessment  of  the  appellants'  claim  and,  in  particular,   their
      credibility.  There was no fault on their part and they  have  made  a
      complaint to the solicitors about their conduct.

  39. Applying the approach in MM, drawing together the earlier case law,  I
      accept that the 'new' evidence is admissible.  The error is as to  the
      established fact, in my judgment, that there was no  evidence  linking
      Mr N to FLEC-FAC.  That is a verifiable fact.   I  do  not  understand
      Carnwath  LJ  to   exclude   from   consideration   fault   by   legal
      representatives.    Each  case  must  turn  upon  its  own  particular
      circumstances.  Here, the appellants, in the words of Carnwath LJ in E
      & R at [63] "could not fairly be  held  responsible  for  the  error".
      That is, in my judgment, significant.  The error was material  to  the
      Judge's determination of the appellants' credibility and their claims.
       There was a mistake of fact, amounting to  an  error  of  law,  as  a
      result of the failure to put before the Judge the  documents  held  by
      the appellants' former legal representatives.  The  proceedings  were,
      as a result, unfair.

  40. As a consequence, I am satisfied that Mr Simmonds has  made  good  the
      substance of ground 4 and ground 5 of his skeleton argument.

  41. In addition, Mr Richards accepted the substance  of  ground  3.   This
      arises out of the judge's reasoning  in  para  21(xxv)  which  was  as
      follows:

         "(xxv)   The Appellants now say, effectively, that they  told  lies
               at the screening interview because they  were  instructed  by
               their traffickers to repeat the story they had told the Dutch
               authorities and that, thereafter, they told the truth.  There
               are,  however,   inconsistencies   not   resolved   by   that
               explanation.  For instance, the [first appellant] said at the
               screening interview that a priest had come to her school  and
               told her that a brother and male cousin had been  killed  and
               named her older sister as being  alive,  but  at  her  asylum
               interview said that her older sister had been  killed.   Thus
               there was not simply a case of alteration  of  dates  in  the
               retelling  of  the  story  told  to  the  Dutch  authorities.
               Similarly, the [second appellant] had said at  the  screening
               interview that her eldest brother had been  killed  and  that
               her older sister was on the run too, whereas  at  the  asylum
               interview she said that her older  sister  had  been  killed.
               During her asylum interview, she had said  that  it  was  her
               father's driver, not the priest, who had come to the  school,
               which presents a  difference  in  the  accounts  of  the  two
               women."

  42. The appellants accepted that in their screening interview they had not
      told a truthful account.  Their explanation was that their traffickers
      told them  to  tell  the  same  story  as  they  had  told  the  Dutch
      authorities earlier.  In their asylum interview,  however,  they  told
      the  truth.   In  para  21(xv)  the  judge  states  that   there   are
      "inconsistencies not resolved by that explanation".   The  judge  then
      goes on to give  as  the  example  of  this  differences  between  the
      accounts of the first and  second  appellant  given  in  their  asylum
      interview as to who it was collected them in a car from their school -
      inconsistently one saying it was their father's driver and  the  other
      saying it was a priest.

  43. Mr Richards accepted that that was not an inconsistency that could  be
      identified in reading their respective interview records.  He accepted
      that both had said that it was their father's driver who had collected
      them and that the priest was  involved  thereafter  in  finding  them.
      Given the concession, I need not set out their answers in their asylum
      interviews which are as Mr Richards accepted (see Q100 (A1) and Qs  10
      and 51 (A2)).  As a consequence, there was no inconsistency  in  their
      accounts although there was, of course, an inconsistency between  what
      they said in their  screening  interviews  (which  they  accepted  was
      false) and what they said consistently with each other in their asylum
      interviews.  That inconsistency could be taken into account  but  only
      if the judge did not accept their explanation as to why they had  said
      what they had said in their screening interview.  That was, of course,
      not part of his reasoning in para 21(xxv) which parks the  explanation
      and then goes on to say that nevertheless  there  are  inconsistencies
      between what they say in their asylum interviews.  That  reasoning  is
      flawed and taken with the other matters I identify contributes to  the
      cumulative materiality of the errors which I accept.

  44. The errors I have so far identified  relate  either  directly  to  the
      appellants' account and their claimed risk on return because of  their
      father  or  relates  to  their  general  credibility.   There  are  in
      addition, in my judgment, two difficulties with the judge's  reasoning
      in relation to their trafficking claim.

  45. First (as raised in ground 6), at para 21(xiii)  the  judge  commented
      upon and took into account what he perceived to  be  an  inconsistency
      between their claim to  have  lived  in  poverty  in  Angola  and  the
      photographs he had seen, in particular of the first appellant, wearing
      jewellery and clothing inconsistent with that.  Mr  Richards  accepted
      that the first appellant had said in her evidence that  these  clothes
      and jewellery were bought from her in the  Netherlands  and  that  the
      sister helped  with  her  appearance.   This  raised  evidence  of  an
      explanation contrary to the implication that he drew.  The judge  made
      no reference to that evidence in reaching his view in  para  21(xiii).
      That, in itself, was an error.  In addition,  there  is  now  evidence
      from "LA" (at pages 78 and 79 of the UT bundle) that  she  bought  the
      first appellant the items.  Mr Simmonds submitted that  this  evidence
      was admissible under Ladd v Marshall principles as it was not a matter
      that it was known was relevant to the judge's decision at the hearing.
       That may not be wholly correct given that it was at least  raised  in
      cross-examination with the first appellant.  However,  its  importance
      may well not have been understood  until  the  judge's  reasoning  was
      available.  I bear in mind the importance of at least some flexibility
      in applying the Ladd v Marshall principles in  public  law  cases,  in
      particular  those  involving  asylum  claims.   In  my  judgment,  the
      evidence is both admissible and establishes a mistake of fact  (as  to
      relevant evidence) amounting to an error of law by the judge.

  46. Secondly (as raised in ground 7), in assessing the credibility of  the
      appellants' claim to have been trafficked at para 21(xvii)  the  judge
      stated as follows:

         "(xvii)  The account of trafficking is not plausible in a number of
               respects.  The account given  suggests  that  the  Appellants
               were brought to the UK by a trafficker and then left  at  the
               airport, which would  suggest  a  wasted  investment  by  the
               traffickers.  Also, the Appellants say that they lied at  the
               screening interview because they had been told to  do  so  by
               the traffickers and that they had been told to say they  were
               minors.  I find it  very  unlikely  indeed  that  traffickers
               would advise two young women whom they were leaving  to  pass
               through the airport on  their  own  to  say  that  they  were
               minors, when this would be bound to attract the attention  of
               the authorities."

  47. Mr Simmonds submitted that the Home Office's guidance,  in  particular
      at para 2.14 on trafficking children was relevant in that it said:

         "Some groups of children are instructed  by  their  traffickers  to
         avoid contact with authorities.  In  other  cases  the  traffickers
         insist that the child applies for asylum as this gives the child  a
         legitimate  right  of  temporary  leave  to  remain  in  the   UK."
         (Emphasis added)

  48. In my judgment, this material was relevant to the issue of whether the
      appellants' accounts of being trafficked were  "plausible".   Although
      this was a public document, the respondent should have produced it  in
      order to assist the judge (see AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ
      12 at [28]).  It is an aspect of the "shared interest" in asylum cases
      of decisions being taken on  the  best  information  and  achieving  a
      correct result (see E & R at [64] and [66]).  Applying Ladd v Marshall
      principles, I accept that the material is admissible.  The first  Ladd
      v Marshall principle must be applied with an element of flexibility in
      cases of this nature.  It appears that the issue  of  plausibility  of
      the appellants' accounts may only have  been  raised  in  the  judge's
      determination and, therefore, the  need  for  this  evidence  was  not
      obvious.  The evidence was clearly relevant  and  credible  given  its
      source.  It was material to the Judge's determination  of  credibility
      and to his actual reasoning in para 21(xvii).

  49. For these reasons, I am satisfied that Mr Simmonds, on behalf  of  the
      appellants, has made good the substance of grounds 3, 4, 5, 6  and  7.
      Although the judge's reasons are detailed, I am not persuaded that had
      the errors not been made the judge would necessarily have reached  the
      same findings and conclusion on the appellants' claims, in  particular
      the credibility of their accounts.

  50. I have not found it necessary to consider grounds 2 and 8  although  I
      would remark, in relation to ground 2 that the FLEC pamphlet  produced
      before me makes no mention of the appellants and is not, on its  face,
      directly linked to  the  appellants  and  I  have  considerable  doubt
      whether applying Ladd v Marshall and E & R this new evidence, even  if
      admissible, demonstrated any error of law based upon a mistake of fact
      by the judge.  Likewise, I have not dealt with Mr Simmonds' submission
      that the judge's reasoning that led him to give "little weight" to the
      expert's report  at  para  21(xviii)-(xxiv)  was  inadequate  in  law.
      Suffice it to say that on rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it
      will be for the judge at that hearing to consider this (and any other)
      experts reports in the context of all the evidence relied upon by  the
      appellants at that hearing.  Given my view on the materiality  of  the
      errors in the grounds I have dealt with  above,  I  need  say  nothing
      about ground 8.

Decision

  51. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  each  of  the
      appellants' appeals involved the making of a material error of law.

  52. The judge's findings and decision cannot stand and are set aside.

  53. Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding, and applying para 7.2
      of the Senior President's Practice Statements the proper  disposal  of
      these appeals is to remit them to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de
      novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Cresswell.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:15 July 2016
