
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00638/2016
                                                               AA/11761/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 20th January 2017                     |on 7th February 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               yan qing chen &
                                KA GEEK CHUA
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellants:    Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant is a citizen of China and the second is  a  citizen
    of Malaysia.  They have  two  children,  both  born  in  the  UK.   The
    respondent refused their  applications  on  asylum  and  on  all  other
    grounds.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley dismissed their appeals  by
    determination promulgated on 23rd September 2016.

 2. Permission was granted to appeal to the UT on a restricted basis:

         "... The judge's consideration of Article 8 is confined to two very
         brief paragraphs [63-64] ... the judge has arguably not  given  any
         real consideration to the interests of the two young  children  ...
         and has only peremptorily addressed the  viability  of  the  family
         living together in Malaysia or China ... Permission ... is  granted
         on Article 8 only, in terms of family and private life."

 3. The appellants have not sought to argue any other ground.

 4. Mr Martin submitted as follows.  The judge gave inadequate reasons  for
    the outcome in terms of Article 8.  He failed fully to engage with  the
    facts of the family life of the appellants, and did not assess the best
    interests  of  the  two  children.   There  might  be  difficulties  in
    registering the births or  establishing  the  nationality  of  children
    either in China or in Malaysia.  Background materials before the  judge
    had shown that in China there is a  requirement  to  register  a  birth
    within one month.  Even if the children were able to enter  China,  the
    judge did not engage with the difficulties which might arise there  for
    their Malaysian mother.  There might be  difficulties  in  establishing
    family life in China.  As to Malaysia, there had  been  evidence  of  a
    requirement to register births within fourteen days, and of a  need  to
    produce the identification documents of  both  parents,  if  they  were
    unmarried.  There were also  background  materials  regarding  problems
    that might arise over children in Malaysia born out of wedlock, against
    the background of Sharia law.  There was a  possible  obstacle  to  the
    Chinese  appellant  entering  Malaysia.   It  was  accepted  that   the
    appellants could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  in
    respect of family life, but there had been compelling circumstances  by
    which there might have been success in terms of Article 8, outside  the
    Rules.  The case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Martin accepted the following in course of  submissions.   The  onus
    had  been  on  the  appellants  to  establish  any  difficulties   over
    citizenship and entry into China or  Malaysia.   The  children  had  UK
    birth certificates, naming both parents.  There was  no  evidence  that
    such certificates were not accepted in China and Malaysia.  The  family
    planning rules in China are relatively relaxed in  respect  of  foreign
    born children.  The second appellant is of Chinese ethnic origin.   The
    common language of the appellants is Mandarin.

 6. Mr Matthews pointed out that the first appellant gave his  religion  at
    screening interview as Christian,  and  the  second  as  Buddhist.   He
    submitted further as follows.  The  appellants  effectively  brought  a
    challenge based on inadequacy of reasoning.  It had been  for  them  to
    make their case.  It was plain that the best interests of the two young
    children were to be served by their remaining with  the  parents.   The
    appellants had done very little to establish where the  children  might
    go.  They effectively left  the  matter  obscure,  hoping  to  use  the
    children as pawns to forestall their own removal.  The  appellants  had
    not pointed to  any  evidence  to  establish  the  nationality  of  the
    children; it was at least  likely  that  they  were  entitled  to  both
    Chinese and  Malaysian  nationality.   Evidence  of  the  reception  of
    foreign born children into  China  was  not  entirely  clear,  but  the
    country guidance  did  not  show  that  there  was  likely  to  be  any
    substantial interference with their best interests.  The appellants put
    their family  life  case  on  a  flimsy  basis  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, so it was highly surprising that it was  not  dealt  with  at
    length.  The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law.   Alternatively,
    if error were to be found,  the  respondent  would  seek  to  introduce
    further evidence on nationality  and  on  immigration  into  China  and
    Malaysia, and the UT should reach a further decision in that light.

 7. I put the case back to the end of the list, to enable  the  parties  to
    consider further materials.  Both  representatives  then  made  further
    submissions on what the outcome might be, if the decision  were  to  be
    remade, under reservation of the question  of  whether  there  was  any
    error such as to require remaking.

 8. It is unnecessary to go into the detailed background references, as the
    position  which  emerged  after  final  submissions   was   clear   and
    undisputed.  The children will be accepted by the  Chinese  authorities
    as having Chinese nationality, and  by  the  Malaysian  authorities  as
    having Malaysian nationality.  It is a  practical  certainty  that  the
    Malaysian mother would be permitted to enter and reside in  China,  and
    at least highly likely that the Chinese father would  be  permitted  to
    enter and reside in Malaysia.  The nationality and immigration  law  of
    China and of Malaysia puts no difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  family
    residing as a unit in either country.

 9. Mr Matthews submitted that on that basis there was nothing  to  suggest
    that the best interests of the children would be adversely affected  by
    the removal of their parents, or that either appellant had any right to
    remain in the UK, outwith the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

10. Mr Martin maintained his submission that the decision was  inadequately
    reasoned, and that there was scope for the  appeal  to  be  allowed  in
    terms of Article 8, outwith the Rules.

11. While much is made in  the  grounds  of  the  children  being  seen  in
    Malaysia as children born out of wedlock to a Christian Chinese father,
    and therefore less likely to be accepted, there  are  quite  large  and
    overlapping  minorities  there  of  ethnic  Chinese,  Christians,   and
    Buddhists, and no evidence that Sharia  law  or  any  other  factor  in
    Malaysian society results in serious difficulties for the children of a
    family such as this.

12. The alleged difficulties of registration of birth in China and Malaysia
    are all based on materials relating to children born there.   There  is
    nothing that suggests that  UK  birth  certificates,  identifying  both
    parents, constitute anything less than satisfactory documentation,  for
    any purpose.

13. The limited treatment by the judge of Article 8 issues is not shown  to
    constitute an error of law.  On examination of the materials before and
    the case made to the First-tier Tribunal, the findings by the judge  at
    paragraphs 63 -64 were indeed brief, but they were legally adequate.



14. In the alternative, any error made was immaterial, and if the decision,
    were to be remade, the same outcome would inevitably be reached.   Full
    examination of the materials shows no difficulties in the way  of  this
    family establishing itself either in China or in Malaysia, without  any
    significant detriment to the children's interests.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           6 February 2017
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
