
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00876/2014
     AA/00877/2014
     AA/00878/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 21 December 2015                      |            On 20 January 2016      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a s
                                     d s
                                     d S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Lewis Counsel, instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These three linked appeals by the Appellants are against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Perry  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  26
    February 2015.  The appeals to the  judge  were  in  turn  against  the
    Respondent's decisions, dated 24 January 2014, refusing to  vary  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom and to issue directions  under  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first Appellant is the mother of the second and  third  Appellants,
    who are both minors.  All three are nationals of Sri Lanka.  The  first
    Appellant had made a claim for international  protection.   The  second
    and third Appellants are and always have been dependent upon her claim.





The hearing before the judge

 3. The judge refused to grant  an  adjournment  to  the  Appellants.   The
    application was based upon the production of relevant evidence  by  the
    Presenting Officer on the morning of the  hearing  in  respect  of  the
    first Appellant's husband, a husband whom she had  not  seen  for  some
    years and, on her case, she did not know was  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The new evidence provided by the Presenting Officer indicated
    that he was in fact in this country, and had been for some  time.   The
    judge considered that an adjournment was not required in order for  the
    Appellants to respond to this new evidence.

 4. The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  merits  of  the  claim  for
    international protection.  He concluded that the first Appellant was an
    untruthful witness in respect of core elements of  her  claim  to  have
    been detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities before  coming
    to the United Kingdom.  He rejected medical evidence, in particular  on
    the basis that the first Appellant had not sought  medical  examination
    in respect of possible  sexually  transmitted  diseases  following  her
    claimed rape in detention.  As a  result  of  the  adverse  credibility
    findings the judge proceeded to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.  The
    Appellants sought permission to appeal and permission  was  granted  on
    all grounds by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain on 16 July 2015.
     The Respondent duly provided a Rule 24 Notice dated 21 August 2015.




The Hearing before me

 5. Prior to the hearing before me, Mr Lewis and Mr Clarke had a discussion
    between themselves regarding the alleged errors of law in  the  judge's
    decision.  At the outset of the hearing itself, Mr Clarke very candidly
    indicated that he was  conceding  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    approach to the  medical  evidence,  in  particular  that  he  had  not
    properly considered the medical  evidence  "in  the  round".  In  other
    words, the credibility of the first Appellant  had  been  assessed,  in
    effect, independently of the medical evidence:  that  medical  evidence
    had then been considered in  the  light  of  the  negative  credibility
    findings already made.




Decision on error of law

 6. Mr Clarke was quite right to have made the concession  he  did.  It  is
    abundantly clear to me that at numerous  points  in  his  decision  the
    judge had effectively considered the large amount of  medical  evidence
    from, on the face of it, perfectly suitable sources,  as  mere  add-ons
    rather than an integral part of the evidence in the case.  It was clear
    that credibility was a core issue in the  appeal  and  well-established
    case law tells us that medical evidence must be assessed together  with
    all  other  relevant  evidence  before  reaching  overall  conclusions.
    Unfortunately, this is not what the judge proceeded to do when deciding
    the first Appellant's  appeal.   Specific  examples  of  his  erroneous
    approach can be found  at  paragraphs  83,  84,  85  and  perhaps  most
    strikingly at paragraph 91 of his decision.

 7. Paragraph 83  includes  a  clear  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was
    incredible. This precedes any  consideration  of  the  relevant  expert
    medical evidence before him. Paragraph 84  begins  with  the  statement
    that having regard to the negative credibility finding in the preceding
    paragraph, an assessment of medical reports was then  to  be  conducted
    under the Tanveer Ahmed principles. At paragraph 91, the judge restates
    his rejection of the first Appellant's credibility and then  (and  only
    then) goes on to "approach the medical evidence  from  the  perspective
    that the narrative provided by the appellant  to  the  doctors  is  not
    true." Put in blunt terms, the cart has repeatedly been put before  the
    horse.

 8. It is quite clear that the error in approach to  the  medical  evidence
    went to the issue of credibility, and given that credibility was a core
    aspect of the appeal, the error was material.

 9. I have also considered the challenge to the failure to adjourn.  I have
    real concerns about the judge's decision in respect of his  refusal  to
    grant the adjournment, and although it is not strictly necessary  given
    my conclusions on the first error, I do nonetheless find that  he  also
    erred  in  respect  of  this  matter.   He  appears  to  have  attached
    significant weight to the fact  that  the  appeals  had  in  fact  been
    adjourned on three previous occasions.  However, none of those  related
    to any fault or inaction by the first Appellant, and  the  judge  seems
    not to have taken any account of the fact that there was no explanation
    from the Presenting Officer as to why the significant evidence relating
    to the first Appellant's husband had not been  adduced  sooner,  as  it
    should have been. Simply giving the first Appellant's counsel  time  to
    consider the information on the day of  the  hearing  was  in  my  view
    wholly insufficient and resulted in  unfairness.   I  accept  that  the
    first Appellant was significantly taken aback by the revelation of this
    evidence, and that it is likely that that would have had some impact on
    her emotionally during the day. In any event, the Appellants and  those
    representing her required proper time to  be  able  to  digest  and  to
    respond to the new evidence and giving a couple of hours or so  on  the
    day of the hearing was just not good enough in the circumstances.

10. I therefore conclude that the judge also materially  erred  in  law  in
    respect of his refusal to grant the adjournment.

Disposal

11. Although Mr Clarke appeared to indicate that this matter  could  remain
    in the Upper Tribunal and that  certain  adverse  credibility  findings
    should be preserved, this is clearly one of those cases where  remittal
    to the First-tier Tribunal is the only proper outcome having regard  to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement and my powers under section 12 of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  The  appeals  will  be
    remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  afresh  with  no
    preserved  findings  of  fact  from  the  judge's  decision.   I  issue
    directions  for  the  re-hearing  of  these  remitted  appeals,  below.
    Further, on request from Mr Lewis, these appeals shall be heard at  the
    Taylor House hearing centre and not at Hatton Cross.  I  base  this  on
    the fact that the first Appellant is privately paying and that she will
    be represented at the remitted  hearing  on  an  effectively  pro  bono
    basis. Moving the appeals from Hatton Cross to the  Taylor  House  will
    assist in reducing costs for all involved.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Directions to the parties

    1. The linked appeals  shall  be  reheard  afresh,  with  no  preserved
       findings of fact;


    2. Further evidence may be adduced by either party, in accordance  with
       standard directions issued in due course by the First-tier Tribunal.


Directions to Administration

    1. These appeals shall remain linked;


    2. The remitted appeals shall not be heard be First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Perry;


    3. The appeals shall be reheard at the Taylor House hearing centre on a
       date to be fixed by that centre;

    4. A Tamil interpreter is required at the remitted hearing;

    5. There is a three hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 18 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

