
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00017/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision& Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th March 2018                    |On 2nd May 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 AHMED [A-K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Wilkins instructed by the Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa, promulgated on 6  July  2017,  in
         which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection  and
         human rights grounds.



Background


      2. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Syria born on  [  ]  1998.
         He claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on 30  July  2014  on  this
         basis. The respondent refused the application on 16  December  2015
         against which the appellant appealed.
      3. The Judge noted that the EURODAC fingerprint database  showed  that
         the appellant had been fingerprinted in Italy on 25 May  2014.  The
         Italian authorities have  confirmed  to  the  respondent  that  the
         appellant, in addition to providing the  name  and  date  of  birth
         referred to above, also claimed  he  was  Ahmed  [A],  an  Egyptian
         national, born on 24 May 1997.
      4. Having considered the evidence, the Judge sets out her findings  of
         fact from [27] of the decision under challenge. At [29]  the  Judge
         writes: "Miss Smith confirmed that the only issue in the appeal  is
         the  appellant's  nationality.  In  his  rebuttal  statement,   the
         appellant asserts that he is a Syrian national and that  he  speaks
         the Syrian dialect of Arabic.  He  told  the  Home  Office  in  his
         statement that he had lived in Egypt and  has  never  attempted  to
         hide this fact. While he believes that his dialect  may  have  been
         influenced by the Egyptian dialect, he maintains that he  does  not
         speak the Egyptian dialect and that he is not an Egyptian citizen."
      5. The Judge noted the core of  the  appellant's  case  and  that  the
         respondent relied upon a language analysis from  Verified  AB.  The
         Judge also  notes  the  appellant  relied  upon  a  report  from  a
         Professor Yaron Matras dated 30 July 2016, who is  a  Professor  of
         Linguistics at the University of Manchester. The  Judge  notes  the
         appellant's expert is critical of the evaluation  of  the  Verified
         report on the grounds that an individual's speech is rarely uniform
         and that young people who have left their home region and have come
         into contact with other migrants of different  backgrounds  usually
         have a complex of differentiated repertoire of  speech  forms  that
         shows variation according to style, setting and  interlocutor  and,
         secondly,  on  the  ground  that  Verified  fails  to  provide  any
         justification or explanation for the choice of the Cairo dialect as
         an alternate hypothesis [39].
      6. The Judge's core findings are set out between  [41  -  53]  in  the
         following terms:

             "41. I have taken into account both  the  reports  and  accept
                  that there are limitations and that  the  Verified  report
                  has to be considered in its context. Likewise, I find that
                  there are also limitations  on  the  report  of  Professor
                  Matras as he only  considered  the  38  minutes  telephone
                  recording and did not interview  the  appellant.  Further,
                  while he is of the view that the appellant's  most  likely
                  place of origin is Damascus, he accepts that  individuals'
                  speech is rarely uniform especially that of young people.


             42.  I have given due weight to the two  reports  but  I  also
                  have to assess all the evidence in the round and  make  my
                  own findings.


             43.  I had the benefit of seeing and listening most  carefully
                  to the appellant as he gave his evidence. I have given due
                  regard to the fact that the appellant was aged 16 when  he
                  entered the UK and was aged 17 when he had his substantive
                  asylum  interview.  I  find  that   there   are   material
                  inconsistencies which damages the appellant's  credibility
                  and thus reject the appellants claim that he is  a  Syrian
                  national.


             44.  The appellant and his substantive asylum interview stated
                  that he was born in Al Yarmouk camp and not live  anywhere
                  else in Syria (Qs 10 and 11). He  described  working  with
                  his father in construction and they worked a  lot  in  the
                  camp itself (Qs 26 and 27). He stated that he did not know
                  Umayyad Mosque (Q30). The respondent in the refusal letter
                  states that Umayyad Mosque is one of the  largest,  oldest
                  and holiest mosques of the world found in  the  centre  of
                  Damascus  (paragraph   h).   Following   the   appellant's
                  substantive interview his  previous  representatives  made
                  further submissions in response to  the  interview  record
                  and in relation to Q30 where it states that the  appellant
                  had said that he didn't go to  the  mosque,  he  told  the
                  interpreter that he caught the bus to get to the centre of
                  Damascus and then went there twice. He does not  know  why
                  the answer says that he does not know but he is sure  that
                  he gave this information (D1).


             45.  If the appellant had indeed attended the  Umayyad  Mosque
                  then it is reasonable to conclude that he would have  said
                  so in his  substantive  asylum  interview.  The  appellant
                  claims that he told the interpreter that he caught the bus
                  to get to the centre of Damascus in order  to  attend  the
                  mosque and if he is to be believed  in  his  account  then
                  this would have been recorded  in  his  interview  record.
                  However, it is clearly recorded that he had indicated that
                  he  did  not  know  the  mosque  (Q30).  It  is  not   the
                  appellant's assertion that he  could  not  understand  the
                  interpreter or that the interpreter had misunderstood him.
                  The appellant at the conclusion of his interview confirmed
                  that he understood all the questions put to him  and  that
                  he understood the Home Office interpreter  (B27).  Present
                  at the interview was also his  representative  (B28).  The
                  representative  did  not  state  that  the  appellant  had
                  problems understanding the interpreter (B 28).


             46.  I find that there is also a material inconsistency as  to
                  when the appellant left Syria. In his screening interview,
                  he claims that he left Syria about 5 months ago which  was
                  around February 2014 whereas in his witness  statement  he
                  claims to have left Syria in 2012 but  does  not  remember
                  the date or time (C28). I find it reasonable  to  conclude
                  that if the appellant had indeed left Syria in  2012  then
                  he would have said so during his screening  interview.  In
                  his screening interview,  the  appellant  also  failed  to
                  mention that he lived in Egypt for 2 years instead stating
                  that he travelled  through  two  unknown  countries  after
                  Jordan where he stayed for 2 days and later on  in  France
                  (2.1). In his  screening  interview,  the  appellant  also
                  claimed that his last address  was  Al  Yarmok  Street  in
                  Aleppo and gave the house number as 8 (7.1) and  that  his
                  family remained in Syria (7.7). The appellant I  find  has
                  not given a satisfactory explanation as to  why  he  would
                  not have mentioned the fact that he lived in  Yamouk  camp
                  in Damascus and the fact that his parents and younger were
                  in Egypt.


             47.  The appellant in  cross  examination  was  asked  why  he
                  claimed in his screening  interview  that  he  left  Syria
                  around February 2014 and his response was that he did  not
                  say that. He was also asked why he failed  to  mention  in
                  his screening interview that he lived in Egypt. He replied
                  that since he arrived in the UK he  had  told  people  who
                  interviewed him that he went to Egypt and stayed there for
                  2 years. It was put to the appellant that in his screening
                  interview he claimed that his parents were still in  Syria
                  and to this the appellant replied he said they accompanied
                  him to Egypt and they stayed in Egypt. If the appellant is
                  to be believed then it is reasonable to conclude that such
                  information would have  been  recorded  in  his  screening
                  interview. I find that the appellant has failed to provide
                  a satisfactory explanation.


             48.  I  find  the  appellant  also  failed  to  state  in  his
                  screening interview that he was  in  Italy  where  he  was
                  fingerprinted. He only mentioned  the  fact  that  he  was
                  fingerprinted in the UK (2.13). I find that the  appellant
                  had indeed concealed information and it cannot  simply  be
                  put down to the fact that he was aged 16 at  the  time  of
                  that interview, especially when taking into  consideration
                  the fact that he himself asserts that he was afraid of the
                  interpreter and the  interviewing  officer  as  they  were
                  talking  about  returning  him  to   Italy   because   his
                  fingerprints had been located there.


             49.   I  find  that  the  appellant  had  provided   different
                  identities to the Italian authorities, namely the name  of
                  Ahmed [A] with the date of birth of 24/05/1997 and claimed
                  to be an  Egyptian  national.  I  reject  the  appellant's
                  explanation that the name [A] is similar to his  own  name
                  and that the  Italian  immigration  officials  incorrectly
                  noted his name on their system and that  they  assumed  he
                  was Egyptian.


             50.  I asked the appellant in his oral evidence as to why  the
                  Italian officials would assume that he  was  Egyptian  not
                  Syrian. To this the appellant replied when he  arrived  in
                  Italy the authorities took all Syrian  families  and  left
                  the other people like him i.e. males of  their  own.  They
                  took their names and date  of  births.  The  other  Syrian
                  males who were on their own stayed with them at  the  same
                  place. If this is the case then  I  find  the  appellant's
                  assertion that the Italian authorities simply  assumed  he
                  was Egyptian to be implausible.


             51.  I find the appellant's failure to claim asylum  in  Italy
                  and France damages his credibility under section 8 of  the
                  2004 Act. Given the  appellant's  overall  credibility,  I
                  reject his explanation that the  situation  in  Italy  and
                  France is very bad and he saw lots of people there on  the
                  street [26 of the first statement].


             52.  I find that the appellant was also inconsistent as to why
                  he has not been in  contact  with  his  parents.  In  oral
                  evidence, he stated when he left Egypt he did not  have  a
                  phone with him. When he arrived in Italy he lost  all  his
                  contacts. When asked to explain what  he  meant  lost  all
                  contacts, the appellant replied lost  contact  number  for
                  his family. It was on the phone and when they  arrived  in
                  Italy the phone fell in the sea. It was his phone. When it
                  was put to the appellant that initially he  said  that  he
                  did not have a phone when he  left  Egypt,  the  appellant
                  replied he had a phone but when he  arrived  in  Italy  he
                  lost all the  contacts.  I  asked  the  appellant  why  he
                  initially said that when he left Egypt he did not  have  a
                  phone with him. The appellant replied he did have a  phone
                  with him but when they boarded the sea he lost it  on  the
                  second day. Before they took the boat, they had to walk on
                  the sea and half of his body was  underwater  and  as  his
                  phone  was  in  his  trousers  it  got  wet.   Given   the
                  appellant's overall credibility, I reject his  claim  that
                  he has not been able to contact his family because he lost
                  his contact numbers.


             53.  After consideration of all the evidence in  the  round  I
                  find that the appellant has failed to demonstrate, even to
                  the lower standard of proof, that he  has  a  well-founded
                  fear of persecution for any of the reasons  recognised  by
                  the Refugee Convention. I find that there are  no  grounds
                  which would justify a grant of humanitarian protection and
                  I can find no reason to distinguish the  appellants  claim
                  under articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

      7. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  on  17
         October 2017.  The  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
         following terms:

             3.   The grounds of appeal raised arguable errors  of  law  in
                  the decision of the FtTJ. Whilst the Judge at [33] -  [41]
                  set out salient aspects of the Respondent  and  Appellants
                  respective language analysis reports, she stated  at  [42]
                  that she had given them due  weight,  without  making  any
                  findings as to which report or aspects of the reports  she
                  accepted and which she rejected. Given that the Appellants
                  nationality was the central aspect of the appeal it is  an
                  arguable error for the  Judge  to  failed  to  make  clear
                  findings in respect of  the  two  reports.  Permission  to
                  appeal is granted.

      8. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State in her Rule 24
         response dated 22 November 2017.




Submissions



      9. On behalf of the appellant  it  was  submitted  that  his  language
         expert has concluded that he is definitely from  Syria.  The  Judge
         noted at  [41]  limitations  on  the  material  considered  by  the
         appellant's expert which meant the experts had  the  same  material
         available to them which it was submitted made it easy for the Judge
         to compare the reports.
     10. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that at [43] the Judge's
         findings are not clear in relation to where she was going.  It  was
         accepted the appellant had lived in Egypt for a  while,  which  was
         not disputed, but it was not clear  what  findings  the  Judge  was
         making about the conflicting reports and what weight the Judge gave
         to the reports.
     11. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that what the Judge  did
         was to not make a decision on which report was  reliable  but  just
         put that issue aside preferring instead to consider  other  aspects
         of the evidence.
     12. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that Professor Matas  is
         more experienced than those who undertook the report on behalf  the
         Secretary of State and so his conclusion  should  have  been  given
         greater weight due to his academic qualifications  and  experience.
         It was confirmed neither expert was called to give oral evidence.
     13. On behalf the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Bates  disagreed  with  the
         suggested approach arguing that both were independent  experts  and
         that in relation to language matters the appellant  could  not  say
         that one was more qualified than the other.
     14. Mr Bates submitted both experts set out  their  reasoning  for  the
         conclusions reached and set out the methods and limitations. It was
         submitted  there  was  nothing  to  support  a   claim   that   the
         respondent's report should have been found to be less reliable than
         that of the appellant.
     15. It was submitted the analysis  considered  the  language  issue  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State and came to the conclusion set out
         in document. This is different from the appellant's expert  who  is
         an academic which has its own  limitations.  No  third  report  was
         provided or produced regarding the conflict meaning the  judge  had
         the two reports and the other evidence available to her.  Mr  Bates
         submitted the appellant's submission that the Judge was required to
         state which of the reports was  preferred  is  unrealistic  on  the
         basis language analysis is not an accurate  science  and  that  the
         Judge was required to look at all the other evidence in the round.
     16. Mr Bates submitted having done so the Judge highlights a number  of
         issues that were of concern based upon the evidence provided by the
         appellant,  including  failure  to  demonstrate  knowledge  of   an
         important mosque located in Damascus. Points are also raised in the
         reasons  for  refusal  letter  in  relation  to   the   appellant's
         credibility. The Judge noted discrepancies in the evidence and when
         combining all the available material submitted was entitled to come
         to the conclusion she did in relation to the language issue.
     17.  In  reply,  Miss  Wilkins  submitted   the   appellants   expert's
         methodology was to look at the language analysis  and  then  decide
         how the same was made out by considering dialects. It was submitted
         the Professors methodology was more robust.
     18. The Judge's findings were challenged by reference to the fact  that
         the appellant's representative had written following the  interview
         to correct the error relating to the mosque in Damascus which gives
         rise the question of whether that  issue  was  a  contradiction  or
         misunderstanding. The appellant's position was that the interviewer
         did not properly record the answers that he gave. It was  submitted
         that if those findings remain it will impact upon the assessment of
         other aspects of the case.
     19. On behalf of the appellant Miss Wilkins concluded  her  submissions
         by returning to the point that the language evidence had  not  been
         subject to a finding as to whether it was reliable  or  not,  which
         meant that it could not be considered if the report was reliable or
         not.







Error of law finding


     20. In this appeal the Judge was  faced  with  two  languages  analysis
         reports the first dated 11 August 2015 written by  Verified  AB  on
         behalf of the Secretary State and the report written  by  Professor
         Matras dated 13 July 2016.
     21. Verified state they provide "expert testimony regarding  linguistic
         behaviour, in particular relating  to  an  individual�s  linguistic
         background.  These  services  are  required  by  police,  migration
         authorities and for trials in court.

             "Verified employs a dozen of linguists with special  training,
             such as creole languages,  dialectology,  interview  technique
             and forensic phonetics. Verified has conducted  in  excess  of
             24.000 analyses. The use of the same rigorous and well-defined
             methodology in each case ensures that analysis reports can  be
             assessed and used in a safe and  easy  way,  whether  that  be
             during an investigation or in court.


             Equally indispensable for a clear and reliable result  is  the
             active language competency of a native speaker. To  meet  this
             requirement, Verified maintains a network of around 240 native
             speakers with training in auditory analysis to cover about 100
             combinations of linguistic varieties and regions."

     22. The analysts who prepared the  report  are  identified  as  Analyst
         1616, described as an Arabic (Egyptian Arabic)  speaker  at  mother
         tongue level, who has a degree in Social Work from a university  in
         Egypt and who has worked as a social  worker  in  Egypt  and  as  a
         preschool teacher in Egypt and Sweden and who was born in and  grow
         up in the north of Cairo, Egypt, who has also lived in  Alexandria,
         who last visited Egypt in 2013, and who has maintained contact with
         friends and family  in  Egypt.  The  analyst  was  commissioned  by
         Verified for language analysis in 2014.
     23. Analyst 1586 is said to speak Arabic (Damascus dialect)  at  mother
         tongue level and to have studied English and French in Damascus and
         English in Sweden as well. This  analyst  was  commissioned  for  a
         language analysis in 2013 and was born and raised  in  Damascus  in
         Syria and last travelled to Damascus in 2011 and  has  since  spent
         time in Beirut, Lebanon for five months in 2013, and kept  frequent
         oral and written contact with their home region and socialises with
         fellow countrymen.
     24. Analyst 1608 is said to speak Kurmanji of Kobani variety and Arabic
         at mother tongue level. This analyst studied economy  and  language
         at the University in Aleppo, Syria and has  been  commissioned  for
         language analysis by Verified since 2014. It is said  this  analyst
         was born and raised in Raqqa in north central  Syria  with  parents
         from Kobani. The analyst left Syria in 2010 after which four months
         was spent in Turkey where there are  relatives.   The  analyst  now
         maintains contact with their place of origin several times  a  week
         orally and in writing, keeps up-to-date whilst  in  Sweden  through
         Kurdish  and  Arabic  TV  channels  and  electronic   papers,   and
         socialises with Kurdish and Arabic speakers from different areas of
         Syria.
     25. The above analyst's details appear under the section report  headed
         "Information  regarding  competence".  There  is   also   a   named
         individual who has provided  linguistic  qualifications,  namely  a
         Josefin Nillsson, who holds a Master  of  Arts  in  Psychology  and
         Linguistics from the University of Edinburgh afforded  with  first-
         class honours. The linguist has been  employed  by  Verified  since
         2014 and has undertaken courses  of  particular  relevance  to  the
         context in hand including Psycholinguistics of Language Production,
         Sentence Processing, and Psycholinguistics.
     26. The report also refers to LOID which appears to be a  reference  to
         'Linguistic Origin Identification'. The methodology of this  system
         is to focus on profiling a dialectal background.  It  identifies  a
         number of grammatical, morphological and  phonetic  features  of  a
         person's speech and groups them in  patterns.  These  patterns  are
         supported with references in academic  research  which  makes  LOID
         reports transparent and easily cross-checked. The  patterns  create
         the basis for conclusion about the probability  that  the  person's
         speech can be attributed to the claimed area of origin.
     27. The authors of the  report  records  limitations  in  any  language
         analysis and set out the summary of the results in section 2 in the
         following terms:

             "2 Summary of Results


             2.1  The claimed linguistic community


             The hypothesis  is  that  the  person  belongs  to  an  Arabic
             linguistic community that occurs in Damascus, Syria.


             For a person born and raised in Damascus, Damascus dialect  of
             Central Syrian Arabic  is  expected.  Noted  phonological  and
             morphological features mostly deviate from  Damascus  dialect.
             Noted syntax features are consistent with Damascus Dialect.


             The  language  analysis  clearly  suggests  that  the  results
             obtained most likely  are  inconsistent  with  the  linguistic
             community as stated in the hypothesis (see full assessment  in
             section 3).


             2.2 The alternate linguistic community (if applicable)


             The hypothesis that the person belongs to an Arabic linguistic
             community that occurs in Egypt.


             For Egypt, Cairo Arabic is  primarily  expected,  and  various
             Delta dialects can also occur. Noted phonological features are
             generally consistent with Cairo Arabic. Phonological  elements
             which are instead consistent with certain Delta  dialects  are
             noted. Noted morphological features are most  consistent  with
             Cairo Arabic. Noted syntax features deviate from Cairo Arabic.


             The language  analysis  somewhat  suggests  that  the  results
             obtained  more  likely  than  not  are  consistent  with   the
             linguistic community as stated in  the  hypothesis  (see  full
             assessment in section 4)."

     28. The professional opinion of Verified is clearly that the  appellant
         is a national of Egypt and not of Syria.
     29. Professor Matras has the opportunity of considering the  report  by
         Verified and confirms that his instructions given by the appellants
         representatives have been to review the written and audio  material
         and to provide his  opinion  as  to  whether  he  agrees  with  the
         report's conclusions or not, in regard to the question whether  the
         appellant's linguistic  features  may  indicate  that  he  is  from
         Damascus in Syria.
     30. Professor Matras has served as a professor  at  the  University  of
         Manchester since 2003 prior to  which  he  was  a  Senior  Lecturer
         between 2001-2003, Lecturer between  2000  to  2001,  and  Research
         Fellow between 1995 and 2000 in linguistics at the same university.
         The Professor states he learned the Palestinian variety  of  Arabic
         as an adolescent and  is  considered  a  near  native  speaker  who
         studied  Arabic  Language  and  Literature  at  the  University  of
         Jerusalem together with General Linguistics and the Linguistics  of
         the Middle East at the universities of Tubingen  and  Hamburg.  The
         Professor states he has drawn  on  data  from  Arabic  in  numerous
         comparative publications in academic books  and  journals  and  has
         contributed  written  work  to  various  publications  as  well  as
         supervising  PhD  thesis  and  Masters  Degree  thesis  on   Arabic
         dialectology.
     31. The Professor had before him a 38-minute recording of  a  telephone
         conversation  between  the  appellant   and   the   analysts.   The
         Professor's methodology is set out at section  4.1  of  his  report
         together with the phrenology in a similar manner to that set out by
         Verified.
     32. The Professor's conclusions are set out in section 6 of the  report
         in the following terms:

             "6. Conclusion


             The  VERIFIED  report  is   flawed   from   a   methodological
             perspective, as it arbitrarily juxtaposes the hypothesis  that
             favours the clients own narrative about his  place  of  origin
             with the hypothesis that the client is from Cairo, and because
             it fails  to  take  into  account  that  stylistic  variation,
             notably incorporation structures from formal standard  Arabic,
             is a  natural  occurrence  in  speech,  especially  in  formal
             settings such as the remote interview with a stranger as  part
             of a formal institutional procedure. Some of the statements in
             the VERIFIED report are inconsistent with the  data  found  in
             the recording,  and  some  interpretations  of  the  data  are
             inconsistent with  published  documentation  on  the  relevant
             dialects of Arabic.


             The VERIFIED report also entangles itself  in  contradictions,
             recognising that some features  of  the  client's  speech  are
             consistent with the Arabic dialects of both Damascus and Cairo
             yet at the same time using  them  selectively  to  favour  its
             'alternate' hypothesis of an origin in Cairo (see p 10 of  the
             report). VERIFIED fails to acknowledge  that,  once  stylistic
             variation is taken into  consideration,  or  features  of  the
             client speech,  without  exception,  are  consistent  with  an
             origin in  Damascus  in  Syria,  and  moreover,  that  in  the
             particular combination in which they  occur  in  the  client's
             speech, they are consistent  exclusively  with  an  origin  in
             Syria, as detailed in section 4.6 above. At the same time,  no
             features of the client  speech  are  consistent  -  either  in
             isolation, or  in  the  combination  in  which  they  occur  -
             exclusively or specifically with the Arabic dialect of  Cairo,
             and there is therefore no basis whatsoever for the  suggestion
             that the client's origin might be in Cairo."

     33. The Judge was therefore faced  with  two  conflicting  reports  one
         prepared by two analysts whose experience of relevant  language  is
         based  upon  there  being  mother  tongue  speakers  with  relevant
         training, as well as the other aspects set out above,  supplemented
         by a third person educated to Masters degree  level  with  relevant
         language experience and the report prepared  by  Professor  Matras.
         There is no third report available and  nor  does  it  appear  that
         either of the advocates took any steps to arrange a joint  meeting,
         on the telephone or otherwise,  between  the  report's  authors  to
         enable them to discuss their differing opinions  and  to  see  what
         could be agreed and what remained in dispute between them.  Such  a
         meeting of joint experts is common in both  the  civil  and  family
         jurisdictions and it should not need a specific direction from  the
         Tribunal  for  such  a  step  to  be  taken.  The  failure  of  the
         representatives to  do  more  than  they  did  contributed  to  the
         situation facing the Judge.
     34. The Judge at [42] states that  due  weight  is  given  to  the  two
         reports but that she also was required to assess all  the  evidence
         in the round and  make  her  own  findings.  The  Judge  cannot  be
         criticising for adopting such an approach. In a  report  an  expert
         sets out his or her opinion in relation to the topic in hand and no
         more. Those opinions in this case are in opposition  with  Verified
         not being given the chance to  reply  to  the  criticism  of  their
         methodology or conclusions. In NA v UK  Application  25904/07  2008
         ECHR  616  it  was  said  that   "in   assessing   such   material,
         consideration must be  given  to  its  source,  in  particular  its
         independence, reliability and objectivity. In respect  of  reports,
         the authority and reputation of the author, the seriousness of  the
         investigations by means of which they are compiled, the consistency
         of their conclusions and that corroboration by  other  sources  are
         all relevant considerations."
     35. There have been a number of cases in relation to 'Sprakab  Reports'
         before the Tribunal and the senior courts,  including  the  Supreme
         Court. The most recent guidance is to be found in RM (Sierra Leone)
         2015 EWCA Civ 541 it which was held that RB (Linguistic evidence  -
         Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329 (IAC) set out the approach  to  be
         taken to linguistic analysis reports. Those reports  were  entitled
         to considerable weight but should not be treated as infallible. The
         Upper Tribunal was therefore  entitled  to  take  the  report  into
         account provided it adopted  a  properly  critical  approach.  This
         decision is a  practical  application  of  the  guidance  given  at
         paragraph 51 in the judgment of Lord Carnwath in Secretary of State
         for the Home Department v MN and KY [2014]  UKSC  30.   A  Sprakab-
         based analysis now requires a  proper  nuanced  assessment  of  the
         knowledge demonstrated by the analyst (see Lord Carnwath's  opinion
         at 51(i)), considering what  the  relevant  expertise  is  of  that
         expert.
     36. At [51]  of  the  judgment  in  RM  (Sierra  Leonne)  Lord  Justice
         Underhill, giving the lead judgment, stated:

             "51. Various points are made in that passage. I take first the
                  fact that the analysts have no  formal  qualifications  as
                  linguists (in the  sense  of  linguisticians).  I  do  not
                  believe that it follows from that fact that the Judge  was
                  obliged to hold that it was not established that they had,
                  in  Lord  Eassie's   phrase,   "the   appropriate   expert
                  qualification". I do not understand either Lord Eassie  or
                  Lord Carnwath to  have  been  referring,  in  the  passage
                  relied  on  by  Mr  Chirico,   to   formal   or   academic
                  qualifications but to the question  whether  it  had  been
                  shown that  the  analysts  had  appropriate  expertise  to
                  express an opinion on the particular  issue  in  question.
                  The criticism of the Sprakab report in  MN  was  that  the
                  analysts expressed views about (a) the subjects'  lack  of
                  knowledge of a particular part of Somalia when  there  was
                  no evidence of their own knowledge of that  part  and  (b)
                  identification  of  certain  Somali   dialects   and   the
                  distribution of their speakers when there was no  evidence
                  of their expertise in those questions; and it was to those
                  deficiencies that Lord Eassie was evidently  referring.  I
                  do not understand either this Court in RB or  the  Supreme
                  Court in MN to have held  that  the  evidence  of  Sprakab
                  analysts was worthless  unless  they  had  an  appropriate
                  academic qualification. Indeed if that had been their view
                  they could hardly have given  the  endorsement  that  they
                  did, albeit carefully qualified, to the continued  use  of
                  Sprakab reports in principle, since it is inherent in  the
                  Sprakab method that its analysts rely on  their  practical
                  knowledge and  experience  of  a  language,  supported  by
                  appropriate  training  and  with  the  involvement  of   a
                  professional linguist. The  crucial  question  is  whether
                  they have demonstrated  an  expertise  in  the  particular
                  issue on which they are expressing  an  opinion.  For  the
                  same reason I do not regard it as fatal that "linguist 04"
                  does  not  claim  expertise  in  West   African   English:
                  detection and analysis  of  significant  features  of  the
                  subject's speech is the role of the analysts."

     37. Miss Wilkins submission that more weight should have been given  to
         the report  of  Professor  Matras  as  a  result  of  his  academic
         qualifications  is  not  therefore  the  determinative  issue.   As
         recognised by both the Supreme Court and the Court of  Appeal,  the
         term "appropriate expert qualification", related to the question of
         whether it  had  been  shown  that  the  analysts  had  appropriate
         expertise  to  express  an  opinion  on  the  particular  issue  in
         question.
     38. The report based upon the work of  the  analysts  within  Verified,
         like Sprakab, relies on their practical knowledge and experience of
         the relevant languages supported by appropriate training  with  the
         involvement of a professional  linguist.  The  information  in  the
         report relied upon by the Secretary of State  clearly  demonstrates
         an expertise  in  the  particular  issue  on  which  Verified  were
         expressing an opinion.
     39. It is also the case that, although derived  from  discussions  with
         students  and  academic  sources,   Professor   Matras   has   also
         demonstrated an expertise in the particular issue on  which  he  is
         expressing an opinion.
     40. I find no arguable merit in Miss Wilkins submission that the  Judge
         was required, in isolation, to express as a preliminary  issue  her
         opinion upon which report she preferred. In Pajaziti v SSHD  [2005]
         EWCA Civ 518 the Court of Appeal said that adjudicators were not to
         select a particular  evaluation  of  an  expert's  report,  without
         placing it side by side with other expert evidence (in this case  a
         CIPU report), in order to make a qualitative assessment and  arrive
         at a balanced over  view  of  all  the  material.   At  very  least
         adjudicators had to explain why they preferred one source of expert
         evidence over another. Matters that had to be  taken  into  account
         included the standing of the expert, the sourcing of  the  expert's
         material and the logical cogency of the arguments.
     41. Other relevant case law includes FS (Treatment of Expert  evidence)
         Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT  00004  in  which  the  Tribunal  held  that
         Immigration Judges have a duty to consider all the evidence  before
         them when reaching a decision  in  an  even  handed  and  impartial
         manner. In assessing the evidence before them they must attach such
         weight as they consider appropriate to that  evidence.  It  may  on
         occasions be appropriate to reject the conclusions  reached  by  an
         expert. What is crucial is that a reasoned explanation is given for
         so doing.  In Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  362  the
         Court of Appeal said that where the  evidence  of  one  expert  was
         contradicted by the evidence of another, the judge  might  need  to
         choose between them, but should not, for that reason alone,  reject
         both.   In AK and FH (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1032 the Court
         of Appeal said that the  Tribunal  was  not  bound  to  follow  the
         evidence of two expert witnesses.  In this case  the  Tribunal  had
         taken into account other evidence from UNHCR and concluded  overall
         that although  the  Appellants  might  face  difficulties,  despite
         comments of the experts, they would not be at risk.  Where adequate
         reasoning was provided for that decision it sufficed.
     42. The Judge considered the evidence outside the language reports from
         [43] - [52] of the decision under challenge.  Whilst  Miss  Wilkins
         asserted the Judge was not entitled to conclude there are  material
         inconsistencies in that evidence, particularly in relation  to  the
         matters raised at [44], those  submissions  repeat  matters  relied
         upon at the hearing before the Judge which the Judge did  not  find
         provided  a  proper  explanation  for  what  appeared  to  be   the
         appellant's lack of knowledge  of  the  most  important  mosque  in
         Damascus in his substantive asylum interview.  The  Judge  assessed
         the evidence with the  required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and
         disagreeing with a conclusion reached, especially  when  adequately
         reasoned, does not establish arguable legal error.
     43. Having made relevant findings, the Judge was faced with a situation
         of conflicting language expert reports on the one hand but  with  a
         number of material discrepancies which  undermined  the  appellants
         claim to be a national of Syria, including his having  advised  the
         Italian authorities that he is an Egyptian national. That  evidence
         when considered in the round together with other material  supports
         the conclusion set out at [53] that "after consideration of all the
         evidence in the round I find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
         demonstrate, even to the lower standard of proof,  that  he  has  a
         well-founded fear of persecution for any of the reasons  recognised
         by the Refugee Convention. I find that there are no  grounds  which
         would justify a grant of humanitarian protection and I  could  find
         no reason to distinguish the appellants claim under Articles 2 or 3
         of the ECHR". As the appellants claim was based on a real  risk  of
         ill-treatment of return to Syria the Judge was finding it  had  not
         been established to the required standard that the appellant  is  a
         Syrian national. A specific finding made at [43]  of  the  decision
         under challenge. The Judge was clearly finding  that  she  did  not
         find the conclusion of Professor Matras to be determinative.
     44. Although the  Judge  does  not  expressly  find  the  appellant  is
         Egyptian the clear inferences from the findings and the evidence is
         that that is what the weight of  the  evidence  provided  supported
         although, as Mr Bates submitted,  the  core  finding  is  that  the
         appellant is not Syrian, whatever he may actually be.
     45. As stated above, the Judge was not assisted in the manner in  which
         this case was prepared or  presented.  Notwithstanding,  the  Judge
         undertook the analysis of the evidence required of her. The  weight
         to be given to that evidence was a matter for the Judge. The  Judge
         clearly found  that  the  issues  arising  from  the  evidence  was
         sufficient to enable her to make a clear  and  adequately  reasoned
         finding notwithstanding the dispute between the  language  experts.
         It has not been made out the findings or outside the range of those
         reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence;  including  that
         relating to the failure of the appellant to discharge the burden of
         proof upon him to the applicable lower standard. On that basis  the
         appellant has failed to establish that it  is  appropriate  in  the
         circumstances of this appeal for the Upper  Tribunal  to  interfere
         with this decision.

Decision

     46. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     47. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 2 May 2018

