
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA006492016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st August, 2017                      |On 7th August, 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    SSMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bayoumi of Counsel instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Libya, born on [ ] 1989.  He arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 27th July 2014, with entry clearance as a student
    until 1st April 2015.  On 21st March 2015, the day following the end of
    his course, he made application for asylum.

2.   The appellant's application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on
    22nd April 2016 and the appellant appealed the decision to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  On 12th December 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell
    heard the appellant's appeal.   Counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant told the judge that the appellant did not rely on either  the
    Immigration Rules or on Article 8 and confirmed  that  the  appellant's
    human rights Articles 2 and 3 appeals stood or  fell  with  his  asylum
    claim and that in the light of country guidance he could not,  and  did
    not rely on Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.   The  judge
    applied the then country guidance  case  of  AT  (Article  15(c):  risk
    categories) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) and in the light of that dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

3.   The appellant, dissatisfied with the judge's decision, sought  and  was
    granted leave to appeal on the basis that the judge erred in  accepting
    a concession from the appellant's previous representative that  Article
    15(c) was not being pursued.  At the hearing before me, Mr Mills handed
    me a copy of ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263  (IAC)  and
    told me that in the light of that decision the  appellant's  appeal  is
    being allowed by the  respondent.   This  determination  appears  as  a
    matter of record.

Anonymity order made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and have decided to make no fee  award  of  any
fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted  where  full  award  not
justified) for  the  following  reason.   The  respondent  has  granted  the
appellant recognition as a refugee.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

3rd August, 2017
