
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00522/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 January 2016                       |On 7 March 2016                     |
|Prepared  27 January 2016                |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Mr Dineshkumar Sannathirajan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Islington Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  18  November
    1988, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 11 November 2014
    to refuse asylum under paragraph 336 of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395
    and essentially under the Refugee Convention.

2.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ghani  (the  Judge),
    who on 22 April 2015 allowed the appeal with reference to  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules but dismissed the appeal on the  asylum  basis
    Permission to appeal was given by F-t Judge Bird on 13  May  2015.  The
    Secretary of State made a rule 24 response on 16 June 2015.

3.   The appropriate required notice under Section 104 (4A)  NIAA  2002  and
    Upper Tribunal Procedural Rules 17A(reference  to  be  added)  was  not
    served to notify the Tribunal the Appellant had leave to remain but  he
    wished to appeal his appeal. In an affidavit from Stephane  Gentili,  a
    solicitor, he explained the circumstances in which it came to pass that
    an error arose in terms of  giving  the  appropriate  notice.   In  the
    circumstances Mr Mills very fairly accepted that it was appropriate for
    the matter still to be  considered.   Therefore,  as  the  parties  are
    agreed and I with them, it is necessary for  the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to the asylum claim to be returned to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and to be considered afresh.  The parties are similarly agreed that  no
    findings of  fact  relating  to  the  asylum  claim  should  stand:  In
    particular it is clear that the judge failed to take into  account  all
    the evidence, including a second medical  report,  and  weigh  it  with
    other medical evidence in  the  round  in  the  context  of  the  facts
    claimed.  Thus the assessment the judge made of the risk of  proscribed
    ill-treatment contrary to  the  Refugee  Convention  was  not  properly
    considered.  The Original  Tribunal's  decision  on  the  asylum  issue
    cannot stand.

4.   For these reasons therefore I  am  fully  satisfied  that  this  is  an
    appropriate  case  having  regard  to  the  Presidential  Statement  in
    relation to the remaking of decisions in the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    appeal is allowed to the extent it is to be returned  to  the  Tribunal
    for the Refugee Convention asylum claim to be properly considered.

LISTING

(1)  Relist in the First-tier Tribunal, Birmingham,  not  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghani.

(2)  List for two and a half hours.

(3)  No findings of fact relating to the asylum claim are to stand.

(4)  Any further documents to be served shall be served not  less  than  ten
    working days before the listed hearing for remaking the decision.



Signed                                  Date 27 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

