
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00038/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 November 2016                        |On 18 November 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     ss
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B E Jones, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association (Romford Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a female citizen of  Sri  Lanka  who  was
    born on 23 January 1981.  The appellant appealed against  the  decision
    of the respondent, dated 9 February  2015  to  refuse  the  appellant's
    application  for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and/or  protection
    against abuses amounting to a breach  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  In a decision promulgated on 22 September 2016 Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal O'Malley dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds:

 1) Ground 1: that the judge misdirected herself  in  making  an  error  in
    procedural unfairness;

 2) Ground 2: that the judge made material errors of fact;

 3) Ground 3: that the judge erred in her approach to the medical evidence;

 4) Ground 4: that the judge's credibility assessment was infected  by  the
    errors already identified.

 3. The appeal came  before  me.   Ms  Jones  relied  on  her  grounds  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  reiterated   her
    submissions in relation to the judge's  findings  on  Dr  Abdulkareem's
    report that, that Dr Abdulkareem's  findings  were  not  tested  as  Dr
    Abdulkareem was not available to the Tribunal to provide live evidence.
     Ms Jones indicated that if Dr Abdulkareem had been  required  to  give
    evidence legal aid  would  have  had  to  have  been  obtained  and  an
    adjournment sought.  However, she reiterated  that  no  indication  was
    given at the hearing that the judge wished to hear oral  evidence  from
    the expert.

 4. The judge had also found that it weighed against the appellant (at [39]
    of the decision) that the family members who secured  her  release  had
    not given evidence on this.  Again, Ms Jones confirmed  that  this  was
    not raised by the judge at the hearing and Ms Jones made the point that
    even if it had been this was an issue that may not have been relied  on
    by the appellant as if such evidence had been provided it may have been
    seen as self-serving.

 5. In relation to ground 2  Ms  Jones  accepted  the  point  that  it  was
    unlikely that the points in themselves  raised  in  the  second  ground
    disclosed an error of fact capable of amounting to material  errors  of
    law characterised in R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  However, she
    submitted that this was more relevant in relation to ground 3  when  it
    was relied on that the judge had misdirected herself in her approach to
    the medical evidence.  Ms Jones pointed out  that  the  judge  accepted
    repeatedly, at [23], [27] and [53] that  the  appellant's  account  was
    plausible and consistent with the objective evidence (see  also  [50]),
    yet the judge went on to find that the appellant was not credible.

 6. The judge criticised the  appellant  for  not  providing  evidence  for
    seeking medical treatment for her mental health in the UK.  However, it
    was submitted that this was addressed in oral evidence (as set  out  in
    the grounds for permission to appeal) and  this  was  not  specifically
    disputed by Mr Avery.

 7. In relation to the rejection by the judge of the  medical  evidence  Ms
    Jones submitted that in the Rule 24 response from the respondent it was
    pointed out that in the Reasons for Refusal Letter inconsistencies were
    identified between the evidence  that  the  appellant  provided  to  Dr
    Abdulkareem and that  provided  the  asylum  interview.   Reliance  was
    placed on the case of HE (DRC) [2004]  UKIAT  00321.   However,  as  Ms
    Jones pointed out, the skeleton argument submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sought to address the  respondent's  concerns  and  relied  on
    further case law in relation to the approach  to  medico-legal  reports
    including JL (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  00145
    (IAC) and AM, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521.

 8. In addition the appellant's representatives  had  submitted  a  further
    document from the Medical Foundation, namely a letter from the Head  of
    Doctors at the Foundation, Dr Juliet Cohen,  which  addressed  in  some
    considerable detail the  respondent's  criticism  of  Dr  Abdulkareem's
    report made in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  It was  submitted  that
    the judge did not engage with this document at all in her decision  and
    reasons.  Particularly relevant,  it  was  submitted,  was  Dr  Cohen's
    indication that the doctor's views were formed:

         "not solely by the history related to them but by their observation
         throughout the examination, the responses made to specific clinical
         questions and their objective findings  on  examination  of  mental
         state.  Dr Abdulkareem explains the links between the features  now
         identified and the torture history described at paragraph 46 of her
         report.  No other  sufficiently  traumatic  experience  that  could
         cause PTSD was identified -  and  PTSD  requires  an  exceptionally
         traumatic experience as a cause, the 'ordinary  experiences  of  an
         asylum seeker' do not constitute this."

    It was submitted by Ms Jones that the judge  had  failed  to  give  any
    reasons for rejecting this evidence, if indeed that was what  she  did,
    or  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  submissions  in  relation  to  Dr
    Abdulkareem's report.

 9. The respondent in the Rule 24 response relied  on  the  fact  that  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter had identified inconsistencies  between  the
    evidence provided to Dr Abdulkareem and that  provided  in  her  asylum
    interview and again relied on the case of HE (DRC) [2004] in respect of
    the claimed cause of the appellant's PTSD.  It was submitted  that  the
    judge's findings appear to accept that  position  and  that  the  judge
    could not be satisfied that the information provided to Dr  Abdulkareem
    resulted in a reliably accurate assessment.

10. Mr Avery for his part submitted that there was no  procedural  fairness
    and  that  Ms  Jones  in  her  grounds   misrepresented   the   judge's
    consideration of Dr Abdulkareem's evidence.   It  was  submitted  that,
    contrary to the grounds, it was not the  case  that  the  judge  placed
    "little  weight"  on  Dr  Abdulkareem's  report  because  of  his  non-
    attendance.  Rather, somewhat differently, the judge put  "less  weight
    on her conclusions as they are not tested and they  are  based  on  the
    reports of the appellant" ([22] of the judge's Decision and Reasons).

11. Mr Avery submitted that it would have been helpful if the judge had set
    out what particular aspects of the report had been accepted but he  did
    not accept that there  was  procedural  unfairness.   It  was  also  Mr
    Avery's submission that the judge made no error in taking into  account
    the failure of the family members to give evidence and again he was  of
    the view that this was not a procedural error.

12. In relation to the hospital evidence of the appellant's miscarriage  it
    was submitted that the judge gave reasons  for  why  she  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence and if documents are unreliable it is open to  the
    judge to make adverse credibility findings.

13. Mr Avery indicated that he  had  no  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    judge's failure to deal at all with the letter of Dr Cohen in  relation
    to Dr Abdulkareem's report.

    Error of Law

14. As I indicated at the hearing I am satisfied that there  were  material
    errors of law in the judge's approach.   The  judge's  approach  to  Dr
    Abdulkareem's report in particular was concerning:

  . At paragraph [22] of the decision the judge took into account  that  Dr
    Abdulkareem worked for the Medical Foundation and that  her  specialist
    training would be relevant  to  her  conclusions,  but  attaches  'less
    weight' to the  report  because  Dr  Abdulkareem  did  not  give  "live
    evidence" to the Tribunal nor have her conclusions tested.

  . At paragraph [23] the judge found the appellant's history plausible but
    "on the basis of Dr Abdulkareem's report alone" was not satisfied  that
    the history was credible;

  . At paragraph [28] the judge did not accept Dr Abdulkareem's conclusions
    in relation to the appellant suffering from PTSD and was not  satisfied
    that the appellant  had  suffered  the  claimed  intrusive  flashbacks,
    anxiety around uniformed policemen or aversion to  sexual  intercourse,
    which she detailed in her appointments with Dr Abdulkareem;

  . At paragraph [38] of the decision the judge at the final  sentence  (in
    relation to Dr Abdulkareem's report) stated that "I have concluded that
    it is not appropriate to place reliance on that report".

15. The judge's approach is inconsistent as it is not clear why on the  one
    hand she attached less weight to the report from the Medical Foundation
    and yet on the other hand placed no reliance on the report at [38].

16. Even if that inconsistency was not fatal the judge failed to  give  the
    appellant an opportunity to  address  the  judge's  concerns  that  the
    evidence of Dr Abdulkareem had not been tested.  Equally, at  [39]  the
    judge found against the appellant due to a lack of  evidence  from  her
    family about her release from detention but had not  raised  this  with
    the appellant and  gave  no  adequate  reasons  as  to  the  background
    information including, as recorded in GJ and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319, that  release  from  detention
    and escape from Sri Lanka is routinely achieved by way of bribery.

17. In relation to Dr Abdulkareem's report the judge's error in approach in
    my findings is compounded  by  her  failure  to  give  any  reasons  in
    relation to why, if that was the case,  she  rejected  the  explanation
    provided in some  considerable  detail  by  Dr  Cohen  of  the  Medical
    Foundation in relation to the  respondent's  concerns  in  the  refusal
    letter about the conclusions reached by Dr Abdulkareem (including  that
    Dr Abdulkareem would not have  relied  solely  on  the  report  of  the
    appellant).

18. In the circumstances I am satisfied that there is a  lack  of  adequate
    reasons in this decision such as to amount to a material error of  law.
    I am further satisfied that there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  the
    judge's failure to allow the appellant an opportunity to address points
    which had a material effect on the outcome of the case.   Applying  the
    authorities including of MM (Unfairness E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  105
    (IAC) and AM  (fair  hearing)  Sudan  [2015]  UKUT  00656  (IAC)  I  am
    satisfied that the failure of the judge to put matters to the appellant
    relied upon by her in assessing the credibility of the appellant and in
    placing less weight on  the  expert  report  given  the  lack  of  oral
    evidence, without again giving the appellant an opportunity to  address
    this amounts to a material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law. I set aside the decision for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, courts and enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2, the nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard,
    de novo, by any judge other  than  Judge  O'Malley.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

