
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00147/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 30 July 2013                                 |On 11 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                  d. s. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms McEwen
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born in 1984.  She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 20 December 2011 to refuse
    to vary her leave to remain.  She was refused asylum.

 2. Her immigration history, in summary, was that she arrived in the UK  in
    February 2008 with entry clearance until April 2009 as a dependent of a
    student. She was subsequently given leave to remain as a dependent of a
    Tier 1 migrant until June 2011. In March 2011 she sought further  leave
    to remain as a dependent of her Tier 1 partner. However, she  submitted
    false bank statements in support of her application and it was  refused
    in May 2011. On 12 October 2011 she was encountered  and  arrested  for
    immigration offences. She claimed asylum on 17 October 2011.

 3. The basis of her claim was  that  she  had  campaigned  against  female
    circumcision in Sierra Leone.  It was as a result of  this  campaigning
    that she was attacked and raped by a group of men in 2005.  Soon after,
    her husband called her to the UK.  She claimed  asylum  in  2011.   She
    feared that because of her activities she would be at serious risk from
    people in her tribe anywhere in the country if returned.

 4. The Respondent, in refusing the claim, did not believe the  Appellant's
    account on material matters.

 5. She appealed.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on 30  October  2012
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Suchak dismissed the appeal on asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  He did  not  believe
    the account for the reasons given at [25-28] stating, at [29]  that  he
    did 'not place any reliance on her story that  she  left  Sierra  Leone
    fearing persecution for a Convention reason'.  And at [30] 'The  appeal
    is wholly without any  merit  whatsoever.   There  is  no  evidence  of
    persecution in the past or the likelihood or threat of  persecution  in
    the future'.

 6. Turning to human rights (Article 3) the judge noted medical reports  by
    Professor  Katona (8 October 2012) and a letter from Dr  Goldstein  (12
    October 2012).  The judge's findings on the medical evidence are at [34-
    37].  In deciding not to give weight to Professor  Katona's  report  he
    stated that it was 'based entirely  on  the  history  provided  by  the
    Appellant' [34].  Also, he had not explained how  he  had  reached  his
    conclusion that the Appellant suffers from 'complex PTSD',  a  category
    not formally recognised in diagnostic systems.  Further,  in  light  of
    the indication that the Appellant  denied  suicidal  intent  the  judge
    could not see how Professor Katona reached the conclusion that she  was
    of significant risk of suicide [35].

 7. As for ongoing medical  treatment  the  judge  stated  'the  background
    evidence shows that suitable medical treatment is available  in  Sierra
    Leone' [36].  He concluded that the Appellant failed under Article 3.

 8. As for Article 8 the judge found that the Appellant  had  not  provided
    any evidence that she had established a family  life  in  the  UK.   On
    private life the judge noted that she has been  here  for  nearly  four
    years but concluded that she 'has not adduced  evidence  of  sufficient
    elements to amount to  private  life'  [38].   The  case  failed  under
    Article 8.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  refused  on  28
    November 2012.  Reapplication was made to the Upper Tribunal, it  being
    claimed, in summary, that the finding  that  there  would  be  suitable
    medical treatment available in Sierra Leone was irrational in light  of
    the  background  material.   Also,  the  judge  had  given   inadequate
    consideration to Professor Katona's report.  Such included his  failure
    to consider that the expert's  diagnostic  conclusions  were  not  only
    based  on  the  Appellant's  own  account  but  also  on  his  clinical
    observations of her behaviour.

10. In granting permission on 17 December 2012 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen
    stated:


         'It is possible, and I  put  it  no  higher  than  that,  that  the
         culmination of the Appellant's medical condition and the paucity of
         available facilities in Sierra  Leone  is  such  as  to  cross  the
         relevant Article 3 or Article  8  threshold.   Arguably  the  judge
         erred, as is contended at ground 1,  in  respect  of  the  relevant
         medical facilities in Sierra Leone and  also  with  regard  to  the
         conclusion that Professor  Katona  had  based  his  report  on  the
         Appellant's own account of her experiences.  On  balance  therefore
         the determination is arguably flawed as contended.'

11. Following the error of law hearing  on  13  March  2013  I  issued  the
    following decision (the later paragraphs suffice to avoid repetition):

12.            '       ...

         10.  At the error of law hearing before me both parties agreed that
             the judge in a very brief  analysis  had  failed  properly  to
             engage, in considering Article  3,  with  the  background  and
             medical evidence.  There  was  no  reference  at  all  to  the
             medical evidence in the consideration of Article 8.  I agreed.

            11.     The  background  material  that  was  before  the  judge
             indicated that facilities  for  medical  treatment  in  Sierra
             Leone were very limited.  Indeed,  psychiatric  services  were
             minimal.

           12.    As for Professor Katona's  report  he  did  not  base  his
             report  solely  on  the  Appellant's  own   account   of   her
             experiences but also, as he stated, on his  own  observations.
             As he stated at 6.1 "I base my diagnostic  conclusions  on  my
             objective clinical observations of (Ms S's) behaviour,  speech
             and demeanour and not merely on the symptoms she described  to
             me".

           13.    As for the denial of suicidal intent by the Appellant  the
             judge failed to engage with the doctor's comments.  At 9.4  he
             stated "(She) denies current suicidal intent.  However, people
             with major depression and those with PTSD both have  increased
             suicidality ... In my opinion (she) would  be  at  significant
             risk of suicide both in the UK prior to removal (once she  had
             given up all hope of being  allowed  to  remain),  during  the
             removal process and once she was back in Sierra Leone ...".

           14.    In failing  to  give  careful  consideration  to  relevant
             evidence in  the  background  material  and  medical  evidence
             before him the judge materially erred.

           15.    By consent the decision on human rights, Article 3 and  8,
             was set aside.  The case  could  not  proceed  immediately  to
             rehearing as, Ms McEwen indicated, an  up-to-date  report  was
             likely to be sought from Professor Katona.

           16.    No challenge was made  to  the  dismissal  of  the  asylum
             appeal and that decision stands ..."

13. At the resumed hearing before me on 30 July 2013, a psychiatric  report
    by Dr Francis Winton, Consultant Psychiatrist was lodged on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.

14. There was no oral evidence.  The parties made submissions  to  which  I
    refer in my analysis below.

15. There are before me two medical reports  by  Consultant  Psychiatrists.
    The first by Professor Katona, which was before the First  tier  judge,
    is dated 8 October 2012.  The second by Dr  Winton  is  dated  28  July
    2013.  Professor Katona, in summary, concluded that the  Appellant  had
    'severe depressive symptoms' (5.12).  Also  that  her  'trauma  related
    symptoms' were in the 'severe range' (5.13).  He rated the severity  of
    her 'overall mental symptoms' as being in the 'severe range' (5.14).

16. He concluded that she fulfils the criteria of the DSM for PTSD and  for
    Major Depressive Episode (6.2).  Further, she has 'complex PTSD' caused
    in the doctor's opinion  by  'her  multiple  traumatic  experiences  in
    Sierra Leone and her subsequent domestic abuse  at  the  hands  of  her
    husband' (6.5). Her depressive symptoms 'probably have the same causes.
    However, other factors such as her separation  from  her  country,  her
    recent abdominal surgery and her continuing immigration uncertainty are
    likely to be contributing significantly to the severity and persistence
    of her depression' (6.8). Under 'Clinical Plausibility' he  stated  'My
    impression is that (her) clinical presentation is compatible  with  the
    experience of rape and domestic abuse and  does  not  suggest  a  false
    allegation of mistreatment' (7.1).

17. In his opinion she would benefit from a combination  of  antidepressant
    drugs  and  long-term  specialist  psychotherapy  (8.4).   As  for  the
    possible effect on her mental health if she were forced  to  return  to
    Sierra Leone, the doctor stated that her 'therapeutic relationship with
    Dr Julie Goldstein would be disrupted' (9.1).  It would  'significantly
    worsen (her) already severe PTSD  and  major  depression'  which  would
    'render her unable to work and support herself' (9.2).

18. As indicated there is a letter from Dr Goldstein (12 October 2012). She
    is a psychologist and gestalt therapist and states that  she  had  seen
    the Appellant 'for some sessions to evaluate  her  current  health  and
    assist to find the best suited help for her.' She considered  that  the
    Appellant had 'been traumatized from a very young age, and was raped in
    her country of origin and rejected by her husband on arrival to the UK,
     so her situation is complex and demands in (her) opinion the attention
    of a multi disciplinary team.'

19. Dr Winton's report includes a section headed 'Instructions' in which he
    is  asked  whether  he  agrees  with  Professor  Katona's  report   and
    diagnosis.   He  agrees  with  the  professor's  diagnoses   of   PTSD,
    depressive illness which is of a severe form, and that  she  has  panic
    attacks which are part of her PTSD (11.1.1).  In addition, however,  he
    considers that she has had 'a psychosis for several years' (11.1.2).

20. As for current prognosis he considers that to be 'poor' adding 'She had
    an extensive number of pre migration problems in the form  of  episodes
    of rape, assault and emotional stress due to  her  campaigning  against
    genital mutilation'(11.2.1).  He is, however,  'more  optimistic  about
    her psychotic symptoms as she has never been on an  anti-psychotic  and
    these symptoms may settle.  Her  depression  with  more  treatment  may
    improve as would her anxiety' (11.2.2).

21. As for prognosis if removed: 'she is seriously distressed by  her  past
    experiences of trauma and her current mental illness.  If  her  account
    is accepted then she tried to make a serious attempt on her life in the
    form of drinking bleach ...'.  He would be 'deeply  concerned  if  this
    highly traumatised and mentally ill person were to be removed from  the
    UK' (11.5.1).  Further, having listed  six  factors  which  the  doctor
    considered would be relevant in the Appellant's situation  if  returned
    he concluded: 'She would be single, unemployed,  isolated,  in  poverty
    and mentally ill.  Combined together these are high  risk  factors  for
    suicide'.

22. In her submissions Ms McEwen, who both sides agreed should speak first,
    in summary, accepted  that  the  threshold  for  Article  3  was  high.
    However, in this case it was  satisfied.   The  Appellant  if  returned
    would have no access to support.  Her  father  is  dead,  and  mother's
    whereabouts unknown.  She has no siblings.  There is a stigma to people
    with mental health problems.

23. Turning to the medical reports it was clear that her prognosis had  got
    worse since Professor Katona's report.  Dr  Winton  had  noted  complex
    PTSD, depressive illness and  psychosis.   Further,  she  had  made  an
    attempt on her life.  The doctor has experience  in  West  Africa.   He
    found she was not exaggerating her symptoms.  As for medical facilities
    these are woeful with almost no psychiatric facilities.   Both  doctors
    stated that she needs specialist care for her complex PTSD, care  which
    would not be available in Sierra Leone.

24. As for Article 8, return would clearly amount to an  interference  with
    her right to a private life.  As for proportionality, her conditions at
    present were more or less under control.  If returned as a  woman  with
    complex psychiatric needs to  a  country  with  almost  no  psychiatric
    services or anti-psychotic medicines such would be disproportionate.

25. In reply, Mr Wilding, in summary, submitted that the two  reports  were
    undermined by what they did not do.  Professor Katona  found  that  the
    Appellant's symptoms were due to a traumatic event.   However,  it  had
    been found that the Appellant's account  of  having  suffered  such  an
    event,  namely  rape,  had  been  rejected.   Also  Professor  Katona's
    assessment was at best pre-emptive.  He had  failed to  apply  the  DSM
    criteria which required that he see the patient  again  to  assess  the
    claimed duration of the symptoms.  Yet  his  diagnosis  came  from  one
    assessment.  His assessment was inadequate.

26. As for Dr Winton's report he  had  simply  adopted  Professor  Katona's
    findings rather than reach his own findings.  It was clear also that Dr
    Winton  had  not  been  given  a  copy  of  the  First   tier   judge's
    determination which would have shown him that  the  historical  account
    had not been believed.  Thus his assessment was also inadequate.

27. In further comments Mr Wilding questioned the claim that the  Appellant
    had attempted suicide.  No chronology or evidence had been given  about
    this.  Professor  Katona  had  specifically  noted  that  she  was  not
    suicidal.

28. It was significant also that Dr Winton indicated that the Appellant was
    now receiving no treatment.  Such hardly seemed to be  the  actions  of
    someone with significant PTSD.

29. Mr Wilding noted Dr  Winton's  comment  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    depressed since childhood.  Yet there was  no  reference  in  Professor
    Katona's report to any depressive history dating back to childhood.  Mr
    Wilding questioned whether it  was  possible  that  the  Appellant  had
    always had a depressive illness and had learned to live  with  it,  but
    who, her  marriage  having  broken  down  and  her  visa  expired,  had
    fabricated her claim.

30. It was significant,  Mr  Wilding  submitted,  that  she  had  lived  in
    Freetown on her own with no particular problems.  She had also reported
    that she missed working as a carer.  Her situation was clearly  nowhere
    near as hopeless as claimed.  Also there is training  in  Sierra  Leone
    for health care workers.

31. As for the suggestion that her treatment is inadequate in the UK it was
    noted from Dr Winton's report that she had  stopped  going  to  see  Dr
    Goldstein.   On  the  issue  of  her  drug  regime  she  was  receiving
    Fluoxetine, an anti depressant. Even if it is not available  in  Sierra
    Leone there are other drugs which are.

32. On the totality of  the  evidence,  in  Mr  Wilding's  submission,  the
    Appellant's  situation  came  nowhere  near  reaching  the  Article   3
    threshold.

33. As for Article 8 Mr Wilding questioned whether the Appellant  had  even
    established that she had private life.  There had been no evidence from
    her uncle or friend who it was said in Dr Winton's report she had  been
    staying with. As for her mental health with the problems in respect  of
    the medical reports  it  could  not  be  said  that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

34. In a final response Ms McEwen pointed out  Professor  Katona's  comment
    that his conclusion had been reached following objective  observations.
    He was an experienced clinician.

35. In considering this matter, as indicated,  Professor  Katona  diagnosed
    the Appellant to be suffering from complex  PTSD  and  to  have  severe
    depressive symptoms.  I note his comment that he based  his  diagnostic
    conclusions on his 'objective clinical observations' and not merely  on
    the symptoms she described.  He goes on to state that in  keeping  with
    his clinical impression she fulfilled the criteria of DSM both for PTSD
    and Major Depressive Episode.

36. I find merit, however, in Mr Wilding's comments that Professor Katona's
    conclusions do not appear to comply with the DSM criteria  in  that  he
    examined the Appellant only for two  and  a  half  hours.   Appendix  1
    requires for the diagnosis of PTSD that the  duration  of  symptoms  is
    more  than  one  month;  as  for  the  criteria  for  diagnosing  Major
    Depressive Episode, five of the symptoms must have been present  during
    the same two week period (Appendix 2).  That  together  with  the  fact
    that the Appellant's account of her claimed trauma in Sierra Leone and,
    indeed, all material aspects of her historical claim were  disbelieved,
    a conclusion which has not been challenged, must in my  judgment  cause
    no significant weight to be given  to  Professor  Katona's  conclusions
    that she suffers from PTSD caused principally by trauma in Sierra Leone
    and that such trauma is a factor in her depression.

37. As for Dr Winton's report, he too saw the Appellant once only, for  one
    and three quarter hours.   I  find  merit  in  the  criticism  that  Dr
    Winton's conclusions are inadequate.  First, he, too, takes as a source
    of the information from which he reaches his conclusions the  statement
    of the Appellant, the contents of which  in  relation  to  her  claimed
    account of rape and her wider  history,  have  been  found  not  to  be
    credible.  He does not appear to have been given a copy  of  the  First
    tier judge's determination.

38. He also, essentially, adopts Professor Katona's conclusions (which were
    based on a single two and  a  half  hour  interview  and  a  historical
    account which has been found to be untruthful).

39. Dr Winton having agreed with Professor Katona's findings  of  PTSD  and
    depressive illness does make some additional comments.  Mention is made
    of a suicide attempt by swallowing bleach  'if  her  account  [of  that
    incident] is accepted' (11.5.1).  However no indication is given as  to
    when this incident took place. Why he did  not  seek  to  find  out  is
    unexplained. Her friend Mr S. who  was  said  to  be  present  and  who
    stopped her, did not attend nor was there a statement from him. In  the
    circumstances I do not give weight to that claimed incident. It  is  of
    importance because no such incident is reported in  Professor  Katona's
    report.  Indeed she denied current suicide  intent.   Professor  Katona
    stated that 'people with major depression and those with PTSD both have
    increased suicidality'(9.4). However, in light  of  the  unsatisfactory
    evidence  about  that  incident  and  the  disbelieved  evidence   more
    generally about her history, and my comments (above)  about  the  claim
    that PTSD and depression were the result, substantially, of  trauma  in
    her home country, I do not accept on the evidence before me that she is
    at risk of suicide.

40. I do not place significant weight on Dr Winton's  conclusion  that  she
    has a psychosis. I reach that view because it came as the result of one
    short interview and because although she was displaying symptoms at the
    time such has to be seen in the light of Professor Katona's  report  in
    which he made no such observations despite Dr Winton's comment that  he
    was 'reasonably confident that she has  had  a  psychosis  for  several
    years.'

41. Dr  Winton,  as  indicated,  agrees  with  Professor  Katona  that  the
    Appellant has a depressive illness.  She told him  that  she  had  been
    depressed since  childhood.   That  also  is  something  that  was  not
    mentioned in Professor Katona's report where the indication is that  it
    began following her rape at the age of 19.

42. In seeking to assess the medical reports, for the reasons stated, I  do
    not give significant  weight  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    suffers from PTSD the main cause of which was trauma which occurred  in
    Sierra Leone.  She has been prescribed Fluoxetine (Prozac).  It appears
    to be the only medication she has been prescribed. Such is a  treatment
    for depression. It may well be that the  Appellant  has  suffered  from
    depression since childhood but was able to cope with it when she  lived
    in Sierra Leone.  It may also be that her depression has  become  worse
    as a result of  her  marital  breakdown  and  the  uncertainty  of  her
    situation following the expiry of her visa. I do not  accept  that  the
    trauma of rape in Sierra Leone (such trauma being  found  not  to  have
    taken place) is a factor in her depression.

43. I have considered carefully the comment by Professor  Katona  that  his
    conclusions were based not just on what he was told about  her  history
    by the Appellant but  also  on  his  'objective  clinical  observation'
    (6.1).  I  consider  however  that  in  light  of  the  brief,   single
    examination and the disbelief of  her  account  of  past  events,  such
    observation can be given very limited weight.

44. In light of my findings  I  next  consider  the  consequences  for  the
    Appellant if returned.

45. The Appellant has argued that return  would  breach  her  rights  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.

46. It seems clear from the background material before me  (eg  WHO  Mental
    Health and Service Development report 2012) that  psychiatric  services
    in Sierra Leone are almost  non-existent.   Also  the  availability  of
    drugs to treat psychiatric conditions is very limited.

47. It is well known that a contracting state may infringe Article 3 if  it
    returns a person to a country where she would be at substantial risk of
    inhuman or degrading treatment.  However, the  imposition  of  a  'high
    threshold' is equally well-established and this is  underlined  by  the
    test of exceptionality illustrated by the D case (D v UK [1997] 24 EHRR
    423) and N (N v SSHD [2005]  UKHL  31).   Ultimately  the  question  is
    whether what is  likely  to  befall  the  Appellant  crosses  the  high
    threshold and the test of exceptionality.  Whether or not the  required
    level of severity is reached  in  a  particular  case  depends  on  the
    circumstances of that case.

48. The Appellant is an adult who may have a depressive illness  for  which
    she is receiving drug treatment.  There is no doubt that on  return  to
    Sierra Leone she would receive treatment inferior to that which she  is
    presently receiving in this country.  However, the  circumstances  fall
    significantly short of  the  high  threshold.   Some  of  the  material
    relevant to this conclusion is better  considered  in  the  context  of
    Article 8.

49. Turning to consider Article 8 the House of Lords in Huang  [2007]  UKHL
    made it plain that a step-by-step  approach  as  laid  down  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 was the appropriate way to proceed.  The first  question
    is whether the proposed removal  would  be  an  interference  with  the
    exercise of the Appellant's right to  respect  for  family  or  private
    life.

50. There is no claim to family life.  As for private life she has been  in
    the UK since February 2008.  Before the  Respondent  she  adduced  some
    elements of private life namely her previous work  for  which  she  had
    completed some informal qualifications and occasional attendance at her
    mosque.  Nothing has been heard from any friends including Mr  S.  who,
    it is claimed in Dr Winton's  report,  saved  her  during  her  suicide
    attempt.  Even though the evidence is extremely limited I  am  prepared
    to find that she has established a private life through her  time  here
    and her associations.  There  is  also  the  matter  of  her  right  to
    physical and moral integrity  which  is  an  important  aspect  of  her
    private life.

51. Having found that there is private life, turning to the question  (ii),
    the Court of Appeal has stated that the threshold for  establishing  an
    interference with family or private life is not  a  high  one.   In  AG
    Eritrea v SSHD EWCA Civ 801, Sedley LJ said (at [28]):

         'While an interference with private or family life must be real  if
         it is to  engage  Article  8,  the  threshold  of  engagement  (the
         "minimum level") is not an especially high one.  Once Article 8  is
         engaged, the focus moves, as  Lord  Bingham's  remaining  questions
         indicate, to the process of justification under Article  8(2).   It
         is this which,  in  all  cases  which  engage  Article  8(1),  will
         determine whether there has been a breach of the Article.'

52. I conclude on the facts that the threshold is made.  The threat to  her
    private life and the medical help she enjoys  in  the  UK  and  that  a
    removal decision if implemented might lead to adverse  effects  on  her
    physical  and  moral  integrity  could  scarcely  be  dismissed  as  of
    insufficient gravity and thus an invasion of her private life requiring
    justification under Article 8(2).

53. That the decision is in  accordance  with  the  law  is  not  disputed.
    Further I am satisfied that the decision does pursue a legitimate  aim.
    The question remaining is whether or not the decision is  proportionate
    given all the circumstances of the case.

54. In considering proportionality I note first the Appellant's immigration
    history.  Although she entered the UK in  February  2008  lawfully  and
    remained lawfully until May 2011, she then overstayed, only  coming  to
    the attention of the authorities when  encountered  by  the  police  in
    October 2011 when she claimed asylum, a claim  which  has  subsequently
    been found to have no merit.  Such does not favour her in the balancing
    exercise.

55. Further, she came to the UK at the age of 23.  The vast majority of her
    life including her formative years were spent in  Sierra  Leone.   Such
    also does not favour her.

56. As indicated there is only limited evidence of any ties or  connections
    built up in the UK.  It was not suggested she  has  property  or  work.
    Such, in addition, does not greatly assist her.

57. The emphasis is on her mental health condition.  I have found that  she
    may well suffer from a depressive illness.  As indicated  it  is  clear
    that the provision of psychiatric services in Sierra Leone is much less
    than in the UK.  The indication  is  also  that  Fluoxetine,  the  only
    medication she appears to receive at present may not be available. Such
    is a matter that I weigh in her favour in the balancing exercise.

58. Dr Winton in his prognosis of  the  Appellant  should  she  be  removed
    concluded that she would be 'single, unemployed, isolated,  in  poverty
    and mentally ill.  Combined together these are high  risk  factors  for
    suicide'.  He considered  six  points  which  led  him  to  reach  that
    conclusion.  The first is that she would have 'limited finance'.  It is
    unclear on what basis he reached that conclusion.  The second  is  that
    she would not be able to  afford  medication  which  would  lead  to  a
    deterioration in her mental  state.   Having  noted  that  Dr  Winton's
    involvement with the Appellant lasted one and three quarter hours, that
    she is on a regime of only one drug, an anti depressive, and  that  she
    is 'no longer seeing Julie Goldstein,  psychologist'  and  'apart  from
    occasional outpatient appointments she is  not  receiving  any  further
    input' (8.1), I do not feel able to place  any  great  weight  on  that
    comment. On the issue of availability of drugs, I  note  from  the  WHO
    report that in 2010 a partnership between the Sierra Leone  psychiatric
    hospital and the iNGO Plan International Sierra Leone led to a donation
    of 20,000 USD  for  psychotropic  medicines  for  the  hospital  to  be
    provided from a Netherlands-based supplier. (p31).

59.  Third, 'being socially isolated  thus  increasing  her  experience  of
    threat'.  This conclusion does not hold weight when considered with the
    First tier judge's findings that according to her visa application  for
    entry to the UK she had been living in Freetown for a year.

60. Fourth, 'her concerns of being assaulted would  be  reinforced  by  her
    psychotic experiences and beliefs'.  Again, the doctor has reached  his
    conclusion on the basis of one brief assessment, and apparently  having
    not been made aware that the Appellant's account of  trauma  (including
    rape) had been found to be not credible.

61. Fifth, he gained the impression that she has no close  family  left  in
    Sierra Leone.  One might wonder why if this was a concern to the doctor
    he did not ask about her about family or others  with  whom  she  might
    have spent time during her year in Freetown before coming  to  the  UK.
    There is nothing to indicate that she had  problems  there  as  a  lone
    woman.

62. Finally, she would have no job to go to and would find it difficult  to
    hold it down.  In light of the finding by the First-tier judge that she
    has a good level of education and was working in the UK from 2008 until
    June 2011 and, as Dr Winton himself noted, she had been  working  in  a
    hotel and also as a care assistant and told him  she  misses  the  work
    (3.3) it is difficult to see on what  basis  the  doctor  reached  that
    conclusion.  I note further that the background  material  (WHO  report
    p30) indicates that there are some training  opportunities  for  health
    care workers in Sierra Leone.

63. For the reasons stated I do not feel able to place any great weight  on
    Dr Winton's conclusions, nor on Professor Katona's  As such the medical
    reports do not significantly assist  the  Appellant  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

64. Seeking to make a balanced judgment of risk to the Appellant  in  light
    of all the material facts, I conclude that the removal of the Appellant
    is proportionate to the legitimate end  of  immigration  control.   The
    case also fails on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Articles 3 and 8).


Anonymity Direction

Under Rule 45(4)(i) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
Rules 2005, unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her.  This direction  applies  both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

