
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00420/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 May 2016                       |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    A V H
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Pascoe, Counsel instructed by Vasuki solicitors

For the respondent:    Ms A Holmes, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse to vary his student visa to allow him to remain in the United
    Kingdom on refugee protection, humanitarian protection or human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.



Background

 2. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom as a student  since  2007.
    His core account for protection purposes is that  he  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka for a visit on 13 November 2012, entering without  difficulty  on
    his own passport but he was detained  on  16  November  2012,  after  a
    friend informed on him, questioned, tortured,  and  forced  to  sign  a
    confession.  He was released on 22 February 2012 on payment of a  bribe
    and helped at the airport by an agent his father employed.  He left Sri
    Lanka on his own passport and re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  his
    student visa, claiming asylum a few days later.



First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The First-tier Tribunal considered the appellant's medical evidence  of
    torture, accepted that he had indeed been badly burned and had received
    both medical  treatment  from  his  general  medical  practitioner  and
    counselling in the United Kingdom.

 4. The Judge did not believe the appellant's  core  account,  despite  the
    burn scars, which he found to have  been  self-inflicted  by  proxy  to
    bolster the appellant's claim.  In the light of that finding, the First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  also  attached  very  little  weight  to  medical
    evidence of PTSD and mental health problems arising out of the torture.



 5. Specifically, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    account of having a cousin in the LTTE, of being detained or  tortured,
    signing a confession, skipping bail or escaping custody.

 6. The Judge found instead that the appellant had  entered  and  left  Sri
    Lanka on his own passport, without difficulty.  He did accept that  the
    appellant was of Tamil ethnicity and now has scarring.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal.



Permission to appeal

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission to appeal, noting  that
    the grounds of appeal were  mainly  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings of credibility, but that it was, just, arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred in his assessment of the medical evidence
    of Dr Lingam relating to the casuation of,  and  the  circumstances  in
    which, the appellant's scars were  inflicted.  No  Rule  24  Reply  was
    filed.

 8. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal proceedings

 9. On 24 July 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.   There  was
    no opposition from the respondent's presenting officer at that  hearing
    to the finding of error of law.  For the appellant, Ms  Physsas  argued
    that none of the findings on credibility could stand, having regard  to
    the nature of the error.  For the  respondent,  Ms  Isherwood  accepted
    that the decision would have to be remade.

10. Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson's conclusions were summarised at  [11]-[12]
    in his decision:

         "11. As I observed to the parties, my principal concern related  to
         the  treatment  of  the  medical  evidence,   in   particular   the
         permissibility of the Judge concluding in [69]  as  recorded  above
         that the scars had been  caused  by  deliberate  burning  with  the
         appellant's consent, with a view  to  creating  the  appearance  of
         scars.  It was questionable whether there was an  evidential  basis
         for this conclusion in  the  light  of  the  medical  evidence.   I
         conclude  that  this  error  is   sufficient   to   undermine   the
         determination  as  a  whole,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
         potential ability of the medical evidence to provide an  answer  to
         aspects of the account which the Judge had considered variously  as
         'highly improbable' and 'implausible'.

         12.  I am satisfied, therefore, that Ms Isherwood  was  correct  to
         acknowledge error of law.  I therefore set aside the determination.
          The decision will be remade following the case  management  review
         indicated above."

11. This appeal was one of two identified for possible guidance on scarring
    in what became KV (scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230  (IAC).
    At the case management review, the appellant stated  that  he  did  not
    wish his appeal to be heard  with  that  of  KV  for  (partly)  funding
    reasons.  Judge Dawson refused an application by both the appellant and
    the respondent to remit the present appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for the decision to be remade, and ordered that the  appeal  be  listed
    for hearing after the Upper Tribunal had made its decision in  KV.  The
    rest of the directions then given relate to KV's case.

12. This appeal now falls to be determined in the  light  of  the  guidance
    given in KV about scarring, and the general country guidance in on  the
    post-civil war situation in Sri Lanka given by the Upper Tribunal in GJ
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  It  is
    unfortunate that there has been a lengthy  additional  delay  following
    the decision in KV before this appeal was determined.   However,  there
    has been no change in the Upper Tribunal's country guidance nor in  the
    guidance given in KV in 2014.

13. On 26 May 2016,  this  appeal  came  before  me  for  decision.   After
    discussion with the parties, it was agreed that there would be  written
    submissions by both parties to be received within 21 days, after  which
    the Upper Tribunal would decide whether the appeal could be decided  on
    the papers, or whether a further oral hearing was needed.



Submissions

14. The appellant's  submissions  were  received  on  24  June  2016.   The
    appellant's Counsel, Mr  Paramjorthy,  repeated  his  request  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.   He
    submitted that a further hearing is required, with a Tamil interpreter.
      Mr Paramjorthy's submission set out a list of 'key  elements  of  the
    appellant's profile' most of which are among those which the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not find credible. In addition,  he  relied  on  the
    appellant's mental health issues as set  out  in  additional  documents
    which were filed for the May 2016 hearing.

15. There follows a lengthy citation from GJ, which occupies  more  than  4
    pages in Mr Paramjorthy's 7-page submission.   The mixture of assertion
    of matters which the First-tier Tribunal did not believe as though they
    were established facts and the paucity of any actual  argument  in  the
    submission make Mr Paramjorthy's reasoning hard to follow.  In  effect,
    he wishes to have all the facts found afresh, which is something  which
    is best done, if at all,  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  is  no
    lengthy analysis of the  medical  evidence  upon  the  basis  of  which
    permission to appeal was originally given.

16. For the respondent, Ms Holmes' submissions were received 5 October 2016
    with an apology for their being so  late.   She  did  engage  with  the
    medical evidence.  She contended that little weight should be placed on
    the medical evidence of Dr Dhumad, and Dr  Baha  al-Wakeel,  such  that
    they could not properly be regarded as  having  differentiated  between
    torture scars and those self-inflicted by proxy.

17. Ms Holmes argued that similar concerns apply to the  letter  purporting
    to be from the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam which is  simply
    too vague to meet  the  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  standard  and  establish  the
    existence in this appellant's case of sur place activities which  would
    cause concern to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  involve  a  risk  of
    future torture.  Ms Holmes submits that the decision can be  remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal without a further hearing, on the papers before me.



Discussion

18. I have considered how I should  proceed.   I  find,  reluctantly,  that
    given that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was  set  aside  in  its
    entirety by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson, with the credibility  findings
    tainted by the error of law, the decision must be remade  afresh,  with
    no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

19. That being the case, and contrary to Judge  Dawson's  views  in  August
    2013, I am quite satisfied that the appropriate course is to remit this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing afresh.



DECISION

20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision will be remade in  the
    First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Date:    14 November 2016  Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

