
[pic]
IAC-AH-CAP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00055/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 December 2013                  |On 16 January 2014                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A MCGEACHY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  MISS D b
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Nason, Solicitor, Luqmani Thompson & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's date of birth is 22 July 1995.   She  claims  to  be  a
    citizen of Eritrea.  She has appealed against a  decision  made  on  15
    December 2011 to refuse to grant asylum under paragraph 336 of  HC  395
    (as amended).  Limited leave to remain was  granted  until  21  January
    2013.  The appeal was first heard at  Hatton  Cross  on  6  March  2011
    before First-tier Tribunal  Martins  who  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 9 May 2012.  Following that  decision  the
    appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 29 May 2012.  There was  a  hearing  before
    this Tribunal on 19 September 2012  and  we  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law.  We concluded that there was a failure  to  give
    adequate reasons for  material  findings  and  a  failure  to  consider
    Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Accordingly, we set aside  the  determination  and  directed  that  the
    appeal proceed to a hearing de novo.  We made directions including  the
    preservation of the judge's finding that the appellant is a Pentecostal
    Christian.

2.   This matter comes before us for  a  hearing  de  novo.   We  have  been
    provided with the appellant's bundle  of  documents  amounting  to  283
    pages together  with  a  supplementary  skeleton  argument,  a  witness
    statement from Yosef Tesfaya Bereket , and a skeleton argument dated  9
    December 2013. A supplementary bundle  includes  the  Asylum  Interview
    Record of Yosef Bereket, an expert  report  of  Professor  Kibreab  and
    further objective material.  The respondent relied on  the  bundle  for
    hearing dated 9 January 2012.  No skeleton argument was provided by the
    respondent.

The Issues

3.   It was agreed that  the  central  issue  was  the  nationality  of  the
    appellant.  In the event that we  found  her  to  be  Eritrean  it  was
    conceded that the appeal should be allowed in light of  the  fact  that
    the appellant was a Pentecostal Christian and she would  be  persecuted
    on return to Eritrea.  If however the Tribunal concluded that  she  was
    an Ethiopian citizen, there was no basis on which she could sustain  an
    argument that she faced  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Ethiopia.

Appellant's Claim

4.   The appellant's claim was set out in a  chronology  and  three  witness
    statements dated 10.10.2011 , 30.10.2011 and 27.2.2012.  She  was  born
    in Assab, Eritrea in 1995.  Her mother died in childbirth.  At the  age
    of 1 year she went to Ethiopia with her father and brother to live with
    her aunt in Addis Ababa.  In 1999 her aunt  married  an  Ethiopian  and
    moved out of the family  home.   The  appellant's  father  and  brother
    returned to Eritrea in 2000 and have not  been  heard  of  since.   The
    appellant remained in Addis Ababa living with her  aunt  until  January
    2011. Her aunt's marriage failed in 2010 and a friend of her aunt named
    Hiwot was arrested and imprisoned.   The  appellant  then  returned  to
    Assab for approximately six months with her aunt. In her third  witness
    statement dated 27 February 2012 the  appellant  stated for  the  first
    time that the reasons for  leaving  Ethiopia  given  by  her  aunt  was
    because she was working secretly in order to help Eritrean  people  and
    passing messages between those coming in and  out  from  Eritrea.   Her
    aunt gave her no further information in relation to any specific  group
    or organisation.  The appellant understood that it  was  necessary  for
    them to leave Ethiopia urgently because she thought that the  Ethiopian
    authorities discovered her aunt's activities.  The appellant  travelled
    to the UK via Sudan.

5.   The appellant spoke Amharic with her aunt at  home  and  at  school  in
    Ethiopia.  She lived in Assab for a limited period of time and was able
    to communicate with people in Amharic. She was unable to attend  school
    because she could not speak Tigrinya. In her  asylum  interview  on  14
    October 2011 the appellant was able to answer questions about Eritrea.

6.   The appellant relied  on  a  letter  from  the  Eritrean  community  in
    Lambeth which confirmed that she is an Eritrean national.  Further, she
    attended the Ethiopian Embassy in 2012 regarding the nationality  issue
    and was  provided  a  document  stating  that  there  was  insufficient
    information to issue an Ethiopian passport.

7.   In oral evidence the appellant relied on her witness statements and  in
    cross-examination she confirmed the chronology of events.  She accepted
    that the reasons for leaving Ethiopia given to her  by  her  aunt  were
    first raised in her third statement because her aunt was very secretive
    and she had warned her that they would be in danger. She  was  in  fear
    that there would be repercussions for her aunt  whose  whereabouts  she
    did not know. In Eritrea the main concern was their religion but  there
    was also concern that because of her  aunt's  activities  in  Ethiopia,
    this could have had an impact on their lives in Eritrea where  everyone
    was afraid of the government.  The appellant was uncertain as  to  what
    activities her aunt had been involved in but  she  understood  that  in
    Ethiopia she had helped Eritrean people.  In  Assab  they  lived  in  a
    house rented by her aunt. After a period of time her aunt commenced  to
    run a hairdressing business.  The appellant's uncle lived in Assab. She
    maintained contact  with  him  but  did  not  see  him  regularly.  The
    appellant was asked in cross examination to explain  why  she  had  not
    been given any information about her brother when  she  was  in  Assab,
    given that Mr Bereket as supporting witness had said in  his  statement
    that he knew her brother in  Assab  in  between  2004  and  2007.   The
    appellant stated that she had not heard  from  either  her  brother  or
    father since they left Ethiopia.  Her uncle travelled a lot and did not
    spend any significant time in  Assab.   The  appellant  worked  in  the
    hairdresser's helping out her aunt who employed three other  people  in
    the salon who were Eritreans.  Her aunt had savings from which she  was
    able to pay for  the  rental  for  their  accommodation  initially  and
    thereafter her aunt paid for the rent from her earnings.  The appellant
    did not know who had paid for her travel costs to the  UK.   After  her
    departure from Eritrea her aunt was imprisoned.  Her uncle gave  her  a
    number to ring but she lost all her property when she  arrived  in  the
    UK.

8.   Mr  Bereket  gave  evidence  in  support.  He  relied  on  his  witness
    statement dated 28.6.2013 confirming that he was granted refugee status
    in 2011 and was an Eritrean  national.   His  claim  succeeded  on  the
    grounds of religion as a Pentecostal  Christian.   He  lived  in  Assab
    between 2002 and 2007 where people generally  spoke  Amharic  but  also
    Tigrinya, Arabic and Affar.  He lived in Sudan for  3  years  and  then
    travelled to UK in 2010. He met the appellant in around 2012 at  church
    in King's Cross, London and discovered that he  knew  her  family.   He
    believed that he knew her brother, Yohannes  as  a  friend  from  Assab
    since 2004.  Their fathers were friends. He recalled  that  her  father
    had been arrested and imprisoned.  He was told by her brother that that
    he had a sister living in Ethiopia. Yohnnes was living with friends and
    neighbours as he had no family members  to  look  after  him.   He  was
    certain that the appellant was Yohnnes'  sister  because  there  was  a
    similarity in their looks, their descriptions of  him  were  the  same,
    Yohnnes told him that he had a sister in Ethiopia and they had the same
    surname.

9.   In an expert report  Professor  Gaim  Kibreab  concluded  that  he  was
    unable to say one way or another whether the appellant was an  Eritrean
    national.  While the appellant explained that she lived in Eritrea  for
    only six to seven months of her adult life and the nature of  her  stay
    was very sheltered which accounted for her  limited  knowledge  of  the
    language and life in Assab.   His  main  concern  was  the  appellant's
    inability to speak Tigrinya and the answers provided by  the  appellant
    to his general questions regarding Assab.   He  found  the  appellant's
    knowledge of Eritrea to be limited although he accepted that  this  may
    well be influenced by her young age.

10.  The psychological report from Dr Thomas concluded  that  the  appellant
    is suffering from a severe episode of major depressive disorder and  is
    at a high suicide risk. She suggested that she as she has a  clear  and
    deep attachment to her aunt,  and  that  made  absolute  sense  of  her
    initial decision to withhold information  about  her  aunt's  political
    activities due to her strong wish to  protect  her  aunt  from  further
    harm.  Urgent specialist mental health input is recommended.

Submissions

11.  Both representatives made submissions, the details  of  which  are  set
    out in the Record of Proceedings.  Further  detailed  submissions  from
    the appellant's representative are set out in  the  skeleton  argument,
    which we have taken into account.

Findings of Fact and Conclusions

12.  We have read  the  supplementary  skeleton  argument  produced  by  the
    appellant's  representative  concerning  the  tracing  duties  of   the
    Secretary of State towards unaccompanied minors, pursuant to Section 55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   The  skeleton
    argument fully sets out the relevant legal principles and  recent  case
    law which support the view that a failure by the Secretary of State  to
    discharge the duty to endeavour to trace an asylum  applicant's  family
    members does not  per  se  either  vitiate  the  Secretary  of  State's
    determination of the asylum claim or any ensuing decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  or  Upper  Tribunal   affirming   such   determination.
    Following the  recent  Court  of  Appeal  decision  of  EU  and  Others
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32 we accept that in this instance
    that  the issue of failure to trace is unlikely to be  of  significance
    whether the appellant is found to be a credible witness or  not  as  to
    her nationality.  In the event that the appellant is found credible but
    still refused asylum, a failure to trace may become of significance. We
    consider that the determinative issue in this appeal is the appellant's
    nationality.

13.  We take into account that the appellant was a  young  person  when  she
    entered the UK and when she made her claim for asylum.    We find  that
    whilst the appellant has given a consistent account  of  her  life  and
    upbringing in Eritrea and Ethiopia together with a  consistent  account
    of her family history, we do not find her account to be credible.

14.  We accept that the appellant  has  been  diagnosed  with  a  depressive
    disorder however, the diagnosis does not corroborate her claim  in  any
    significant way.  We take the view that it is equally possible that the
    appellant's depression has come about because of her circumstances  and
    the stresses arising from her situation vis the immigration proceedings
    in the UK.  Dr Thomas considers that the appellant's late disclosure of
    the reasons why she and her aunt left Ethiopia to be understandable  in
    the context of her age, relationship with her aunt and anxieties  about
    her aunt's whereabouts together with her depressive disorder. We  place
    little weight on the findings in the report because Dr Thomas gives  no
    consideration as to alternative causes for the appellant's mental state
    and consequently, we find her analysis of the appellant's motivation in
    her late disclosure to be  lacking.  Although  it  was  argued  in  the
    grounds of application for permission [20] that the First Tier Tribunal
    failed to take into account the conclusion that  the  appellant  was  a
    "current high suicide risk", we do not regard this ground to  have  any
    merit.  In any event the issue under Article 3 was  not  relied  on  or
    pursued before us and the report itself is out of date and we found  it
    to be unreliable.

15.  We place significant weight on the  report  of  Professor  Kibreab  who
    specifically considered the appellant's circumstances living  in  Assab
    for a period of six to seven months at the age of 15. Professor Kibreab
    considered the appellant's explanation for  her  limited  knowledge  of
    Tigrinya and did not find it to be reasonable.  We  agree  .   We  find
    there to be contradiction in the appellant's evidence. Whilst  she  has
    been able to provide basic geographical and  social  information  about
    Eritrea, we place little weight on this evidence  as  such  information
    can be accessed and learned, and is not indicative of her  nationality.
    We find that the  appellant's  explanation  for  not  attending  school
    because she has limited knowledge of Tigrinya to be lacking.  We accept
    that her religious beliefs may well have led to some confinement of her
    interests and life in Assab. However, she spent most of her  time  with
    her aunt and in the  hairdressers  helping  out.  We  do  not  find  it
    credible that the appellant would not  have  used  the  opportunity  to
    speak to Eritreans in  the  hair  salon  and  to  pick  up  some  basic
    knowledge of Tigrinya.   We  find  the  appellant  is  intelligent  and
    articulate as demonstrated by the fact that she was able  to  give  the
    majority of her  evidence  before  us  in  the  English  language.   We
    conclude that it would have been reasonable for the appellant  to  have
    learned some Tigrinya in her  surroundings  and  furthermore  that  she
    would have been motivated to do so in order to be able  to  attend  the
    local school.  We therefore do not accept the  appellant's  explanation
    for her limited knowledge of Tigrinya and of Assab.  We do accept  that
    there may well be many  people  living  in  Assab  who  speak  Amharic,
    however, we do not find this a credible explanation for the appellant's
    linguistic limitations. We rely on the expert conclusion  at  paragraph
    14 that:

         "As a person who says she is originally from Eritrea and  lived  in
         Eritrea for seven months, it is reasonable to expect  her  to  have
         some understanding of the Tigrinya language, to know the answers to
         most of the general questions put to  her  regarding  the  city  of
         Assab and Eritrea.  It is reasonable to  expect  any  Eritrean  who
         lived in Assab even for a short period of time to be familiar  with
         some of its prominent landmarks.

         The appellant's  knowledge  of  the  Tigrinya  language,  Eritrea's
         geography and politics are very limited.  I expected her to be able
         to demonstrate some rudimentary knowledge than she did."

16.  We raise concerns that the evidence of Mr Bereket was produced at  such
    a late stage, given that the appellant has been  attending  the  King's
    Cross church for some years.  It seems a  remarkable  coincidence  that
    she would not have discovered that Mr  Bereket  knew  her  brother  and
    family prior to the summer of this year.  In any event we place  little
    weight on his evidence as we found it to be vague and general.    There
    was no detailed information that Mr Bereket  was  able  to  provide  to
    satisfy us that he knew the appellant's brother from Assab in 2004.

17.  As to the  documentary  evidence  of  the  letters  from  the  Eritrean
    organisation, we place little weight on  this  evidence.   We  find  no
    information or reasons  given  to   support  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is an Eritrean  citizen.   Of  particular  note  we  find  an
    absence of information as to how the assessment was made. In particular
    there is reference to a last  resort  mechanism  for  ascertaining  the
    claimant's  nationality  which  is  the  ability  to   speak   Eritrean
    languages. Yet we find that there is no reference in the report to  the
    fact that the appellant speaks Amharic and/or that  she  is  unable  to
    speak Tigrinya.  It is unclear therefore how this assessment  was  made
    and we place no weight whatsoever on this letter.  Equally  lacking  in
    evidential weight is the application form submitted  to  the  Ethiopian
    passport office.  We find the notes made on the form are  minimal.   It
    is unclear what evidence is relied on to support a conclusion that  the
    appellant is an Eritrean national.

18.  In summary, we find that the appellant is not an Eritrean citizen.   We
    place weight and reliance on the conclusion of Professor  Kibreab.   We
    do not find it credible that the appellant lived in Assab with her aunt
    in the circumstances claimed. We  do  not  accept  that  her  aunt  was
    involved in activities that brought her to the adverse attention of the
    Ethiopian authorities and in respect of which the decision was made  to
    leave Ethiopia and travel to Eritrea.  We do not find  the  account  of
    the aunt's activities to be plausible. This was  not  information  that
    was given by the appellant at the time of her initial asylum claim.  We
    find that the appellant would have known that this  was  of  importance
    and significance at the time of making her  claim  notwithstanding  her
    young age and that it was reasonable for her to have done so.  We  find
    that the appellant is a national from Ethiopia and that she can  return
    to that country where she does not face any risk of persecution for any
    Convention reason.  We conclude therefore that she does not qualify for
    refugee status and she does not qualify for humanitarian protection  as
    she can return to Ethiopia and join her family.

19.  We find that Article 3 ECHR (  and  /or  on  medical  grounds)  is  not
    engaged.  We rely on our conclusions and findings above. The  appellant
    can return to Ethiopia where she will be able to practise her religious
    faith and live a normal life with her family.  There is no evidence and
    it is not submitted that the appellant has  a  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  She has not established any private life  in  the  UK;  she  has
    lived here for a relatively short time only.

20. Decision

We dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

We dismiss the appeal under humanitarian protection grounds.

We dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed   Date 14.1.14

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

No fee award - exempt.


Signed   Date 14.1.14

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

