
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00882/2015
     AA/00883/2015
     AA/00884/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 30 September 2015                          | On 2 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before


                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FJ
                                     AN
                                     AJ
                                                                 Respondents

                                  ANONYMITY

The First-Tier Tribunal made an Anonymity  Order  which  continues.   Unless
the Upper Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of  any  proceedings
or any form of publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
the original appellants. This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
parties.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   We shall refer to the  respondents  as  the  appellants  as  they  were
    before the First-Tier Tribunal.  They are citizens of St.  Vincent  and
    the Grenadines.  The first appellant (hereinafter "the appellant")  was
    born on 4 September 1988.  The two other appellants are  her  dependent
    children.  Their respective dates of birth are  21  March  2010  and  7
    September 2012.  The appellant made an application for asylum which was
    refused by the Secretary of State on  8  January  2015.   She  appealed
    against that decision and her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Moore, in a decision of 1 June 2015, following a  hearing
    on 6 May 2015.  The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett on 19 June 2015.

2.   The appellant came to the UK in July 2013, having been granted a  visit
    visa.  Her claim is that she is in fear of her husband and his  family.
    It is accepted by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  was  the
    victim of domestic violence inflicted by  her  husband.  He  now  faces
    criminal charges of rape. It is accepted  that  the  appellant  is  the
    victim of one of the allegations.  It is accepted by the  Secretary  of
    State  that  the  appellant  received  threatening  messages  from  her
    husband's family who reside in St Vincent.  The  Secretary  of  State's
    position is that the appellant's husband is residing in the UK and  she
    has no contact with him and thus she would not be at  risk  on  return.
    In any event, it is the view of the Secretary of State, that  there  is
    sufficiency of protection and relocation is a viable option.

3.   Permission was granted in relation  to  the  first  ground  only.   The
    issues raised therein can be summarised.  It is asserted that the judge
    did not adequately explain how the husband's family would be  aware  of
    the appellant's return.  It is asserted  that  the  motivation  of  the
    husband's family is not material because the criminal  charges  against
    the husband are being brought in UK.  It is asserted that the judge did
    not deal with  sufficiency  of  protection.   The  appellant  served  a
    response under Rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure rules and  we  heard  oral
    submissions.

4.   Judge Moore found that the appellant was credible.  The judge found  at
    [34] that the appellant's husband and his family  have  the  desire  to
    exact retribution on  the  appellant  noting  the  outstanding  charges
    against him.  The judge found that the threats made by his family  were
    serious.  The perpetrators are the appellant's husband and his  family.
    We do not accept that  if  her  husband  remains  in  the  UK  (and  is
    convicted and sentenced) and she  returns  to  St  Vincent  this  would
    materially reduce the risk.  It is clear that the judge  did  not  find
    that risk was dependent on the husband's presence in  St  Vincent.   In
    any event, the appellant's evidence  was  that  he  regularly  returns.
    Neither party updated us in relation to the criminal  proceedings,  but
    it was not for the judge to speculate that there would be a  conviction
    followed by lengthy custodial sentence.

5.   The grounds assert that the judge failed to  deal  with  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection.  This is  not  correct.   His  findings  and
    reasons are contained in [34] to [37]. Ms Fijiwala  expanded  on  this.
    She argued that the judge failed to consider  the  background  evidence
    cited in the decision letter.  We do not accept this.  The  judge  took
    into account the background evidence relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He made reference to the Human Rights Report of 2013 (see [36])
    but he reached different conclusions to those reached by  the  decision
    maker.  He also took into account the background evidence submitted  by
    the appellant (see [36] and [37]).  It is not suggested that the  judge
    misunderstood or misapplied the background evidence.  The appellant  is
    the victim of serious domestic violence and  is  at  risk  of  domestic
    violence on return. Whether it is perpetrated by  her  husband  or  his
    family is immaterial.  The judge was correct to consider sufficiency of
    protection in the context of domestic  violence  and  his  decision  is
    lawful and sustainable.

6.   The judge considered  relocation  at  [36]  and  [40].   He  took  into
    account the size of the island and the population.  He found that there
    was no reason to doubt the appellant's evidence that  her  husband  and
    family are well-known there.  The judge found that as a  single  female
    with two children she would be easily located.  At [36] the judge found
    that the perpetrators would become  aware  of  the  appellant's  return
    within a reasonable period of her arrival there and relocation was  not
    therefore safe option. His findings are grounded in  the  evidence  and
    reasoned.

7.   There is no properly identified error of law in the decision  of  Judge
    Moore and we dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is maintained.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

