
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00705/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date sent                    |
|on 8 July 2013                                |On 12 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 QING YANG LI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mrs F Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1)  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for   reasons
   explained in a letter dated 17 January 2013.

2) First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski dismissed the appellant's appeal  by
   determination dated 5 March 2013.  The appellant was found,  for  several
   good reasons, not to be a credible or reliable witness.

3) The appellant claimed that while in the UK he had written blogs  critical
   of the Chinese authorities; that the Chinese  authorities  removed  these
   blogs from the  internet;  and  that  through  the  use  of  his  Chinese
   identification number in order to post the blogs, he could be  identified
   as the author on return to China.

4) It is common ground that the  Chinese  authorities  treat  critical  blog
   writers harshly, imposing heavy penalties.

5) The substance of the appellant's ground of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
   is as follows:

    At paragraph 34, the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated:


     "I do not find it logical for the appellant to produce  a  text  of  a
    blog  and  also  produce  a  docket,  apparently   from   the   Chinese
    authorities, saying that the blog  has  been  removed  because  of  its
    content when the source evidence is from the whole screen shot.  It may
    be that that translation of the docket is on a separate screen shot but
    that is not shown.  To my mind it is also  not  obvious  what  the  web
    addresses are.  I am therefore not satisfied that the screen shots  are
    pointing to the Chinese blogosphere.  The only evidence to confirm that
    the screen shots  are  as  claimed  and  were  posted  in  the  Chinese
    blogosphere comes from the appellant himself."


    The documents in the appellant's bundle do show the web address.  It is
    also clear from the appellant's evidence that his blogs  were  separate
    articles which he then published on his blog ...  the  evidence  lodged
    clearly shows firstly the blog itself then the screen after it has been
    deleted by the  Chinese  authorities.   The  judge  misinterpreted  the
    evidence and erred in law ...


6) In response to a suggestion in the grant  of  permission,  the  appellant
   produced certified translations for the Upper Tribunal of what purport to
   be his critical blogs, with  notifications  that  his  account  has  been
   suspended and the documents will be "passed to the law department".

7) Mrs Farrell said that the judge misdirected herself regarding the  nature
   of the internet evidence.  The judge erred  by  finding  that  there  was
   evidence of persecution of bloggers, but not of those  who  blogged  from
   abroad.  However, it  was  obvious  that  a  blogger  from  abroad  whose
   materials had been  deleted  and  who  could  be  identified  would  face
   consequences on return, and that  these  would  reach  the  threshold  of
   persecution.  Mrs Farrell referred to a report by Freedom House, "Freedom
   on the Net 2012: China", dated 24 September 2012.  This includes evidence
   of the Chinese authorities' elaborate control of the internet.  At page 3
   there is a reference to the major microblogging service Sina Yeibo  which
   had 300 million users, 27 million  of  whom  were  active  daily,  and  a
   monitoring  system  to  prevent  circulation  of  politically   sensitive
   content.  There are instances of suppression of controversial  materials.
   This is the service the appellant used.

8) Mrs Farrell submitted that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should be reversed.

9) Mr Mullen  said  that  the  appellant  had  a  history  which  more  than
   justified the adverse credibility conclusions made against  him,  and  he
   was the only real source of the suggestion that he  could  be  identified
   from anything he posted on the internet.  He has been  in  the  UK  since
   2007, entering as a student, but appeared never to have attended college.
    He made an asylum claim in 2012 in a false name.  The judge at paragraph
   36 was not satisfied that the appellant had shown that he did blog in his
   own identity from the UK.  That finding was not directly challenged,  and
   did not disclose any error.  It  was  easy  to  produce  materials  which
   appeared as if they might have been on the  internet.   Such  items  were
   readily open to manipulation.  They were rightly not given  credit,  when
   they came from such a dubious source.

10) Mrs Farrell in reply referred to extract evidence from the  respondent's
   COIR (Country of Origin Information Report) which  showed  that  bloggers
   were persecuted.  She maintained that the appellant had provided in total
   36 pages of his internet blogs.  Despite his past conduct the deletion of
   these blogs by the Chinese authorities established his sur place claim.

11) I reserved my determination.

12) Mr Mullen correctly pointed to the judge's key finding at paragraph  36.
    The appellant failed to prove that he posted blogs on  Chinese  websites
   using his identification number so as to be identifiable by  the  Chinese
   authorities on return.  The judge said that she would have required  much
   greater proof of such a claim from an appellant who was otherwise  in  no
   way credible.  Even recalling the low standard  of  proof,  there  is  no
   error of law therein.

13) It does not require specialist knowledge to observe that it is  easy  to
   copy, paste,  type  and  print  from  the  internet  to  give  a  desired
   impression.  There was no  discernible  chain  of  evidence  linking  the
   appellant's authorship of anti-authority blogs, the adverse  reaction  of
   the authorities, and his personal identifiability on return.

14) The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  been  shown  to
   involve the making of any error on a point of law, such as to require  it
   to be set aside.  That determination shall stand.

15) No order for anonymity has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                9 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
