
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00344/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 19 November 2015                  |
|Prepared 2 November 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant did not appear at the hearing.  Notice was served  at  her
    last known address at 82 [ - ].  There is nothing on the file  to  show
    notices were returned.  The same address was one at which the Appellant
    was living at the time of the original hearing.  There was  nothing  to
    indicate that  there  was  any  change  of  address  and  although  her
    representatives Albany Solicitors at some stage ceased  to  act,  there
    was nothing on the file to confirm that.  I was satisfied that  it  was
    appropriate, just and  fair,  applying  the  overriding  objective,  to
    proceed in the absence of the Claimant  who  had  voluntarily  absented
    herself from the process and failed to keep in touch with the IAC.

3.   The Claimant, a national of Iran, date  of  birth  23  September  1993,
    appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  make  removal
    directions following the refusal of a Refugee Convention claim.

4.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Barcello who, on 8 May 2015, dismissed the appeal on Refugee Convention
    grounds but allowed it under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 as amended.

5.   Permission to appeal was sought by the Secretary of  State  on  14  May
    2015 and was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on  27  May
    2015.  The Claimant claimed that her removal put her at risk on  return
    to Iran and in addition interfered  with  her  family  life  under  the
    provisions of Appendix FM as well as Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.    The  judge  concluded  that  the  Claimant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph R-LTRPT of Appendix FM and concluded that it was not possible
    for K, her UK national son, date of birth 12  August  2014,  to  remove
    with her to  Iran  leaving  behind  his  father,  formerly  an  Iranian
    national, and a half-brother, by the name of  D.   The  judge  did  not
    apparently ask how old D was but by reference to photographs cautiously
    estimated him to be of 6-9 years old.  D had a close relationship  with
    his father, that is the Claimant's husband, as well  as  with  K.   The
    position was that K lived with his mother but had regular contact  with
    his  father.   Similarly  his  father  took  an  active  part  in   K's
    upbringing.

7.   On the face of it under paragraph EX1 the  judge  assessed  whether  it
    was reasonable to expect the child K to leave and did so  by  reference
    to the case law set out at paragraphs 55 to 59 of  the  decision.   The
    judge did not go on to consider EX2 explicitly but it is  fair  to  say
    that at paragraphs 59, 60 and  61  the  judge  assessed  the  practical
    realities and difficulties faced by the separation of K from his father
    and the role his father played in the development and upbringing of D.

8.   Those were fact specific matters which the judge found,  or  in  effect
    found, in the decision.  The Secretary of State's  challenge  does  not
    address the finding that the Claimant fell within  Section  R-LTRPT  of
    Appendix FM, nor the view that the judge took of the interference  were
    the Claimant's husband to return  with  her  to  Iran  and  essentially
    attacked the general reasons which the judge gave from the relationship
    between D, his father and K.  As Mr Richards properly pointed out,  the
    judge did not explicitly refer to EX2.  However, I concluded,  weak  as
    the reasoning was, the fact is the judge considered the implications of
    the removal of the Claimant from her child,D, the separation  from  her
    husband and its implications which  meant  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the United Kingdom, bearing in mind  there  was  no
    prospect of K and his mother removing to Iran.

9.   It seemed to me that if the  judge  had  gone  on  to  more  fully  and
    explicitly set out EX2 and its consequences, the very same result would
    have been reached: As it would by any other tribunal considering  those
    circumstances.  The brief of reasons and  failing  to  explicitly  deal
    with EX.2 of Appendix  FM  were  unlikely  to  result  in  a  different
    tribunal,  properly  considering  the  issues,  reaching  a   different
    decision.

10.  In those circumstances I am not satisfied that the Original  Tribunal's
    error was a material error of law

ANONYMITY ORDER

11.  Given the  age  of  the  respective  children  an  anonymity  order  is
    appropriate.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

NOTICE OF DECISION

12.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed



Signed   Date 13 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

