
                                    [pic]



UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER  Appeal: AA/00327/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 1 February 2017             |On: 2 February 2017             |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                                  Giang [B]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Talacchi, instructed by Morgan Hall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                  DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL



This is an appeal against a determination dated 6  October  2016  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp which refused  the  appellant's  asylum  and
human rights appeal.

The grounds challenge the findings  and  comments  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge at [11]. Judge Boylan-Kemp said this:

    "The appellant failed to attend the appeal hearing despite a Notice  of
    Hearing being sent to her last known address on 5 April 2016 and to her
    legal representative, Morgan Hall Solicitors, on  the  same  date.  The
    appellant's representatives had contacted the Tribunal on  5  September
    2016 to update the appellant's address and to inform the Tribunal  that
    they had received no contact since submission of  the  appeal  fees  in
    March 2016; I considered this communication and decided that  effective
    notice of hearing had occurred and that this late  contact  immediately
    prior to the hearing date was no more than an attempt to frustrate  the
    appeal process. Therefore, I was content to proceed in the  absence  of
    the appellant as I found that it was in the interests of justice to  do
    so."

The appeal  proceeded  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant  and  her  legal
representatives.

The grounds, put simply, argue that a procedural irregularity occurred  such
that a fair hearing did not take place. It was not open  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to treat a letter from legal representatives regulated by  the  Law
Society and with a duty of  candour  to  the  court  as,  in  effect,  being
dishonest, maintaining that they and the appellant had not  received  notice
of the hearing when they had. Neither  the  legal  representatives  nor  the
appellant had received notice of the hearing and  the  Tribunal  had  proper
notice of that but still proceeded.

Having seen the letter of 5 September 2016 from the  legal  representatives,
Mr Tufan agreed that it supported  strongly the submission that it  was  not
open to the First-tier Tribunal to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  letter
merely being "an attempt to frustrate the appeal  process",  that  the  only
permissible interpretation of it  was  that  the  appellant  and  her  legal
representatives had not received notice of the  hearing  regardless  of  the
hearing notices having been  sent  out  and  that  a  procedural  error  had
occurred where the appellant had not had  the  opportunity  to  present  her
case.

I was in agreement with the parties as to there being an  error  of  law  on
that basis and also as to the most appropriate disposal being to  remit  the
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal where the appellant  had  not  yet  had  a
proper opportunity to present her case.



DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made de novo.



DIRECTIONS

The appeal will be heard at the  Birmingham  hearing  centre  on  the  first
available date before a panel other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-
Kemp.

No later than 7 days prior to the hearing, the parties are to file with  the
First-tier Tribunal and serve on the other party ALL  evidence  relied  upon
in a consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle.


Signed: [pic]                       Date:  1 February 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
