
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00380/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2018                   |On 17 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                SN and others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Congo  (Brazzaville).   Their  personal
    details (subject to the direction of anonymity) are as follows:

         SN born 1961

         BN (spouse) born 1961

         GN (daughter) born 1990

         BN (daughter) born 1995

         MN (daughter) born 1996

         MK (daughter) born 2000

         NN (son) born 2005

         YK (daughter) born 2011.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 6 June 2017, I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and remade the decision allowing the appeals of
    SN, BN, MN, NN and YN.  My decision was as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, SN, is a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Congo
         (Brazzaville) (hereafter referred to as the Congo).  He was born in
         1961.  He entered the United Kingdom in April 2009 and has lived in
         this country with his wife and five children.  He claimed asylum in
         September 2009 but his claim was refused  by  a  decision  dated  9
         November 2009.  Subsequent appeals were dismissed and the appellant
         became appeal rights exhausted by November 2011.  He  made  further
         submissions  to  the  respondent  which  were   rejected   and   he
         subsequently initiated proceedings in the Administrative Court  for
         judicial  review  and  the  Court  of  Appeal.    Ultimately,   the
         respondent accepted in January  2015  that  the  appellant's  fresh
         submissions should  be  considered  and,  on  19  January  2015,  a
         decision was taken to  refuse  the  application  for  asylum.   The
         appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)
         which, in a decision promulgated on 28 November 2016, dismissed the
         asylum/Article 3 ECHR appeals but allowed the appeal on  Article  8
         ECHR grounds.  There are cross-appeals before the  Upper  Tribunal.
         I shall refer to SN as the appellant (as he was before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal) and to the Secretary of State as the respondent.

         2.   I shall deal first with the appellant's appeal in  respect  of
         asylum/Article 3  ECHR.   Summarising  the  grounds  when  granting
         permission in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
         stated:

             "The grounds argue that the judge failed properly or at all to
             refer  to  the   relevant   background   country   information
             concerning the deteriorating human rights situation in the DRC
             and failed properly to consider the expert report.

             The judge did refer to some of the background  information  at
             paras 18-20.  It is not  clear  from  the  grounds  what  else
             precisely other documents  would  demonstrate.   Nevertheless,
             the judge's rejection of the clearly articulated  opinions  of
             the  expert  report  supporting  the  risk  to  the  appellant
             (rejecting some as speculative) arguably fails to give  proper
             weight to and/or reasons for rejecting, the expert report."

         3.   The grant of permission refers inaccurately to  the  appellant
         as a citizen of DRC (Democratic Republic of Congo); as I have noted
         above, he is a citizen of Congo Brazzaville, otherwise known as the
         Republic of Congo, having been born there in 1961.

         4.   As Judge Grubb accurately  records,  the  challenge  to  Judge
         Turnock's decision concerns his treatment  of  background  material
         and expert evidence.  The appellant had two expert witnesses (Ticky
         Monekosso and Paul Melly).  Having set out in  considerable  detail
         the contents of the expert reports and  updated  appendices,  Judge
         Turnock wrote this:

             "I find a number of the opinions expressed in the Report to be
             speculative, for example the reporting  of  cases  which  took
             place under the regime of  President  Lissouba  in  connection
             with the risk to the Appellant under the current regime.

             99.  The Appellant accepts that, as a civil  servant,  he  was
             not a major figure in the opposition. However,  he  claims  he
             was  part  of  the  'intellectual  elite'  that  was  used  by
             Professor Lissouba's power and the strategy of  the  power  of
             Denis Sassou Nguesso to get some 'intellectuals nationals'  of
             friendly regions to Pascal Lissouba and show  that  the  power
             was not tribal. The Appellant claims that "having  refused  to
             play this game against nature" he had no alternative  than  to
             flee the country to save his life.

             100. The Appellant left the Congo in 2009 and has not returned
             since that date.  Whilst away from the country he has taken no
             part in any  political  activity  nor  has  he  expressed  the
             intention or desire to take part in any political activity.  I
             do not accept that he would be  considered  to  be  an  active
             opponent of the regime nor being part of the Diaspora  and  de
             facto supporting the opposition movement in Congo. I find that
             there is no reason why he would be  considered  as  subversive
             and a challenge to the official power structure.

             101. As noted in the updated Expert Report  a  number  of  the
             former opposition have now been accommodated by the new regime
             and I am not satisfied that the Appellant, taking  account  of
             his limited previous activity, would still be of any  interest
             to the Government.

             102. I conclude that the Appellant would not  be  at  risk  on
             return to the Congo"

         5.   Earlier in the decision [47] the judge expressed  his  concern
         that it was "a little troubling" that Ms  Monekosso  had  supported
         her opinions by referring to "my experience as  a  student  at  the
         Congolese University" noting that she had completed her studies  as
         long ago as 1990.  However, in the following paragraph,  the  judge
         was careful to state, "however although those matters gave me cause
         for concern, I do not dismiss the opinion of the experts to which I
         gave due weight".  The care with which Judge Turnock had considered
         all the evidence is set out  also  at  [46].   He  noted  that  the
         experts had written (over the space of several  paragraphs)  first,
         "on the issue of the ownership of the newspaper Le Temps it will be
         difficult to prove that President Lissouba was the  owner  of  that
         paper", only to state later, "[the appellant] was economics  editor
         of the newspaper Le Temps in the mid 1990s.  We have been  able  to
         confirm that this paper was owned by the then president  of  Congo,
         Pascal Lissouba".  I consider that Judge Turnock was quite  rightly
         concerned by this glaring inconsistency which, at the  very  least,
         indicated  that  the  authors  of  the  report  had  not  carefully
         proofread the document.   That  Judge  Turnock  should  still  give
         considerable weight to the report  which  contained  such  careless
         inaccuracies, is a clear indication of the even-handed way in which
         he considered the evidence in this appeal.

         6.   It was the task of the judge to weigh each  of  the  items  of
         evidence and then to consider all the evidence as a totality before
         reaching his findings  of  fact.   Quite  rightly,  the  judge  has
         considered the expert evidence together with  the  appellant's  own
         written and  oral  evidence.   It  was  clear  that  Judge  Turnock
         considered that the evidence base with which the experts sought  to
         support their opinions as to  risk  did  not  fully  justify  those
         opinions.  The judge gave proper weight to the opinions of  experts
         (as he stated that he had  done)  but  equally,  he  was  right  to
         express his concern that the opinions as to risk expressed were not
         supported by the evidence and  were  therefore  (as  Judge  Turnock
         describes them) "speculative".  Further,  Congo  Brazzaville  is  a
         country which is, even by the standards of  that  part  of  Africa,
         subject to instability and has a complex political landscape.   The
         judge made findings as to the political profile of  this  appellant
         and he reached the conclusion that, notwithstanding the opinions of
         the experts, the evidence simply did not  support  the  appellant's
         contention that, having a relatively low profile  and  having  left
         Congo  Brazzaville  as  long  ago  as  2009,  he  would  not   face
         persecution or ill-treatment either at  the  point  of  arrival  in
         Congo or subsequently whilst  living  in  his  home  area  of  that
         country.  In particular, I find that the judge did not err  in  law
         in the statements which he has made (quoted above) in his  decision
         at [98-102].  In consequence, the appellant's  appeal  against  the
         dismissal of the asylum/Article 3 ECHR appeal is dismissed.

         7.   As regards the Secretary of State's appeal against the Article
         8 ECHR decision, the grounds of appeal record that the  appellant's
         oldest daughter (G) was 26 years old at the  date  of  the  hearing
         before Judge Turnock.   The  grounds  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         comment, "it appears the parties for  reasons  entirely  not  clear
         accepted that joint decisions should be issued" in respect  of  the
         wife and minor children of the appellant but also in respect of the
         daughter, G.  Judge Turnock  refers  to  that  "agreement"  in  his
         decision at [23]:

             "In the further representations submitted on 26  January  2012
             the Appellant's representatives  stated:  "Please  be  advised
             that simultaneously to  this  application  we  submit  further
             representations on behalf of our client's eldest daughter, GN.
             GN is over the age of 18 years, and therefore is entitled to a
             claim  for  asylum  in  her  own  right.  For  the   sake   of
             completeness, a separate bundle of  representations  has  been
             prepared in her name. However, it should be  noted  that  GN'S
             claim relates largely to that of her father. We would  request
             that our client and his  daughter  are  issued  with  a  joint
             decision on their respective matters."

         8.   I note that the spouse of the appellant was born in  1973  and
         that other children were born respectively  in  1995,  1996,  2000,
         2005 and 2011.

         9.   The judge quoted at length from the jurisprudence relating  to
         Article 8 ECHR and also set out the provisions of  Section  117  of
         the 2002 Act (as amended).  Ms Khan, for the  appellant,  submitted
         that (perhaps unusually) the judge had then gone on  to  apply  the
         relevant case law to the facts as he  found  them  in  the  appeal.
         Indeed,  at  [25],  the  judge  sets  out  in  detail  the  current
         circumstances of the all the children.  At [127]  the  judge  wrote
         this:

             "The  Appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  since  2009  and  his
             immigration  status  has  been  precarious   throughout   that
             period. He speaks fluent English, is well-educated  and  would
             be in a position to find legitimate employment.  His  children
             have all been in the country for the past seven years and have
             built their lives here. The legislation recognises that such a
             lengthy period in  the  UK  brings  with  it  a  status  which
             equates,  for  this  purpose,  to  British  citizenship.   The
             children have spent their time in the UK diligently  and  will
             be in a position where they can contribute to society."

         10.  At [128], the judge concluded that it would  be  "unreasonable
         to expect the children of the appellant to leave the country and so
         it  follows  that  the  removal   of   the   appellant   would   be
         disproportionate and accordingly in breach  of  the  provisions  of
         Article 8 of the ECHR".

         11.   The  decision  on  Article  8  grounds  is  not  without  its
         difficulties.  For whatever reason (and the absence of any  obvious
         reason appears to concern the author of the  Secretary  of  State's
         grounds) the  Presenting  Officer  before  Judge  Turnock  and  the
         representative agreed that the eldest child (GN)  should  have  her
         appeal dealt with with that of  her  father.   More  troubling,  as
         Judge Page noted when granting permission to the respondent, two of
         the other children of the appellant (B, born in 1995 and M born  in
         1996) are also adults.  Further, it is clear from the comments made
         by the judge at [23] (quoted above) that the oldest  child  GN  had
         brought her own claim for asylum in her own name and that the judge
         was referring at this paragraph in effect to the  consolidation  of
         her claim/appeal with that of her father (that is  with  G  as  the
         father's dependant in the appeal).  But there is some force in  the
         submissions of the respondent that the judge's analysis  at  [125],
         where he sets out what each of the children are now doing,  appears
         to ignore the fact that three of the children are adults.  Equally,
         there is force in Ms Khan's submission that  the  younger  children
         have lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven years, a  fact
         properly identified by Judge Turnock.  However, this has led to the
         somewhat unsatisfactory outcome that the appeal of  the  appellant,
         his wife and the three youngest children (M, N and Y) have,  in  my
         opinion, been properly allowed by Judge Turnock on Article  8  ECHR
         grounds whilst the appeals of the three eldest  children  have  not
         been  properly  differentiated  from  the  law  and   circumstances
         applying to their parents and their younger siblings.  In my  view,
         at the end of a very lengthy  and  very  detailed  decision,  Judge
         Turnock  has  perhaps   understandably   mistaken   the   effective
         consolidation of G's asylum claim with that  of  her  father  as  a
         reason for not applying the relevant legal provisions  to  each  of
         the children; he has, in a sense, applied the law relevant to  some
         of them to all of the children.

         12.  However, I do not consider it is a simple  matter  for  me  to
         allow the Secretary of State's appeal in respect of Article  8  and
         to reverse that decision.  The fact that three of the children  are
         adults is, of course, irrelevant but, in appropriate circumstances,
         the claim to remain on Article 8 grounds may succeed even when made
         by an adult child.  Therefore, I set aside the  decision  of  Judge
         Turnock.  I re-make the decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal
         on asylum/Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds.  I  re-make  the  decision  in
         respect of Article 8 allowing the appeals  of  the  appellant,  his
         spouse and the three younger children (M, N and Y).   The  Tribunal
         will determine the appeals of the children GN, B and M at a resumed
         hearing on a date to be fixed at  Bradford  before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Clive Lane.  Both parties have permission to file  and  serve
         new evidence in respect of Article 8 for those appellants  provided
         they do so at least ten clear days before the date of  the  resumed
         hearing.




         Notice of Decision

         13.  I set aside the decision of  Judge  Turnock.   I  re-make  the
         decision dismissing the appellant's appeal on  asylum/Articles  2/3
         ECHR grounds.  I re-make the  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8
         allowing the appeals of the appellant, his  spouse  and  the  three
         younger children (M, N and Y).  The  Tribunal  will  determine  the
         appeals of the children G, B and M at a resumed hearing on  a  date
         to be fixed at Bradford before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane.
         Both parties have permission to file  and  serve  new  evidence  in
         respect of Article 8 for those appellants provided they  do  so  at
         least ten clear days before the date of the resumed hearing.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 3. The appeals of GN, BN and MN remain outstanding.  Following  a  resumed
    hearing, I reserved my decision.

 4. I shall deal first with the appeals of the children BN (born 1995)  and
    MN (born 1996).  Miss Khan, for the appellants,  submitted  that  these
    appellants fell to  be  granted  leave  to  remain  in  line  with  the
    principal appellant, SN (their  father).   She  relied  upon  the  Home
    Office's Asylum Policy Instruction (Dependants and  Former  Dependants)
    (Version 2.0: May 2014).  Section  4.1  of  the  guidance  provides  as
    follows:

         '4.1 Granting leave to dependants Dependants of an asylum applicant
         who have been included in the initial asylum  claim  will,  if  the
         principal applicant is granted Asylum, HP, Family or  Private  Life
         leave to remain (LTR) or Discretionary Leave, normally  be  granted
         leave of the same duration and status as the  principal  applicant.
         Paragraph 349 of the Immigration Rules states that if the principal
         applicant is granted asylum or HP and  leave  to  enter  or  remain
         (LTE/R), any qualifying dependants will also  be  granted  for  the
         same duration. This applies whether the dependants arrived  in  the
         UK with the principal applicant or followed at  a  later  date  but
         were included in the application  before  the  decision  was  made.
         Although it may not be appropriate to recognise some dependants  as
         refugees, for example  if  they  specifically  request  not  to  be
         treated as a refugee or they are a  different  nationality  to  the
         principal applicant, they should still be  granted  LTE/R  for  the
         same duration as  the  principal  applicant.  Where  the  principal
         applicant has been granted leave under the Restricted Leave policy,
         any dependants  should  normally  be  granted  leave  of  the  same
         duration and conditions as the individual granted restricted leave.
         However, caseworkers must have regard to the need to safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of children in the UK under section 55 so  must
         consider the likely impact that imposing such conditions  may  have
         on dependant children and  consider  what  is  appropriate  in  the
         particular circumstances of the individual case.  See  section  1.4
         for application of this instruction to children and the "Restricted
         Leave" guidance.'

 5. Both the children were under 18 years at  the  time  of  the  principal
    appellant's claim for asylum.  They  should,  in  accordance  with  the
    Secretary of State's policy, be granted leave to  remain  of  the  same
    duration and status as the principal appellant.  Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the
    Secretary of State, did not seek to  disagree  with  that  proposition.
    Accordingly I allow the appeals of BN and MN on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 6. The entire family, therefore, has been granted leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with the exception of the daughter,  GN.   GN  does  not
    fall within the terms of the Home Office guidance because  she  was  19
    years old when the  family  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    principal appellant claimed asylum.   In  her  submissions,  Miss  Khan
    first submitted that  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Mrs Fell) had submitted that the appeal of GN "stood and fell
    together" with the remainder of the family.  Secondly, GN  herself  had
    specific reasons for seeking to remain in the United Kingdom on Article
    8 grounds.

 7. GN briefly gave evidence to the Upper Tribunal and was  cross-examined.
    She relied upon her latest witness statement  (made  jointly  with  her
    sisters MN and SN and which is dated January 2018).   It  was  apparent
    from the witness statement that, despite the restrictions  on  tertiary
    education, GN has made good use of  her  time  in  the  United  Kingdom
    achieving considerable academic success.  She has acted as a  volunteer
    and debt assessor at the Citizens Advice Bureau.  The brother of  these
    children,  YN,  is  autistic.   GN  explained  that  her  brother   has
    particular trust in her and that only she can assist him when he awakes
    and becomes distressed.  GN herself left Congo  when  she  was  only  8
    years old she said she did not "know very much about it."  She  has  no
    friends or relatives living in Congo.  She explained in  her  evidence,
    that she had lived with her family in Cameroon  before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  I asked GN who would provide the  special  care  which
    she provides at the present time for  her  brother  when  she  goes  to
    university.  She told me that the family intend  to  relocate  so  that
    they will live within commuting distance of the university campus.   GN
    would, therefore, be able to remain living  at  home  while  she  is  a
    student and would be able to care for her brother.

 8. I am aware that GN is an adult.  I am aware that she was an adult  when
    she came to the United Kingdom with the rest of her family.  However, I
    was very impressed by her  evidence  and  accept,  as  all  the  family
    members say, that the family is close-knit and that GN is a  vital  and
    integral part of it. In terms of her private life,  I  find  that  this
    would be suffer disproportionate interference if she were to be removed
    to Congo.  However, it is possible to  go  beyond  that  statement.   I
    accept the evidence that  GN  offers  special  care  for  her  autistic
    brother and that that care further strengthens what is already  a  very
    close-knit family life.  I accept that GN left Congo  when  she  was  a
    young girl and that she has no ties with the  country  whatsoever.   In
    the very particular circumstances of this case, and notwithstanding the
    fact that GN is an adult, I find that it would  be  a  disproportionate
    breach of both her right to family and private life and the family life
    of her sisters, brother and parents if she were to be removed to  Congo
    Brazzaville.  I find that she should be granted human rights  leave  to
    remain in line with the other members of her family.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of the appellant's GN, BN and MN are  allowed  on  human  rights
grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 13 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
