
                                    [pic]
SELF-TYPED

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00527/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 November 2016                             |On 10 January 2017         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                                LORD MATTHEWS

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                Al (ALBANIA)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H.Cheng, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  the
    appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    qualifying for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules, on account of being the target of a blood feud.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is an Albanian national, and it is accepted that his date
    of birth is 23 November 1997.  The  appellant  has  an  older  brother,
    "RL", who was born on 13 July 1995.

The older brother's asylum claim

 4. RL arrived in the UK on 29 October 2012 and claimed asylum on the  same
    day as the target of a blood feud.  His  claim  was  refused,  and  his
    appeal came before Judge Devittie sitting at Taylor  House  on  16  May
    2013.

 5. In his subsequent decision, Judge Devittie set  out  RL's  evidence  at
    paragraph [3]. In summary, he came from a village near Tirana  and  his
    family were in a blood feud with the Lita family.  This  feud  had  its
    genesis in a land dispute.

 6. The Lita family owned a piece  of  land  next  to  land  owned  by  his
    paternal  uncle  Ferit.   In  May  2011  Ramazan  Lita  began  erecting
    foundations for a house on the Lita family's land.  However,  the  area
    which he had marked out for construction encroached  on  Ferit's  land.
    Ferit returned from Greece where he was working in  order  to  confront
    Ramazan, who produced a map which he said showed that the disputed land
    was his. Ferit did not  accept  the  map's  authenticity,  and  Ramazan
    agreed to suspend further construction work while Ferit approached  the
    local land registry for clarification. In the event, Ferit went back to
    Greece and RL's father made the application to the local land registry.



 7. In May 2012 the local land registry produced a map which clearly showed
    that the construction work encroached on Ferit's land. A  site  meeting
    took place, which was attended by Ramazan, his father  [Ismail],  Ferit
    and RL's father.  Ferit showed Ramazan the map. He did not accept  that
    it was genuine, and  he  destroyed  it  as  well  as  the  accompanying
    documents. An altercation ensued, during which Ferit hit [Ismail]  Lita
    with a piece of wood, killing him. Ferit fled the scene and immediately
    left for Greece, fearful of a revenge attack. (I have placed  the  name
    of Ramazan's father in square brackets as his name is not given in  the
    decision.)

 8. The Lita family declared a blood feud. RL's mother went to the  police,
    who said they could not assist  because  Ferit  had  committed  murder,
    whereas the Lita family had not committed any crime. From the  time  of
    the declaration of the blood feud until  his  departure  on  28  August
    2012, RL and his father had  been  hiding  in  the  family  home.  RL's
    maternal uncle had collected him from home on 28 August 2012 and  taken
    him on a ferry to Italy.

 9. At paragraph [10] of his decision, Judge Devittie addressed the reasons
    given by the Home Office for disputing RL's credibility. One  of  these
    was canvassed in sub-paragraph  (iv)  of  paragraph  [10],  and  it  is
    pertinent to the error of law challenge in this appeal.

10. The Home Office noted that RL said that his  Uncle  Ferit  returned  to
    Albania from Greece "on a regular basis", which was  inconsistent  with
    his claim that Ferit had fled to Greece to escape the blood feud.  RL's
    riposte was that he had been misunderstood. His uncle had obviously not
    returned from Greece as he would be killed by the Lita family if he did
    so. His uncle had a residence document  which  enabled  him  to  travel
    freely between Albania and Greece;  and  he  had  used  this  residence
    document to leave Albania quickly following the incident.

11. In his findings at [15] Judge Devittie accepted that  RL's  family  was
    and remained the target of an active blood feud, after RL's  uncle  had
    killed Ramazan's father. He also accepted  that  RL's  uncle  had  fled
    Albania and remained in Greece, and  that  RL's  father  was  in  self-
    confinement in Albania, as he feared to leave the  house.  It  was  not
    reasonable to expect RL to relocate within Albania because of his  age,
    and so he qualified for recognition as a refugee.

The Appellant's Asylum Claim

12. The appellant claimed asylum at ASU Croydon on 24  December  2014.   He
    subsequently made a witness statement dated 26 January 2015 in which he
    gave the same account as that given by RL, and he elaborated on  points
    of detail in a subsequent asylum interview.  At the time  of  declaring
    the blood feud, he was only aged 14. So under Kanun law  he  could  not
    become a target until he was aged 16. Hence he had continued to  attend
    school until he was approaching the age of 16, when he  was  forced  to
    confine himself. He did not leave the house apart  from  one  occasion,
    when he accompanied his maternal uncle to the passport office to  apply
    for an Albanian passport and ID card. He hid in the back of the car for
    the 20 minute drive to the passport office, and entered  by  the  staff
    entrance in the staff car park so as not to  be  seen  in  public.  His
    uncle had paid a bribe of 20,000 lek for this facility: Q&A 124-5.  The
    Lita family were a large family, and Xhelil Lita worked for  the  local
    municipality (town hall). So Xhelil would  find  out  if  he  moved  to
    another part of Albania, as the  authorities  in  the  new  area  would
    contact the town hall to obtain his details before registering  him  in
    the new area.

13. On 15 March 2016 the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise the  appellant  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise  requiring
    international protection.   There  were  a  number  of  inconsistencies
    within his claim, such that it was not accepted that  Ismail  Lita  had
    been killed, so as to give rise to the claimed blood feud, or that  his
    Uncle Ferit was sheltering in Greece in order to avoid being killed  by
    the Lita family in Albania.  But even if there was  a  blood  feud,  he
    would not be at risk on return to Albania, having regard to the country
    guidance in EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).

14. The adverse credibility points relied on by the respondent included the
    fact that Ismail Lita was confirmed "by internal  governmental  checks"
    to be alive (paragraph 38) and the fact that the authorities in Albania
    had confirmed that the appellant's  uncle  had  not  left  Albania  for
    Greece until 3 June 2012; and  that  he  had  since  travelled  between
    Greece and Albania on seven further occasions (paragraph 39).

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Farmer sitting at Hatton Cross
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 26 September  2016.   The  appellant  was
    represented by Ms Mwamuye, Solicitor,  and  Ms  Mohammed,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

16. In advance of the hearing,  the  appellant  solicitors  had  asked  the
    Tribunal to make an order directing the respondent to serve evidence of
    the enquiries referred to in  paragraphs  38  and  39  of  the  refusal
    letter. The Tribunal made an order directing the  respondent  to  serve
    "all documentary evidence" relied upon to establish the assertions made
    in these paragraphs.

17.  On  the  day  of  the  hearing,  the  Presenting  Officer  produced  a
    supplementary bundle of documents containing a report from the  British
    Embassy in Tirana  dated  28  July  2015  and  a  set  of  registration
    documents dated 9 July 2015 relating  to  (a)  the  appellant  and  his
    family and (b) Ismail Lita and his family.

18. According to the report, checks conducted with the Albanian Border  and
    Migration  Department  had  indicated  the  following  official  travel
    movements for the appellant's uncle:

    "Travel Out                Travel In

    29.10.2011 to Greece            29.12.2011 from Greece

    03.06.2012 to Greece            12.07.2012 from Greece

    05.09.2012     to Greece            22.09.2012 from Greece

    05.11.2012 to Greece            04.01.2013 from Greece

    The subject's paternal uncle has travelled more than  5  times  to  and
    from Greece in 2013. This travel pattern indicates that  the  subject's
    uncle...has not been confined and has had no restrictions to travel  in
    and out of the country."

19. In the meantime the appellant had made a  witness  statement  dated  16
    September 2016 in which he sought to address  the  assertions  made  at
    paragraphs 38 and 39 of the refusal letter. Records in Albania were not
    always up-to-date. In 2015 the municipalities of Paskuqan and Kamez had
    merged to form a  larger  municipality,  and  as  a  result  the  civil
    registry had re-issued  family  certificates  in  2015  using  the  old
    details   previously   registered   with   the    Paskuqan    municipal
    administration.  This  might  account  for  Ismail  Lita  being   still
    registered. Alternatively, the Lita clan was one of the  largest  clans
    in Albania, and so the respondent might have found  another  person  by
    the same name.

20. His brother RL had been told by their father that Uncle Ferit had  been
    back twice to Albania because he was given a "besa" (truce) to take his
    grandmother to hospital about 18 months ago and to attend  the  funeral
    of his cousin in November or December 2015. Also, Albanians are allowed
    to live in Greece for three months, after which  they  have  to  leave.
    Some get round  this  restriction  by  paying  drivers  to  take  their
    passports back to Albania to get them stamped,  so  they  can  stay  in
    Greece for a further three months. He inferred that his uncle may  have
    done this after his residence permit for Greece expired.

21. The hearing  began  some  90  minutes  after  the  representatives  had
    exchanged supplementary bundles of documents. The appellant  gave  oral
    evidence about the documents in the respondent's supplementary  bundle,
    and his evidence is summarised by Judge Farmer at paragraph [11] of his
    decision. The Ismail Lita who was killed by his uncle  was  much  older
    than the Ismail Lita who had been found alive and well in  Paskuqan  2.
    Also, the man killed by his uncle  was  a  widower,  and  he  lived  in
    Paskuqan, not Paskuqan 2, which was a mile away. He was only  aware  of
    his uncle returning twice to Albania since the incident:  this  was  on
    the occasions when he was given a besa.

22. Judge Farmer set out his findings from paragraph [15] onwards.  He  did
    not find the appellant to be a credible witness. Firstly,  in  response
    to the information that his uncle had not left until 3  June  2012,  he
    had changed his account to say that his uncle had not fled the  country
    immediately, only that he had fled the scene immediately. Secondly,  he
    accepted that the dates given by the respondent for the uncle's  travel
    to and from Albania were correct. Whilst it might be right that  people
    "do lend travel documents to each other", he did not find  it  credible
    that someone who is frightened of returning and in fear of  their  life
    would lend out their passport to another person. So he found  that  the
    uncle was able to travel freely between Albania and Greece, and was not
    in fear of his life.  Thirdly, the fact that  the  appellant  had  left
    home to obtain travel documents damaged the credibility  of  his  claim
    that he could not leave home  for  fear  of  his  life.  Fourthly,  the
    envelope produced at the hearing in order to show the appellant's  home
    address showed that his father was the  sender;  and  he  rejected  the
    appellant's oral evidence that, despite appearances, his mother was the
    sender. Accordingly, the fact that the father had posted  the  envelope
    was not consistent with the appellant's claim that his  father  was  in
    self-confinement. Fifthly, it was not credible that  his  father  would
    have remained in self-confinement for four and  a  half  years,  rather
    than fleeing the country as his brother and sons had done. Sixthly,  it
    was not credible that the appellant would have waited for over  a  year
    following his 16th birthday to flee Albania, if  there  was  an  active
    blood feud.

23. At paragraph [24] he said he had given consideration  to  the  decision
    allowing the older brother's appeal, and had reminded himself of AS and
    AA (Effect of  previous  linked  determination)  Somalia  [2006]  UKAIT
    00052. He was not bound by the previous decision but he should treat it
    as his starting point. The further evidence before the Tribunal (namely
    the uncle's travel dates) assisted him in  making  findings  about  the
    appellant's credibility, and this  was  a  case,  "where  the  evidence
    requires me to depart from this decision."

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

24. On 28 October 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Ford  granted  permission  to
    appeal. At paragraph [3] she said that the appellant appeared to  argue
    that Judge Farmer erred in:

          a) Failing to consider documents relevant to  the  alleged  blood
             feud at sections G to J inclusive

          b) Attached too much weight to minor inconsistencies

          c) Misinterpreted the evidence given

          d) Made perverse findings

          e) Failing to treat the previous determination  as  the  starting
             point for findings of fact

          f) Failed to fully consider the background evidence

25. Judge Ford held that only grounds 3a and 3 e  were  arguable,  and  she
    expressed the hope that the appellant's representative would  endeavour
    to draft proper grounds of application  before  proceeding  to  the  UT
    hearing.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

26. At the hearing, Mr Cheng developed the argument advanced in a  document
    which he had prepared, which was headed "Grounds of Appeal and Skeleton
    Argument". Mr Cheng did not draft the grounds of appeal  considered  by
    Judge Ford. His error of law  challenge  was  essentially  confined  to
    Ground 3e. The judge had failed to take the previous  determination  as
    his starting point, and the evidence submitted by the respondent in the
    supplementary bundle should not have caused the judge to  overturn  the
    previous finding that the appellant and his family were involved  in  a
    blood feud. The personal and family registration documents had not been
    translated, and the respondent had not provided any further documentary
    evidence as to how the data cited in the Embassy letter  was  obtained,
    or what contacts were made. He relied by way of analogy on YI (Previous
    claims, fingerprint match, EURODAC) Eritrea [2007] UKAIT 54.

27. Ms Fijiwala submitted that Mr Cheng was straying outside the  scope  of
    the original grounds of appeal, which did not put in issue the  quality
    of the evidence relied upon by  the  respondent.  In  reply,  Mr  Cheng
    submitted that the quality of the respondent's evidence was crucial  to
    the question of whether  there  was  sufficiently  strong  evidence  to
    enable Judge Farmer to depart from the findings of the previous judge.

Discussion

28. The relevant guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in EH is as follows:

         1.   While there remain a number of active blood feuds in  Albania,
             they are few and declining.   There  are  a  small  number  of
             deaths annually arising from those feuds and a small number of
             adults and children living in self-confinement for protection.
              Government programmes to educate self-confined children exist
             but very few children are involved in them.

         ...

         6.   In determining whether an active blood feud exists, the  fact-
             finding Tribunal should consider:

              (i)      the  history  of  the  alleged  feud,  including  the
             notoriety of the original  killings, the numbers  killed,  and
             the degree of commitment by the     aggressor clan toward  the
             prosecution of the feud;

              (ii)     the length of time  since  the  last  death  and  the
             relationship of the last   person killed to the appellant;

              (iii)    the ability of  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  to
             locate  the  appellant  if     returned  to  another  part  of
             Albania; and

             (iv)     the past and likely future attitude of the police and
                  other authorities      towards the feud and the protection
                  of the family of the person     claiming to  be  at  risk,
                  including any past attempts  to  seek      prosecution  of
                  members of the aggressor clan, or to seek protection  from
                  the Albanian authorities.

         7.  In order to establish that  there  is  an  active  blood  feud
             affecting  him   personally,   an   appellant   must   produce
             satisfactory individual evidence of its existence in  relation
             to him.  In particular, the appellant must establish:

             (i)  his profile as a potential target of the feud  identified
                  and which family carried out the most recent killing; and

             (ii)     whether the appellant has been, or other  members  of
                  his  family  have  been,  or  are  currently,   in   self-
                  confinement within Albania.

         8.     Attestation   letters   from    Albanian    non-governmental
             organisations should not in general be  regarded  as  reliable
             evidence of the existence of a feud.

         9.   Documents originating from  the  Albanian  courts,  police  or
             prosecution service, if genuine, may  assist  in  establishing
             the existence of a blood feud at  the  date  of  the  document
             relied upon, subject to the test of reliability set out in A v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Pakistan)  [2002]
             UKIAT 00439, [2002] Imm AR 318 (Tanveer Ahmed).

         10.  Unless factual, prompt and consistent, Albanian press  reports
             will add little or no evidential weight in considering whether
             a feud exists.

         11.  Whether the feud  continues  and  what  the  attitude  of  the
             aggressor clan to its pursuit may be will remain questions  of
             fact to be determined by the fact-finding Tribunal.

Ground 3a

29. Although Mr Cheng did not  in  terms  pursue  Ground  3a,  we  find  it
    convenient to address it as it has some bearing on Ground 3e.

30. The documents at G and J of the Home Office bundle are  an  attestation
    certificate from Sami Rexha, Headman of the Paskuqan Commune, a map and
    the decision of Judge Devittie. As is confirmed  by  RL  in  a  witness
    statement which he made in this appeal, the attestation certificate and
    the map formed part of the  evidence  which  was  placed  before  Judge
    Devittie.

31. In the undated attestation certificate, Sami Rexha certifies  that  the
    "L" family has been in conflict since May 2012 with the Lita family for
    "land issues/dispute". There is no mention of  a  member  of  the  Lita
    family having being killed by  a  member  of  the  appellant's  family.
    Following EH, a certificate of this nature cannot in general be treated
    as reliable evidence of a blood feud. As there is  no  confirmation  of
    the killing which is said to have triggered the blood feud,  there  was
    no reason for Judge Farmer to depart from the norm in this  case.  Thus
    his failure to give overt consideration to this  certificate  does  not
    disclose an error of law.

32. RL gave evidence about the map at his appeal. He had got  it  from  his
    father. It was not similar to the  map  which  had  been  destroyed  by
    Ramazan Lita.  The  map  obtained  from  the  land  registry  was  more
    specific. It showed that his uncle had  purchased  the  land  from  the
    previous owner. It provided conclusive proof of his  uncle's  ownership
    of the disputed area of land. Judge  Devittie  questioned  why  RL  had
    produced a much vaguer map than one which he said his father  had  been
    able to obtain from the land registry to prove his  uncle's  claim.  He
    decided that the explanation was that it had taken  almost  a  year  to
    obtain the document which was shown to Ramazan in May 2012.

33. On analysis, the map produced by RL for his appeal did not advance  his
    case, and it was not treated by Judge Devittie as doing so. Equally, it
    did not advance the appellant's case before Judge Farmer.  For  it  was
    not a copy of the controversial land registry document which  was  said
    to have triggered the altercation which led to the  killing  of  Ismail
    Lita, but a much vaguer document, whose genesis is  unclear  and  which
    does not contain the controversial "proof" that the  area  of  disputed
    land is owned by the appellant's uncle. So Judge  Farmer's  failure  to
    give overt consideration to this map does not disclose an error of law.





Ground 3e

34. AA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 1040 is the leading authority on the question raised by this  error
    of law challenge.  Giving the judgment of the court  in  AA  (Somalia),
    Hooper LJ at paragraph [11] cited the decision of a  panel  chaired  by
    Deputy President Ockelton in TK (Consideration of prior determinations)
    Georgia [2004] UKIAT 00149.  TK concerned an appeal by a family member,
    the success of which was entirely dependent upon her showing  that  the
    risk which she feared was based on the risk faced by another member  of
    the family, in this case her father.  In an earlier determination,  the
    Tribunal had dismissed the father's appeal.  The IAT said:

         19.  In these circumstances the Tribunal considers  that  not  only
             was the Adjudicator entitled to read the  first  determination
             ... he was also entitled to conclude that it would be wrong to
             revisit the first decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
             husband's evidence.  Were the Adjudicator not entitled to take
             this course, the following  extraordinary  circumstance  could
             arise.  The head of a family, call him X, claims asylum on the
             basis of his own account and loses on  the  grounds  that  his
             account is disbelieved.  There follows thereafter a succession
             of separate members of X's family who each makes  his/her  own
             asylum application and each expressly accepts  that  the  risk
             which they fear is based on the risk to X as head  of  family.
             If Miss Record's submissions were correct, then there could be
             a succession of hearings where a succession  of  Adjudicators,
             each deprived of all  previous  Adjudicator's  determinations,
             could be asked to reappraise over  and  over  again  the  same
             basic account from X,  being  an  account  on  which  all  the
             successive family members were relying as  showing  that  they
             were at risk because X was at risk.   Unless  some  very  good
             reason was advanced to the contrary, for  example,  compelling
             new evidence to show that X's evidence (which  originally  had
             been disbelieved) was mistakenly  appraised  by  the  original
             Adjudicator, a future Adjudicator is, in the Tribunal's  view,
             not merely entitled to read the determination in X's case  but
             also to treat it as determinative as to X's account.

35. The particular facts of  AA  were  rather  different.   In  that  case,
    Counsel for the male sibling submitted that  the  previous  finding  of
    fact in his sister's appeal that she was of the Ashraf clan was binding
    on the AIT when considering his separate appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse his asylum and human rights claims.

36. AA was not party to his sister's appeal, and there was only  a  partial
    overlap between his asylum claim and the successful claim made  by  his
    sister. It was in the context of the particular facts of AA that Deputy
    President Ockelton formulated the following principle about the  status
    of a previous decision relating to a family member:

         It has no evidential effect.  It does  not  even  give  rise  to  a
         presumption.  It is merely a starting point ...  the  old  decision
         remains, but only as long as there is no reason for displacing it.

37. However, neither he nor Hooper LJ saw any contradiction between what he
    was saying in AA and  what  he  had  previously  said  in  TK.  So  the
    conclusion we draw is that the strength and  cogency  of  the  evidence
    which is capable of rationally displacing "the old decision"  can,  and
    will, vary from  case  to  case.  But  we  do  not  accept  Mr  Cheng's
    submission that in general the evidence required to  displace  the  old
    decision needs to meet a "high quality" threshold.  His  submission  in
    this regard is plainly refuted by authority directly on the point.  The
    analogy which he seeks to draw with YI-type cases is unhelpful,  as  is
    his alternative analogy with the cogent evidence that  is  required  to
    depart from country guidance authority. The  evidential  principles  in
    play in such cases are sui generis. They are not  applicable  to  cases
    such as this, and there are very sound policy reasons as  to  why  they
    are not, which are fully ventilated in AA.

38. The judge did not mention the previous  decision  until  after  he  had
    already made his adverse credibility findings. But there was no  formal
    requirement for him to begin his factual analysis  with  a  declaration
    that the favourable decision in the  older  brother's  appeal  was  his
    starting point. At  paragraph  [9]  the  judge  acknowledged  that  the
    brother had been granted asylum in respect of the  same  alleged  blood
    feud following his successful appeal in May 2013, and so it  is  to  be
    inferred that the judge took  the  earlier  decision  as  his  starting
    point, as he says he did at paragraph [24].

39. Mr Cheng's criticism of the judge's approach is  effectively  two-fold.
    The first criticism has echoes of a procedural unfairness argument.  Mr
    Cheng submits that it was not reasonably open to the  judge  to  accept
    the evidence in the respondent's supplementary bundle  because  it  was
    served late, some of it  was  untranslated  and  the  report  from  the
    Embassy was inadequately supported by primary evidence.

40. But as the judge notes at paragraph [8] of his decision, there  was  no
    application by  the  appellant  for  an  adjournment.  He  was  legally
    represented, and he had one and a half hours to consider the  documents
    with his legal representative.  He had known in broad outline what  the
    respondent's case was since receiving the refusal letter,  and  he  had
    already prepared a witness statement in rebuttal. We would add that the
    appellant's parents in Albania, with whom the appellant is in  contact,
    would have had plenty of  time,  following  the  refusal  decision,  to
    gather documentary evidence from local sources, such as the police,  to
    support the appellant's account that Ramazan  Lita's  father  had  been
    killed in the appellant's home village in May 2012 by Uncle Ferit.

41. The registration documents did not need to be translated in order to be
    intelligible, and in the event the judge accepted that the Ismail  Lita
    described by the appellant did not match  the  details  given  for  the
    Ismail Lita referred to in the registration documents. So  he  made  no
    finding one way or another as to whether they were the same person.

42. The author of the report identifies  his  source  for  the  information
    given about the uncle's movements, and it was not the appellant's  case
    before Judge Farmer that the information was or might be inaccurate per
    se. There was also no reason why the judge should have  questioned  the
    reliability of the  information,  given  that  it  originated  from  an
    official source. The appellant accepted that his  uncle  had  not  left
    Albania until 3 June 2012. His  case  was  that,  apart  from  the  two
    occasions on which his uncle returned on a besa (both  of  which  would
    fall outside the scope of the report, as it  only  covers  the  uncle's
    movements until the end of 2013), his uncle had  not  come  back  since
    leaving the country on 3 June 2012, but his passport may have  gone  to
    and fro in the hands of a third party.

43. Mr Cheng's second and related criticism is that the evidence about  the
    uncle's travel movements was not good enough to displace the finding by
    Judge Devittie that  the  uncle  remained  in  Greece  as  it  was  too
    dangerous to come back, and/or that the judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  explanation  for  the  uncle
    appearing to be going to and fro, when in  fact  it  was  his  passport
    going to and fro in the hands of a third party.

44. We consider that the judge could have made more of the report by way of
    justifying his  rejection  of  this  explanation  and  the  core  claim
    generally. The report showed that Uncle Ferit had been in  Albania  for
    some six months prior to his departure on 3 June 2012. Before  that  he
    had only been on a short visit to Greece. So the documented evidence of
    the uncle's movements wholly contradicts the core claim  of  the  uncle
    being mainly based in Greece in 2011-2012 with the consequence that  it
    was the appellant's father, not him, who was entrusted with the task of
    dealing with the local land registry. The report also  shows  that  the
    uncle (purportedly) came back to Albania after a month  in  July  2012;
    and he then remained in Albania for two  months,  before  going  for  a
    short time to Greece. Before Judge Devittie, RL's evidence was that his
    uncle had a residence permit for Greece so that he  could  freely  come
    and go, and his recorded movements in 2012  and  2013  bear  this  out.
    Conversely, the amount of time that the uncle was  apparently  spending
    in Albania in the second part of 2012, and the timing of the  trips  to
    and from Greece, is not consistent with the uncle remaining  in  Greece
    but sending back his passport with a third party so as not to breach  a
    three month time limit.

45. The judge dismissed the appellant's explanation on the ground  that  it
    was not credible that his uncle would have lent his passport to someone
    else. We accept that the judge has misstated the  appellant's  case  in
    that the appellant was not suggesting that his uncle lent his  passport
    to someone else for their benefit, but that he paid someone else to use
    his passport so that it would appear to the Greek authorities  that  he
    was not residing in Greece for periods in excess of three months  at  a
    time. However, the judge's stated reason for his disbelief holds  good.
    It was open to the judge to find it was not  credible  that  the  uncle
    would entrust his passport to someone else if he was genuinely in  fear
    of his life and genuinely in fear of returning.  It  was  also  clearly
    open to the judge to adopt the finding made  in  the  report  that  the
    uncle was travelling freely between Greece and Albania, and hence  that
    he was not in confinement in Greece and that he was not in fear of  his
    life on his frequent returns to Albania.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


We continue that order (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

