

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: AA/00343/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2018                              |On 13 March 2018                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             A A N (Bangladesh)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Zakera Ahmed, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Gianpiero Franco, Counsel instructed by Scheider
Goldstein
                  Immigration

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision  to  refuse  him  international  protection  under  the  Refugee
   Convention or humanitarian protection grounds,  or  leave  to  remain  on
   human rights grounds.  The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

Background

2. The claimant is now 34 years old.  His  Bangladeshi  nationality  is  not
   disputed. He came to the United Kingdom on 8 October  2006  with  a  visa
   valid until 17 September 2007.  He did not embark for Bangladesh and  was
   arrested on 18 November 2007 as an overstayer.  He then  claimed  asylum,
   citing in his screening interview on 22 November 2007, the  risk  arising
   from a land dispute in his home area.  That application was unsuccessful.
    The claimant did not attend his appeal hearing on 18 April 2008 and  his
   appeal was dismissed.

3. On 16 December 2013, the claimant made a further  application  for  leave
   to remain, which was refused on 18 December 2013.  That decision was  not
   challenged.

4. The claimant's present appeal arises out  of  his  association  with  the
   opposition Bangladesh National Party (BNP) both in Bangladesh and in  the
   United Kingdom.  The claimant made  further  submissions  on  5  February
   2016, saying that in March 2011 politically motivated trumped-up  charges
   had been filed against him in Bangladesh, that he had been  convicted  in
   absentia and sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment, and that if returned  to
   Bangladesh he would be imprisoned, ill-treated, and possibly killed.  The
   claimant also  said  that  he  had  been  taking  part  in  BNP  diaspora
   activities in London.

5. On 12 February 2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
   application for protection, in a 26-page  refusal  letter,  with  an  in-
   country right of appeal.  She considered that a  letter  from  the  BNP's
   Sylhet Mohangor Branch, confirming that the claimant was President of the
   BNP's student  branch  during  his  studies  at  Modon  Mohan  University
   College, lacked credibility because at his screening interview  in  2007,
   he had not mentioned attending the College.  She also considered that the
   claimant had failed to mention  his  BNP  affiliation  or  the  risks  it
   entailed, in 2007 at the  screening  interview,  and  that  his  reliance
   thereon in 2016 was a fabrication.

6. No section 94 or section 96 certificates were  applied  to  the  decision
   letter. The claimant had a full in-country right of appeal to the  First-
   tier Tribunal, which he exercised.

First-tier Tribunal decision

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence (set out  at  [12]-[16]
   of the decision) and considered documents as follows:

    .     A letter from the President of the  Sylhet  Mohangor  BNP  Branch,
      confirming that the claimant joined the BNP in 2003 and was  President
      of the student branch of the BNP at Modon Mohan University College;

    .     A letter from the claimant's  Bangladesh  lawyer,  confirming  his
      account of  the  criminal  charge  raised  in  2005,  leading  to  his
      conviction in absentia in March 2011.  The lawyer's letter  says  that
      the claimant and several other men were arrested on 25  February  2005
      in connection with an alleged assault on 23 February  2005,  in  which
      the claimant  and  his  co-defendants  were  said  to  have  viciously
      assaulted a man, breaking his hand in two with iron rods.  The alleged
      victim's father filed a First Information Report (FIR).  The  claimant
      and his co-defendants were all detained for a week, then  released  on
      bail.  All of them absconded.  The  State  called  11  witnesses,  the
      trial concluded on 17 March 2011, and the claimant was sentenced to  4
      years' 'rigorous imprisonment'.   The Court was satisfied that it  was
      safe to convict him based on the evidence of one eyewitness. A warrant
      of conviction was issued. A newspaper report from a  local  newspaper,
      dated 18 March 2011, reporting the conviction and sentence.

8. The appeal had been adjourned from 8 August 2016 to 3  February  2017  to
   give the Secretary of State an  opportunity  to  verify  the  documentary
   evidence.  At the beginning of the 3  February  2017  hearing,  the  Home
   Office Presenting Officer told the Tribunal that the Secretary  of  State
   had not taken that opportunity, that she had no verification report,  and
   that she had no instructions on why the Secretary of State, having  asked
   for time to verify, had not  done  so.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   treated the letter from the Sylhet Mohangor BPN Branch and the claimant's
   lawyer as reliable documents on Tanveer Ahmed principles.  The Judge also
   accepted the claimant's evidence of his BNP diaspora  activities  in  the
   United Kingdom, and treated him as a credible witness overall.

9. In particular, the Judge recorded at [15] the claimant's  explanation  as
   to why  he  did  not  disclose  the  alleged  BNP-related  conviction  in
   Bangladesh when he learned about it  in  2011.   The  claimant  told  the
   Tribunal that before the 2016 application, he did not mention it  because
   he was not able to provide the documentary evidence which his  protection
   claim required.  The claimant said that to  obtain  Court  documents  and
   orders, he first had to pay the lawyer in Bangladesh about �3000 for  his
   fees; his father was retired and the claimant could not burden  him  with
   that expense.  The claimant 'had to sort this  out  himself'  and  worked
   when he could, borrowing money from friends  and  family  members  living
   outside  Bangladesh,  until  he  had  sufficient  funds  to  obtain   the
   documentary evidence to support  the  claim  he  was  now  making.    The
   judgment includes country evidence which is supportive of the  claimant's
   account of  politically  motivated  violence  and  ill-treatment  and  of
   impunity where abuses occurred.

10. At [25],  the  Judge  noted  the  adverse  credibility  finding  by  the
   Secretary of State, based on section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
   (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.  He took the approach set out  by
   the Upper Tribunal in SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran  [2005]  UKAIT
   00116 and assessed the evidence as a whole.  The Judge was satisfied that
   the claimant had given credible evidence, and a  credible  and  plausible
   explanation of the delay in advancing the BNP claim.

11. The Judge applied paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as
   amended).  Having accepted that the claimant had previously been detained
   and questioned in Bangladesh in 2005, and  that  the  events  before  his
   departure were capable of amounting to persecution, he was not  satisfied
   that there had been a change in circumstances such that there was now  no
   risk of persecution or serious harm.    He allowed the appeal  under  the
   Refugee Convention and Article 3 and 8 ECHR.

Permission to appeal

12. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal,  out  of  time,
   arguing that the Judge had not placed sufficient weight on her assessment
   of the claimant's credibility; that  the  Judge  had  given  insufficient
   reasons for accepting the claimant's  reason  for  the  delay;  that  the
   decision was  not  sufficiently  reasoned  to  allow  her  to  understand
   properly why the appeal had been allowed;  that the material  matters  in
   dispute had not been sufficiently  reasoned  (see  South  Bucks  District
   Council and another v Porter [2004] UKHL 67); and in particular, that the
   difference between the claimant's screening interview in  2007,  and  his
   current claim, had not been  adequately  considered  or  explained;   and
   that, applying Tanveer Ahmed, it was not open to the Judge to  find  that
   the documents were reliable.

13. The Secretary of State  now  said  that  she  had  in  fact  obtained  a
   verification report in November 2016, on which she would seek to rely  if
   the appeal was reheard, but that she would not rely thereon in the  error
   of law hearing.   That report is not in evidence for this  error  of  law
   hearing and I can give no weight to a document I have not seen.

14. Permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  who  extended
   time for appealing.   The basis of the grant is at [3] in her decision:

         "3.  The grounds seek to challenge the credibility findings made by
         the First-tier Tribunal.  Many of the Judge's findings were  likely
         to be open to her to make, but it is at  least  arguable  that  the
         Judge  failed  to  give  reasons  to  explain  why  she  found  the
         [claimant's] explanation for the delay in claiming asylum 'credible
         and plausible' [25] and failed to engage adequately with the points
         raised in the decision letter.  The grounds of  appeal  merit  more
         detailed consideration at a hearing."

Rule 24 Reply

15. The claimant did not file  a  Rule  24  Reply  following  the  grant  of
   permission to appeal. That is the basis on which this appeal came  before
   the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

16. At the hearing, Ms Ahmed for the Secretary of State recognised that  the
   Secretary of State had not provided  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
   verification report which was contemplated, and for which the hearing had
   been expressly adjourned.  Ms Ahmed relied on South  Bucks  v  Porter  at
   [36] in relation to the particularity of reasoning required.

17. Ms Ahmed also relied on section 8 of the 2004 Act as  determinative,  or
   very heavily persuasive, in relation to the claimant's explanation of the
   delay in claiming international protection on the BNP risk  grounds,  and
   the difference between his allegation of a  local  land  dispute  in  the
   screening interview in 2007, and his BNP-based protection  claim  on  the
   basis of his conviction, in 2016.

18. She confirmed that section 96  had  not  been  invoked  in  the  refusal
   letter and that her  file  note  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  closing
   submissions, like that of the First-tier Tribunal on the  Tribunal  file,
   did not mention any reliance on section 8.

19. I did not consider it necessary to call on Mr Franco for the claimant.

Discussion

20. There are two  main  issues  here,  the  first  whether  the  Judge  was
   entitled to differ from the Secretary of State in her assessment  of  the
   claimant's credibility.  That is unarguable: this was a full rehearing on
   the facts, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  the  claimant's  oral
   evidence, and she explained, albeit briefly, why she believed him.

21. I turn first to the question of adequacy of reasoning.  At [36]  in  the
   decision of the House of Lords in the Porter case, Lord Brown  of  Eaton-
   under-Heywood, with whom Lord Steyn, Lord Rodger of Earlsferry  and  Lord
   Carswell agreed, the following guidance was given:

         "36.     The reasons for a decision must be intelligible  and  they
         must be adequate. They must enable the reader to understand why the
         matter was decided as it was and what conclusions were  reached  on
         the "principal important controversial issues", disclosing how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved. Reasons can be  briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision. The reasoning  must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether  the  decision-maker
         erred in law, for example by misunderstanding some relevant  policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds. But such adverse inference  will  not
         readily be drawn. The reasons need refer only to the main issues in
         the dispute, not to every material  consideration.  ...  A  reasons
         challenge will only succeed if the party aggrieved can satisfy  the
         court that he has genuinely been substantially  prejudiced  by  the
         failure to provide an adequately reasoned decision."

22. The Porter decision was in the context of a planning  case.   A  similar
   approach was taken more recently by the Court of Appeal in EA v Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  10  at  [27]  by  Lord
   Justice Burnett, with whom the Chancellor of the High Court, Lord Justice
   Vos agreed:

         "27. Decisions of tribunals should not become formulaic and  rarely
         benefit from copious citation of authority. Arguments  that  reduce
         to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a
         series of cases in the Court of Appeal  or  elsewhere  will  rarely
         prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v  Piglowski
         [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the  assumption
         that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge  knew  how
         he should perform his functions and which matters  he  should  take
         into account". He added that an "appellate court should resist  the
         temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute
         their own discretion for that of the  judge  by  a  narrow  textual
         analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected  himself".
         Moreover, some  principles  are  so  firmly  embedded  in  judicial
         thinking that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would
         be surprising to see in every civil judgment  a  paragraph  dealing
         with the burden and standard of proof; or  in  every  running  down
         action a treatise, however short, on the law  of  negligence.  That
         said, the reader of any judicial decision must  be  reassured  from
         its content that the court or  tribunal  has  applied  the  correct
         legal test to any question it is deciding."

23. The Secretary of State relies on section 8 of the 2004 Act  as  weighing
   heavily against  the  claimant  on  credibility.   SM  (Judge's  process)
   remains authoritative on that issue, the principal guidance being at [8]-
   [10] of the Tribunal's decision:

         "8.  The impact  of  section  8  will  no  doubt  be  different  in
         different types of case. In cases where there  is  some  reason  to
         doubt a variety of elements of the Appellant's story, the effect of
         section 8 may well be simply to reinforce  the  salutary  principle
         that if a person does not appear to be telling the truth  on  those
         parts of his evidence that can be checked, there is no real  reason
         for believing that he is telling the truth in those  parts  of  his
         evidence that cannot be checked. Where,  on  the  other  hand,  for
         example, a person appears to be  telling  the  truth  about  having
         passed through a number of countries on his or her journey  to  the
         United Kingdom, the effect of section 8  on  a  deciding  authority
         will be to draw clear and specific attention to certain features of
         the evidence as aspects which must  (by  statute)  be  regarded  as
         casting some doubt upon the credibility of the Appellant's claim to
         be a refugee.

         9.   Given the terms of  section  8,  it  is  inevitable  that  the
         general  fact-finding  process  is  somewhat  distorted,  but  that
         distortion must be kept to a minimum. There is no  warrant  at  all
         for the claim, made in the grounds, that the matters identified  by
         section 8 should be treated as the starting point of a decision  on
         credibility. The matters mentioned in section 8 may or may  not  be
         part of any particular claim; and their importance will  vary  with
         the nature of the claim that is being made, and the other  evidence
         that supports it or undermines it. In some  cases,  (of  which  the
         most obvious are perhaps those where there  is  contested  evidence
         about the journey to the United Kingdom)  it  will  simply  not  be
         possible to know whether section 8 applies until a preliminary view
         has been taken on  the  credibility  of  some  other  part  of  the
         evidence.

         10.  In our judgment, although section 8 of the 2004  Act  has  the
         undeniably novel feature of requiring  the  deciding  authority  to
         treat certain aspects of the evidence in a particular  way,  it  is
         not intended to, and does not, otherwise affect the general process
         of deriving facts from evidence. It is the task of the fact-finder,
         whether official or judge, to look  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round, to try and grasp it as a  whole  and  to  see  how  it  fits
         together and whether it is sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
         proof. Some aspects of the  evidence  may  themselves  contain  the
         seeds of doubt. Some aspects of the evidence may cause doubt to  be
         cast on other parts of the evidence. Some aspects of  the  evidence
         may be matters to which  section  8  applies.  Some  parts  of  the
         evidence may shine with the light of credibility.  The  fact-finder
         must consider all these points together; and,  despite  section  8,
         and although some matters may go against and some matters count  in
         favour of credibility, it is for the fact-finder  to  decide  which
         are the important, and which are the less important features of the
         evidence, and to reach his view as a whole on  the  evidence  as  a
         whole."

24. I note that there is no record, either on the Secretary of State's  file
   note or the manuscript note kept by the First-tier Tribunal Judge of  the
   closing arguments before him, to indicate that section 8 was relied  upon
   by the Secretary of State at the First-tier Tribunal as determinative  or
   supportive of a negative credibility finding.  I  note,  also,  that  the
   respondent did not certify the further submissions under  section  96  of
   the 2002 Act.   The Judge in this case found the claimant to be a  person
   who appeared to be telling the truth about events in Bangladesh  and  the
   United Kingdom.

25. The point about the screening interview is a weak one.  When he came  to
   the United Kingdom, the claimant had been detained and  released  on  the
   basis of a politically-motivated assault charge.  He had no documents  to
   prove that had occurred.

26. The asylum screening interview was in  November  2007.   The  conviction
   and sentence now relied upon occurred in March 2011.  The claimant cannot
   be criticised for  failing  to  disclose  an  event  which  had  not  yet
   occurred, or the risk it entailed on return.

27. I consider that the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave proper,  intelligible
   and adequate reasons for finding the claimant's evidence to be  credible,
   and not significantly damaged by the delay  in  claiming.   He  did  take
   account of the negative view taken on credibility in the refusal  letter,
   but having heard and seen the claimant give evidence, he took a different
   view.  He was fully entitled to do so, for the reasons he gave.

28. The arguments advanced now by the Secretary of State are a  disagreement
   with findings of fact and credibility which do  not  come  close  to  the
   standard set for interference with findings of fact and/or credibility at
   [90] in the judgement of the late Lord  Justice  Brooke  in  R  (Iran)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

29. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

30. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date:         9 March 2018              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson





