
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  AA/00459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 31 January 2019                   |on 13 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [D P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [~] 1987.  She entered
    Italy illegally in 2002, and by 2009 had  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    there.  She spent various later periods in Sri  Lanka.   After  several
    refusals, she obtained a visa to visit the UK on 26 August  2014.   She
    travelled to the UK on 12 October 2014, and sought asylum on arrival.

 2. The appellant has two children.  The elder, of her first  marriage,  is
    now adult.  The younger, of her second marriage, was born on [~]  2008.
    The appellant came to the UK with her second husband, who  also  sought
    asylum.  The marriage broke down, and after a period of imprisonment in
    the UK, he returned to Italy.  At the time of the FtT hearing,  divorce
    proceedings were said to be under way.  I was advised at the UT hearing
    that the divorce has not been finalised.

 3. The appellant says that there is a gang of  brothers,  surnamed  Lanza,
    active in politics in Sri Lanka and in crime  in  both  Sri  Lanka  and
    Italy.  The gang has had a feud  with  the  appellant's  husband  since
    2005, and has tried to kill him.  The gang has threatened and  attacked
    the  appellant  and  her  children  on  various  occasions,   including
    incidents in Italy in 2008; in Sri Lanka in 2013; and most recently, in
    Italy on 8 October 2014.

 4. The respondent refused the claim for reason which may be summarised  as
    follows, citing the paragraph  numbers  from  the  respondent's  letter
    dated 3 March 2016:

         13 - 15, no Refugee Convention category;

         16 - 17, nationality and identity accepted;

         19 - 25, reasons to doubt credibility;

         26 - 27, documents do not support gang's powerful political  links,
         or credibility of claim;

         28, risk from gang not accepted;

         30, internal relocation in Sri Lanka or Italy available;

         31, Italy a safe country;

         34 - 36, claim fails in  respect  of  humanitarian  protection  and
         articles 2 and 2 ECHR;

         37 - 58, claim fails in respect of family and private life.

 5. The appellant appealed to the FtT, on the grounds that:

         My removal would breach the  UK's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
         Convention ... risk of persecution due to my religion  and  imputed
         political opinion; risk of unlawful killing or  serious  harm;  the
         decision ... would breach my rights under articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

 6. FtT  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 22 February 2018.

 7. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal to the UT, on
    detailed grounds which in  brief  summary,  following  their  paragraph
    numbers, contend thus:

         [3] error  of  fact,  wrongly  identifying  a  discrepancy  in  the
         appellant's evidence over the number of times she moved in Italy;

         [4] failure to have regard to material considerations regarding the
         appellant's movements, 2009 - 2014;

         [5] failure to have regard to  material  considerations,  regarding
         whether police records in Sri Lanka might have been tampered with;

         [6] error of fact, regarding whether newspaper  accounts  disclosed
         targeted attacks;

         [7] findings no reasonable judge could make, about attackers  being
         able to recognise the appellant, and attacking her in public;

         [8]  failure  to  have  regard  to  material   considerations,   or
         inadequacy of reasoning, about the appellant's husband choosing  to
         return to Italy;

         [9] failing  to  address  the  correct  question,  and  effectively
         reversing the burden of proof, by asking whether the appellant  had
         shown she could not return to Italy.

 8. On 4 April 2018 FtT Judge Froom refused permission, on  the  view  that
    the grounds were only disagreement, and that the judge plainly  decided
    the case based on risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 9. The appellant sought permission from  the  UT,  on  grounds  contending
    error by Judge Froom (which  is  not  strictly  relevant),  and  saying
    finally:

         "... the FtT Judge gave a number of reasons ... and by no means all
         of those are vitiated by error of law.  However, ...  the  question
         is  whether  the  findings  that  are  vitiated  ...   when   taken
         cumulatively, demonstrably exercised a material  influence  on  the
         outcome, or plainly coloured her approach [authority is cited]  ...
         the findings impugned in  the  grounds  did  demonstrably  exert  a
         significant influence on  the  ...  overall  decision  and  plainly
         coloured her overall approach."

10. Deputy UT Judge L Murray granted permission on 13 August 2018.

11. Ground [3] aims to show that  the  appellant  said  that  she  and  her
    husband moved to 4  different  places  before  2009  and  moved  to  10
    different cities after 2006, which could both be true.  Ground [4] aims
    to show that the judge did not have regard to all the  details  of  the
    appellant's explanations for her movements.

12. Mr Govan responded that these grounds could be taken together, and that
    they went into exhaustive detail,  but  did  not  disturb  the  judge's
    general view that the  appellant's  movements  to  and  from  areas  of
    alleged risk, leaving children there, and building a house with a  view
    to the long term, did not sit well with her claim of pervasive risk.

13. Ground [3] is a tenable interpretation, but a rather minute point in  a
    through and detailed decision.  Ground [4] is less clear, and not shown
    to be much more than  insistence  and  disagreement.   Together,  these
    grounds do little to undermine the overall analysis.

14. The respondent made enquiries  resulting  in  a  document  verification
    report which suggested that the appellant's evidence  about  complaints
    to the police in Sri Lanka was unreliable.   The  appellant  said  that
    counter-enquiries showed that the explanation might be  tampering  with
    police records.  The judge found at  [20]  that  the  counter-enquiries
    failed to show her complaint to be genuine.  Ground [5]  aims  to  show
    that the judge missed the  significance  of  reports  about  this  from
    lawyers in Sri Lanka.  Reading through the sequence of  information,  I
    cannot discern error.  The judge referenced the latest report  obtained
    for the  appellant,  which  did  not  contain  anything  which  clearly
    advanced her case, rather to the contrary.  The reports  show  at  best
    that police records are not generally well kept.  They do not show that
    the judge missed  a  sinister  explanation  of  later  tampering  which
    supports the appellant, or that she erred by interpreting the  evidence
    as she did.

15. Ground [6] contends that reports in Sri Lankan newspapers shortly after
    the attacks showed that the appellant there and then blamed "a group in
    Italy" with a grudge against her husband, and  that  the  judge  missed
    this point.  Mr MacKay clarified that the newspaper reports are at  tab
    1 of the appellant's inventory in the FtT, with translations, and  that
    tab 4 duplicates the reports, certified by letters from the publishers.
     He said that the judge failed to see how supportive this material was,
    and that there was no basis for finding at the  end  of  [20]  that  it
    disclosed embellishment and damaged credibility.

16. Mr Govan observed that the  newspapers  reported  statements  of  blame
    which were not in the police reports, and said that it  was  reasonable
    for the judge to take that as embellishment.

17. The materials were perhaps capable of an interpretation more favourable
    to the appellant; but this ground  also  resolves  into  no  more  than
    insistence and disagreement.

18. Ground [7] is the strongest.  It is not hard  to  conceive  that  there
    might be a targeted attack on the  appellant  by  people  she  did  not
    recognise.  It is not difficult to identify a victim, either in advance
    or near the scene.  A public park in the middle of  the  afternoon  may
    not be the most obvious choice of venue for such an attack but  it  not
    outwith human experience.  Mr Govan  accepted  that  the  reasoning  on
    those points was not strong.  However, as he pointed out, this  is  one
    aspect of a decision which contains many reasons.

19. Ground [8] is plainly no more  than  disagreement.   It  was  obviously
    within reason for the judge to  take  the  return  of  the  appellant's
    husband to Italy as an indication that neither he nor she  is  at  risk
    there.  The description by the  appellant  of  his  return  as  due  to
    homelessness and destitution in the UK takes nothing  away  from  that.



20. There was undisputed evidence in the hands of the respondent  that  the
    appellant had indefinite leave to remain in Italy.  Even  if  the  onus
    was on the respondent, no further proof was  required.   The  appellant
    suggested that her leave had lapsed, but for sensible reasons given  at
    [25] the appellant found that had not been established.  The point  did
    not turn on incorrectly placing any burden on her, but on analysing the
    evidence as showing that she  was  able  to  return.    Ground  [9]  is
    misconceived in relating this matter  to  Article  1E  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and to paragraph 145 of the Refugee Handbook.  The judge had
    asked herself the question whether the appellant  was  in  well-founded
    fear, and answered it in the negative.  The  appellant  had  not  shown
    herself to be a refugee, so those considerations did not arise.  In any
    event, Italy is by definition and by its  international  obligations  a
    country which if the appellant  were  a  refugee,  would  protects  her
    against deportation or expulsion.

21.  The  FtT's  decision  includes  numerous  unchallenged  reasons.   The
    appellant selectively tackles points  of  fact,  but  her  grounds  and
    submissions do not embark on an analysis whereby  the  overall  adverse
    credibility findings might not stand.

22. The appellant's challenge overlooks that the decision did not turn only
    on credibility.

23. The FtT found at [24] that "... the appellant has  separated  from  her
    husband and therefore ... would not be a person of interest  to  anyone
    in Italy or Sri Lanka".  That is a complete  answer  to  the  case,  in
    relation to both countries.  The grounds make no challenge to it.

24. The appellant's case on the facts has been well researched and strongly
    presented, both in the FtT and in the UT, but it  has  not  been  shown
    that the overall adverse credibility findings of the FtT should be  set
    aside for having involved the making of an error on a point of law,  or
    that the outcome would be different, even without those findings.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      1 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




