
IAC-AH-pc-V2
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00166/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16th  September 2014              |On 26th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
             DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     H B
                           ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan ( instructed by Lawrence Lupin )
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery ( Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing following a decision made on 1st October 2013
    that there was a procedural irregularity amounting to an error  of  law
    by the First-tier Tribunal (FTT). The issue for us is  whether  or  not
    there is evidence that Article 1F  (UN  Convention  on  the  Status  of
    Refugees 1951) applies so as to  exclude  the  Appellant  from  refugee
    status. The First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal under Article 3 ECHR
    and the Respondent accepts  that  the  same  findings  would  make  the
    Appellant a refugee if he is not found to be excluded from the  Refugee
    Convention.

 2. The Appellant whose date of birth is 25.6.1979 is a citizen of Tunisia.

 3. The facts as preserved are set out in the First-tier  determination  at
    paragraphs 33 - 41. In summary the Appellant was found to  be  credible
    as a member and an informer for the  governing  Regroupment  Constitute
    Democracy ("RCD") in Tunisia.  His role at a local level from May  2003
    to December 2007 was to  give  information  to  the  police  and  party
    officials about local criminals and political opponents of the  regime.
    Before the First-tier Tribunal he established that he faced a real risk
    of persecution in Tunisia following a change in the regime  because  of
    these  activities,  which  had  led  to  people  being   arrested   and
    imprisoned, some of whom may have been interrogated and  tortured.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that he was a target  for  revenge  by  those
    imprisoned during the regime.

Preliminary issue

 4. We rejected Mr Avery's application to admit further country evidence on
    Tunisia.  The Secretary of State had ample  opportunity  to  apply  for
    further evidence to be adduced for the hearing, and to do so at such  a
    late stage, on the day of the hearing, was  not  procedurally  correct,
    additionally so in the context of the number of adjournments there have
    been in this matter. Mr Avery conceded that  the  new  materials  added
    little and we declined to accept them.

Key issues

 5. The relevant evidence relied on by the  Respondent  is  set  out  in  a
    skeleton argument dated 23rd October 2013 [6-9].  The Respondent argues
    that Article 1F(a) is engaged on the grounds that the RCD  carried  out
    crimes against humanity, specifically torture, of which  the  Appellant
    was aware when pursuing his informant activities. Reliance  was  placed
    on  three  sources  of  evidence;  the  Appellant's  own  account   and
    admissions as established in the preserved findings, the reports of the
    expert country witness,  Professor  Seddon,  and  a  letter  dated  7th
    January 2013 from an official from the RCD in Sousse (the RCD letter).

 6. In his witness statement dated 9th January 2013 the Appellant confirmed
    that he informed on criminal and political  dissidents  over  a  period
    from May 2003 to December  2007,  and  that  they  were  aware  of  his
    activities.  He  was  at  risk  from  revenge  following  the   Jasmine
    revolution. The Appellant had been found credible as an informer.

 7. Professor Seddon at 4.11 relied on the letter from the former  head  of
    the RCD, which he found to be genuine  and  which  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant provided daily  reports  about  the  movements  and  work  of
    criminals and opponents  to  the  regime.  Professor  Seddon's  further
    report dated 11.4.13 at 2.10, states "it could be argued ... with  some
    degree of justification - that he was probably aware even at  the  time
    of what might happen to those  on  whom  he  informed.   Certainly  the
    regime was considered by some to be oppressive."

 8. The RCD letter confirmed that the Appellant was an  informer  and  that
    "he was providing daily reports on some  fanatic  religious  cells  and
    networks who were working on destabilising the regime, not  to  mention
    that he was stalking and tracking  using  all  available  vehicles  and
    funds whenever the need arises in order to facilitate  his  mission  in
    this purpose." It further stated that the Appellant was at risk because
    his informant activities had led to "the arrest of some  criminals  and
    opponents to the regime, and led them  to  interrogation,  torture  and
    infringement of their personal affairs...".

 9. The Respondent argues that the Appellant falls within the  category  of
    an accessory in the commission of crimes under Article 7(1) of the Rome
    Statute of the International Criminal Court  (the  ICC  Statute).   The
    weight of the evidence from the Appellant, the preserved findings  from
    the Tribunal and Professor Seddon's report meet the  "serious  grounds"
    test required in JS(Sri Lanka) v SSHD (2010) UKSC 15.

10. We received a skeleton argument  dated  2nd  September  2014  from  the
    Appellant in  response.   The  Appellant's  expert  witness,  Professor
    Seddon, did not in the event attend to give evidence before us  but  we
    have taken into account his  two  reports.   The  supplementary  report
    dated 11th April 2013 specifically deals with the issues  pertinent  to
    Article 1F and sets out Professor Seddon's view that the private  media
    was highly constrained and that most of the  Tunisian  population  went
    about its business without  any  deep  seated  fear  and  anxiety.  The
    country was regarded as an ideal  holiday  destination  and  there  was
    little concern about the repressive regime. Mr Nathan relied on  JS(Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD (2010) UKSC 15, AA(Art 1F(a) complicity-Arts 7 and 25 ICC
    Statute) Iran [2011] UKUT 00339, MT(Zimbabwe (Article 1F(a) aiding  and
    abetting)[2012] UKUT 00015. The Appellant  admits  to  informing  at  a
    local level but denies that he knew or was aware  that  those  arrested
    would be tortured.

The Law

11. The terms  of  Article  1F  are  reflected  in  Article  12(2)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, the provision under which the appellant  seeks
    to be recognised as a refugee.

12. Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention states:

         The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person
         with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering
         that:

          a) He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a
             crime against humanity, as defined in the international
             instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such
             crimes;

13. In JS(Sri Lanka) Lord Brown said that when considering whether an
    applicant is disqualified from asylum by virtue of crimes against
    humanity under Article 1F(a) the starting point should be the  Rome
    Statute of the International Criminal Court ("the ICC Statute"). The
    relevant definitions from the ICC Statute are set out below:

         "Article 7 - Crimes against humanity

         1.   For the purpose of this Statute 'crime against humanity' means
             any of the following acts when committed as part of a
             widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian
             population, with knowledge of the attack:

             (a)  Murder;

             (b)  Extermination;

             (c)  Enslavement;

             (d)  Deportation or forcible transfer of population;

             (e)  Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical
                  liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international
                  law;

             (f)  Torture;

             (g)  Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced
                  pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of
                  sexual violence of comparable gravity;

             (h)  Persecution against any identifiable group or
                  collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic,
                  cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, on
                  other grounds that are universally recognized as
                  impermissible under international law, in connection with
                  any act referred to in this paragraph or any crime within
                  the jurisdiction of the Court;

             (i)  Enforced disappearance of persons;

             (j)  The crime of apartheid;

             (k)  Other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally
                  causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to
                  mental or physical health.

         2.   For the purpose of paragraph 1:

             (a)  'Attack directed against any civilian population' means a
                  course of conduct involving the multiple commission of
                  acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian
                  population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or
                  organizational policy to commit such attack;

             (e)  'Torture' means the intentional infliction of severe pain
                  or suffering, whether physical or mental, upon a person in
                  the custody or under the control of the accused; except
                  that torture shall not include pain or suffering arising
                  only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions;
                  ...

             (g)  'Persecution' means the intentional and severe
                  deprivation of fundamental rights contrary to
                  international law by reason of the identity of the group
                  or collectivity ...".

         "Article 25

         Individual criminal responsibility

         1.   The Court shall have jurisdiction over natural persons
             pursuant to this Statute:

         2.   A person who commits a crime within the jurisdiction of the
             Court shall be individually responsible and liable for
             punishment in accordance with this Statute.

         3.   In accordance with this Statute, a person shall be criminally
             responsible and liable for punishment for a crime within the
             jurisdiction of the Court if that person:

             (a)  Commits such a crime, whether as an individual, jointly
                  with another or through another person, regardless of
                  whether that other person is criminally responsible;

             (b)  Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a
                  crime which in fact occurs or is attempted;

             (c)  For the purpose of facilitating the commission of such a
                  crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its commission
                  or its attempted commission, including providing the means
                  for its commission;

             (d)  In any other way contributes to the commission or
                  attempted commission of such a crime by a group of persons
                  acting with a common purpose. Such contribution shall be
                  intentional and shall either:

                  (i)  Be made with the aim of furthering the criminal
                      activity or criminal purpose of the group, where such
                      activity or purpose involves the commission of a
                      crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; or

                  (ii) Be made in the knowledge of the intention of the
                      group to commit the crime ...".

14.  The case  law  on  Article  1F  is  set  out  fully  in  both  skeleton
    arguments. The leading case is JS(Sri  Lanka)  where  at  [30-40]  Lord
    Brown sets out the correct approach and interpretation of Article 1F as
    follows:

         a)   Is there evidence  of  crimes  falling  within  the  scope  of
             Article 1F and as defined in Article 7(1) of the Rome  Statute
             of the International Criminal Court;

         b)   Recognition that criminal responsibility  can  be  engaged  by
             persons other than the person actually committing  the  crime,
             by reference to Article 25(3) of the Rome Statute;

         c)   The expression of the Statute of  the  International  Criminal
             Tribunal on the former  Yugoslavia  that  such  other  persons
             include anyone who "planned, instigated, ordered, committed or
             otherwise aided or abetted in the  planning,  preparation   or
             execution" of the crime in question;

         d)   The key test to establish if an individual as an accessory  is
             excluded is set out at [38]. Whether the evidence  establishes
             that  "there  were  serious  reasons   for   considering   him
             voluntarily to have contributed in a significant  way  to  the
             organisation's ability to pursue its purpose of committing war
             crimes, aware that his assistance would further that purpose".



15.  Lord Brown [30] identified  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  when
    assessing an individual's involvement in an  organisation  said  to  be
    engaged in crimes against humanity such as to show  complicity  on  the
    part of the individual.

16.  In MT  (Article  1F  (a)-aiding  and  abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT
    00015(IAC) the Tribunal held in the context of exclusion under  Article
    1F(a) of the 1951 Refugee Convention (Article  12(2)(a)  of  2004/83/EC
    (the Refugee Qualification Directive)) that (i) The requirement set out
    at Article 7(1) of the ICC Statute that acts be "...committed  as  part
    of a widespread or systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian
    population with knowledge of the attack" ("the chapeau requirement") is
    an essential element in the definition of  a  crime  against  humanity.
    (ii) In principle the question of whether  acts  are  "...committed  as
    part of  a  widespread  or  systematic  attacks  directed  against  any
    civilian population.." is a matter that could be dealt with  in  future
    country guidance cases; although the question of  whether  there  exist
    acts with such a nexus must ultimately be  decided  on  a  case-by-case
    basis. (iii) Commission of a crime against humanity or other excludable
    act can take the form of commission as  an  aider  and  abettor,  as  a
    subsidiary (or non-principal) form of participation. To quote  from  MT
    at paragraph 119:

         "Aiding and abetting differs  from  joint  criminal  responsibility
         (jce) in  that  whilst  the  former  generally  only  requires  the
         knowledge that  the  assistance  contributes  to  the  main  crime,
         participation  in  jce  requires  both  a  common  purpose  and  an
         intentional contribution of the participant (Triffterer,  pp.  756-
         758)  to  a  group  crime.  Aiding  and  abetting  encompasses  any
         assistance, physical  or  psychological,  that  has  a  substantial
         effect on the commission of the crime. Article 2 para 3(d)  of  the
         1996 Draft Code requires that aiding and abetting should be "direct
         and substantial",  i.e.  the  contribution  should  facilitate  the
         commission of a crime in "some significant way". The Trial  Chamber
         in Tadic II, the Trial Chamber in the Prosecutor  v  Naletilic  and
         Martinovic (IT-98-34) cases and the Appeal Chamber in Prosecutor  v
         Akeyesu  (Case  No.  IT-95-14/l-T),  paras  484,  706)  interpreted
         "substantial" to mean that the contribution has an  effect  on  the
         commission, that is have a causal relationship with the result  and
         it included within the concept "all acts of assistance by words  or
         acts  that  lend  encouragement  or  support".  In   Prosecutor   v
         Furundzija (IT-95-17/1-T, 10 December 1998), paras 199, 232, 273-4,
         the Trial Chamber said that assistance need not be tangible: "moral
         support and encouragement" can suffice,  albeit  it  must  "make  a
         significant difference to the commission of the criminal act by the
         principal": see  also  Prosecutor  v  Brdanin  (IT-99-36-A,  Appeal
         Chamber, 3 April 2007) and  Prosecutor  v  Perisic  (IT-04-81-T,  6
         September 2011). The requisite knowledge may be inferred  from  all
         relevant circumstances, i.e. it may  be  proven  by  circumstantial
         evidence (Prosecutor v Tadic, para 689; Prosecutor v  Akeyesu  para
         498)."

17.  We also had regard to Al-Sirri  [2012]  UKSC  54  which  clarified  the
    standard of  proof   in  Article  1F  cases  as  "serious  reasons  for
    considering".

Background material

18.  The Respondent relied on the US State Department report on Tunisia  May
    2012  when considering the appellant's claim  for  asylum.  No  further
    background material was specifically relied on in the skeleton argument
    for this hearing, other than that which  highlighted  the  difficulties
    faced by RCDists after the Jasmine revolution.  We have regard  to  the
    Report of the Special  Rapporteur  on  Torture  following  a  visit  to
    Tunisia between 15-22nd May 2011.  We set  out  the  relevant  extracts
    below:

         1.   Endemic practice of torture and ill-treatment

             26.  The Special Rapporteur received many reports and
                  testimonies indicating that the Ben Ali regime was marked
                  by widely reported cases of torture and ill-treatment. The
                  systematic practice of torture and ill-treatment was
                  deeply entrenched and institutionalized within the
                  security sector, with torture being practiced and abetted
                  by law enforcement officials, the former State Security
                  Department (DSS, also known as the "political police"),
                  Ministry of the Interior personnel and prison staff, with
                  complete impunity.

             27.  Torture and ill-treatment was pervasive in detention
                  centres, particularly in the DSS. The Special Rapporteur
                  received testimonies and reports indicating that torture
                  was orchestrated by the DSS under the authority of the
                  Ministry of the Interior and practiced by all police
                  forces. Certain victims were reportedly kept in custody
                  and subjected to various forms of torture within the
                  Ministry of the Interior headquarters itself.

             28.  In addition, according to various sources, the use of
                  torture intensified after the entry into force of the
                  counter-terrorism legislation of 10 December 2003 (Law No.
                  2003-75).

             29.  The Special Rapporteur heard credible testimonies about a
                  pattern of a lack of timely and adequate investigation of
                  torture allegations by prosecutors or investigative
                  judges.

         2.   Political prisoners

             30.  The Special Rapporteur received information indicating
                  that the overwhelming majority of persons convicted for
                  politically motivated offenses in Tunisia, some arrested
                  under the 2003 anti-terrorism law, were reportedly
                  sentenced by military courts to life imprisonment after
                  unfair trials marred by allegations of torture and other
                  ill-treatment.

             31.  The Government announced on 19 February 2011 that all
                  political prisoners had been released and that others had
                  been awarded conditional release or a presidential pardon.
                  The Special Rapporteur is concerned that while some of the
                  detainees of the Ben Ali period may have benefitted from
                  the general amnesty, [1] there is no strategy in place to
                  hold the perpetrators of past violations accountable and
                  to ensure reparation and effective remedy. No programme of
                  remedies, including the means for as full rehabilitation
                  as possible, were contemplated by the interim Government
                  at the time of the visit.

         3.   Impunity

             32.  The Special Rapporteur was informed that complaints of
                  torture were rarely investigated under the Ben Ali regime.
                  [2] The judiciary has reportedly been tightly controlled
                  by the executive branch. In the majority of cases, the
                  investigating judge would refuse to register complaints of
                  torture out of fear of reprisals, and complaints lodged by
                  victims to the prosecution were almost always dismissed
                  immediately. [3] The practice of admitting a confession
                  obtained under torture into evidence was widely practiced
                  by judges. In addition, forensic assessments generally
                  were not conducted or, if they were, their credibility was
                  undermined by many deficiencies or falsified conclusions.

             33.  The Special Rapporteur learned that during the period
                  from 1999 to 2009 (September), 246 police officers were
                  prosecuted for ill-treatment and misconduct. Out of 246
                  initiated prosecutions, 228 final judgments were handed
                  down during the same period. Reportedly, only seven
                  criminal convictions for acts of torture and ill-treatment
                  were handed down against law-enforcement and prison
                  officials under article 53 of the statute of the Internal
                  Security Forces.

         4.   Safeguards

             35.  The previous regime permitted no independent oversight of
                  places of detention, with the exception of granting ICRC
                  access to prisons as of 2005. After the revolution, the
                  interim Government opened the prisons up to external
                  inspection by international, and some national, human
                  rights organizations.

             75.  The Special Rapporteur has learned that several hundred
                  cases relating to torture and ill-treatment committed
                  during the Ben Ali regime were filed with the Prosecutor's
                  office. The legacy of the dependence of the judiciary on
                  the executive and the lack of response regarding the
                  status of their complaints have triggered some
                  disgruntlement among the victims. The Special Rapporteur
                  regrets that there is no clear strategy or timeline for
                  addressing the huge backlog of cases and preserving the
                  evidence of torture and abuse subject to adjudication as a
                  matter of transitional justice. Furthermore, no official
                  or institution seems to be in charge of these cases, nor
                  of informing the public about the status of the
                  complaints. The judiciary and the Prosecutor's office
                  currently lack the capacity to process the volume of cases
                  of torture and ill-treatment. Moreover, there does not
                  seem to be a plan to provide legal assistance to victims
                  interested in filing complaints.

             76.  A general mood of dissatisfaction with the remedial
                  efforts prevails, coupled with frustration with the lack
                  of public information as to the charges and status of
                  those arrested and subjected to trial. The Special
                  Rapporteur also heard consistent allegations that some
                  representatives of the previous regime and high-ranking
                  officials who have been responsible for perpetrating
                  torture are still at large. The fact that some hold
                  positions of power continues to jeopardize efforts to
                  reform the entire system, and generates public frustration
                  regarding accountability."

The hearing

19.  The Appellant gave oral evidence and relied on his witness  statements.
    In his statement dated 16.9.2014 he denied knowledge and awareness that
    those he informed on were or may be ill-treated or tortured. He  stated
    that he had subsequently seen some of those he had informed on at large
    and he heard of no allegations of torture made. His role was  primarily
    informing on criminals so as to maintain order. He was not  allowed  to
    ask for further information after having given the names and reports to
    either the police or to party officials. That was  the  extent  of  his
    involvement.

Submissions

20.  Mr Avery submitted that the four elements (as above  paragraph  14)  of
    JS(Sri Lanka) were satisfied. The Appellant's  activities  fell  within
    the definition of crimes involving  "torture"  and/or  "other  inhumane
    acts intentionally causing  great  suffering".  The  Appellant  was  an
    "accessory" as he voluntarily contributed in a significant way  to  the
    RCD's serious mistreatment of criminal and political detainees.

21.  Mr Avery submitted that the Appellant was aware of the consequences  of
    his claimed actions and there was a clear indication in the RCD  letter
    that people were ill-treated following arrest. It was not credible that
    the Appellant would not have known of the torture  and  widespread  ill
    treatment if he were involved in monitoring their activities. Mr  Avery
    further submitted that the Appellant's own witness,  Professor  Seddon,
    acknowledged  the  likelihood   of   the   Appellant's   awareness   of
    mistreatment of detainees in his report [2.10].

22.  Mr Nathan adopted the original position taken by the Respondent  before
    the FTT that she could not justify the Al-Sirri standard  of  proof  on
    the basis of one document  (the  letter  from  the  RCD)  alleging  the
    Appellant's  complicity  in  torture.  The  Appellant  had  been  found
    credible in the FTT and by Professor Seddon,  and  ought  to  be  found
    credible by the Upper Tribunal.

23.  He submitted that the case fails at the outset. There  was  an  absence
    of objective material that officials from the RCD were  prosecuted  for
    their role in torture under their regime.   The  Respondent  failed  to
    adduce sufficient evidence to establish that torture occurred and  that
    the Appellant's localised activities had led to such mistreatment.

24.  Secondly, Mr Nathan submitted that it was  not  openly  established  at
    the time that officials of the regime were involved in  crimes  against
    humanity.  It was more recently that this had been made  public.  There
    was a need to consider the situation from the  Appellant's  perspective
    at that time.  There was  no  evidence  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was aware that torture occurred consequent to his activities.



25.  Thirdly,  Mr  Nathan  submitted  that  the  "proximity"  test  was  not
    satisfied; the Appellant could not  be  categorised  as  an  aider  and
    abetter. In Perisic IT-04-81-A at [44] the Appeals  Chamber  considered
    the need for "specific direction" to be met in cases  involving  aiders
    and abetters; "evidence establishing a  direct  link  between  the  aid
    provided by an accused individual and the relevant crimes committed  by
    principle perpetrators." The link ought to be specific rather than  "in
    some way"  linked  to  the  relevant  crime.  A  provision  of  general
    assistance which could be used for both lawful and unlawful  activities
    will not be sufficient, alone, to prove that this aid was  specifically
    directed to crimes of principal perpetrators.

Discussion and conclusion

26.  Our starting point is to consider whether there is evidence  of  crimes
    against humanity perpetrated by the RCD.  We then go on to consider  if
    there was evidence of  complicity  by  the  Appellant.  We  follow  the
    approach in JS(Sri Lanka) to establish whether there was evidence  that
    the Appellant was an accessory, who had voluntarily  contributed  in  a
    significant way to an organisation's ability to pursue its  purpose  of
    committing war crimes, crimes against humanity or  crimes  against  the
    peace or whether  it  could  be  established  that  the  Appellant  was
    complicit in crimes such that he  was  aware  that  his  actions  would
    further the purpose. It was common ground that the burden lies  on  the
    Respondent to establish that Article 1F applies  and  that  torture  is
    designated a crime against humanity satisfying Article  7  of  the  ICC
    Statute.

Crimes against humanity

27.  As above, there was only a limited amount of evidence  put  forward  by
    the Respondent to show that the RCD  engaged  in  acts  falling  within
    Article 7 as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against
    a civilian population.  It was our view, however, that even if  it  was
    not so well known at the time, the evidence from the Special Rapporteur
    above showed that the party carried out torture against  prisoners  and
    opponents pursuant to an  organisational  policy  and  that  there  was
    sufficient independent evidence of the  RCD's  perpetration  of  crimes
    against humanity. We noted that  the  Special  Rapporteur  acknowledged
    that since the Revolution, progress has been slow in the  investigation
    and prosecution of the perpetrators of  torture  and  other  violations
    committed during the regime, but did not find that this indicated  that
    a campaign of mistreatment had not taken place under the former regime.
     There have been prosecutions of police officers, prison  officers  and
    law enforcement officials involved in torture and ill treatment  during
    the regime.

Was the Appellant knowingly involved in crimes against humanity?

28.  We have considered separately  and  cumulatively  each  aspect  of  the
    three sources of evidence relied on by the Respondent to show that  the
    Appellant was involved in or knew of the  mistreatment  of  those  upon
    whom he informed.  Our assessment must  include  consideration  of  the
    subjective and objective evidence.

29.  We find that the RCD letter makes no reference to any knowledge  of  or
    specific involvement on the part of the Appellant in what  happened  to
    persons following their arrest.  The  letter  is  generalised  in  this
    regard and is not entirely consistent with the evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant as to the scope of his activities.  He  denies  having  funds
    available to him and there is no reference to any vehicles used by him.
     What the letter makes clear is that the Appellant's role  was  limited
    to giving  information  for  the  benefit  of  the  former  regime.  We
    acknowledge that the letter was accepted as genuine by Professor Seddon
    and by the FTT.  However, we have some concerns as to  the  reliability
    of this evidence, which does not refer to any specific crimes committed
    during the regime or by the Appellant. The letter in our  view  is  not
    sufficiently strong, clear  or  credible  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant  was  involved  or  knowingly  involved  in  crimes   against
    humanity.

30.  The Appellant's account is that not all his reports led to arrests  and
    the information was provided primarily  for  monitoring  purposes.  The
    Appellant has consistently denied any knowledge  or  awareness  of  the
    consequences of his actions.

31.  We accept that by the time the truth started to be published about  the
    RCD regime the Appellant had left Tunisia and was living in the UK.  We
    place weight on  Professor  Seddon's  qualified  view  emphasising  the
    closed nature of the regime and restrictions on the  media  whilst  the
    RCD was in power. Further, Professor Seddon highlights that the Ben Ali
    government  was  an  approved  member  of  all  the  recognised  bodies
    including the United Nations, as was the RCD, and was well regarded  by
    other European  countries.  In  his  witness  statement  the  Appellant
    accepted responsibility for imprisonment of wrong doers  and  political
    dissidents but we find that this falls short of having a close role  in
    and knowledge  of  the  crimes  committed  against  those  arrested  or
    imprisoned.  The evidence is not that he played anything other than  an
    unofficial role as an informant; he had no formal or paid role  in  the
    party.  There  is  no  evidence  that  his  role  extended  beyond  the
    provision of information from the street. We found it credible that  he
    had no access to the inside  of  the  police  station.  We  also  found
    credible his further evidence that he had seen at  large  some  of  the
    people that he had informed on and heard of no allegations  of  torture
    made. This we find is consistent with the view of Professor  Seddon  as
    to the lack of public awareness about the workings of the  regime,  for
    example:

         "...official media presented a public face  -  that  of  a  secular
         democratic  multi-party  state,  whose  president  Ben   Ali,   was
         consistently  re-elected  with  massive  majorities  including   as
         recently as October 2009 - both to the Tunisian population  and  to
         the outside world that  was  rarely  openly  questioned  until  the
         uprising of 2011."

 32. Professor Seddon's expert report we find  to  be  reliable.  As  above,
    there is no direct evidence linking the Appellant's activities with any
    specific incidents of torture. There is no evidence  to  indicate  that
    the appellant was a member and informer other than in a  voluntary  and
    informal capacity; he was not paid and was not a member  of  the  State
    Security Department ("DSS"). The fact that he assisted the RCD  between
    2003-2007  is  a  significant  period  of  time  in  which  to  provide
    information  and  suggests  that  potentially  he  could  have  made  a
    significant contribution to the  party's  purpose.  It  was  our  view,
    however, that Professor Seddon's comment that "it could be argued" that
    the Appellant was "probably aware" was,  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence before us, insufficient to show the Appellant's  knowledge  of
    the programme of mistreatment operated by the RCD such that he could be
    said to be a knowing and voluntary contributor. This  was  additionally
    so where the Appellant was involved at a local level with the police in
    his area and where  the  country  material  focuses  on  the  role  and
    activities of the RCD centrally, in particular the DSS.

33.  In short, we accept the submission made by Mr Nathan that the  evidence
    here does not meet  the  requirements  of  the  "proximity"  test.  The
    evidence fails to establish that the Appellant knew that the purpose of
    the party or regime was to commit crimes against humanity or  that  his
    activities  amounted  to  personal   and   knowing   participation   or
    acquiescence amounting to complicity in the crimes in question. We find
    that the evidence  is  not  sufficient  to  meet  the  restrictive  and
    cautious approach necessary for establishing that the test for "serious
    grounds considering" is met. What is  required  is  something  stronger
    than suspecting or believing.

34.  In conclusion we are not satisfied  that  Article  1F  can  be  invoked
    against this Appellant as  it  has  not  been  shown  to  the  required
    standard that he knew of the crimes against humanity being carried  out
    by the regime either on a general basis or in relation to the  specific
    individuals on whom he reported.

Decision

35.  We substitute in the First-tier determination the following decision.

     We allow the appeal on asylum grounds.



Signed                                  Date 25.11.2014

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



Anonymity

The Appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until the court directs otherwise, and be referred to as HB.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  a  contempt
of court. This order is made in order to avoid  the  risk  of  serious  harm
arising from the subject matter of the Appellant's protection claim.



