
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 22nd April 2014                            |On 22nd  May 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR GSM
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Counsel, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Behbahani, Oaks Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant born on 21st March 1962 is a citizen of Iran.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in August 2009 as a  dependant  upon  his  wife's
    student visit.  In December 2011 he returned  to  Iran  for  a  holiday
    returning to the UK on 6th April 2012.  He applied for asylum  on  17th
    October 2012.  The application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department on 30th December 2013 and  directions  for  his
    removal were also issued.

2.   The claimant sought to appeal  against  those  decisions  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney on 14th  February  2014.
    The determination is a detailed one.  The decision by the Judge was  to
    allow the asylum appeal and to allow the appeal in respect of Article 3
    of the ECHR.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to raise a  number
    of grounds against that decision in particular that the Judge failed to
    give reasons for findings on material matters.   Permission  to  appeal
    was granted on  that  basis.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    pursuance of that grant of permission.

4.   The nature of the appeal was twofold.  The first  basis  was  that  the
    claimant had a political profile with the Iranian authorities.  It  was
    said that in 1978 he had become a supporter of the Tudeh Party and  had
    distributed leaflets and attended meetings.  That had  led  him  to  be
    expelled from school and in 1982 he was  arrested  and  imprisoned  for
    eighteen months.  He was released and went on to complete his  military
    service but his profile had caused him to have difficulty in  obtaining
    employment.  He said he was detained on two further occasions.

5.   After what clearly was a very significant period,  the  claimant  began
    activities with the Green Movement prior to the 2009 elections.  At the
    time he was working as a manager of a pharmacy in Mashad.  It  was  his
    evidence that he used pharmaceutical supplies to support those  members
    of the Green Movement who had been wounded in demonstrations.   One  of
    his contacts, Dr K, seemingly was killed in March 2012.  The  appellant
    suspected that it was not an accidental death.  When he  had  attempted
    to contact P who had been a nurse and a go-between he was told  by  her
    not to contact her further.  Seemingly after he had returned to UK from
    his latest visit information came that  she  had  been  arrested.   His
    brother had told  him  also  that  security  services  had  raided  the
    pharmacy and the house looking for  evidence  seeking  to  confirm  the
    appellant's associations with the Green Movement.

6.   The second aspect of the appeal was that the  appellant  had  converted
    to Christianity and feared retribution also on that account.

7.   The reasons for refusal letter dated  30th  December  2013  set  out  a
    detailed analysis of the evidence provided.  The delay of the  claimant
    claiming  asylum  was  considered  to  be  relevant  and  a  number  of
    discrepancies  highlighted  in  the  course  of  the  analysis  of  the
    evidence.  It was accepted that the  claimant  had  converted  for  the
    reasons that are set out in the decision.

8.   Ms Everett,  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, relies on the grounds of appeal which she  says  speak  for
    themselves.

     Essentially she seeks to criticise the approach adopted  by  the  Judge
    to the delay and why that should not have affected the  credibility  of
    the claim.  Also said that the Judge has not  given  reasoned  findings
    for accepting  the  profile  of  the  appellant  as  to  his  political
    activities and of the events described.  It  is   also  said  that  the
    Judge gave inadequate reasons  for  accepting  the  conversion  of  the
    appellant and had not applied the principles and guidelines set out  in
    the decision of Ali Dorodian (01/TH/1537).

9.   Mr K Behbahani, who represents the claimant, invited me  to  find  that
    contrary to the grounds the determination was not only a  detailed  one
    but a very careful one.  He drew my attention initially  to  paragraphs
    27 and 28 of the determination in which the Judge sets out the  general
    principles which apply to the assessment  of  credibility.   The  Judge
    reminds herself of the importance of taking the case as a  whole.   She
    addresses the issue of vulnerability of the witness, particularly given
    the medical evidence as to his depression.

10.  The Judge proceeds to consider the issue of credibility from  a  number
    of perspectives.  The first being that relied upon by the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, namely the effect of Section 8  and  the
    delay in claiming asylum being a factor damaging of  credibility.   The
    matter is dealt with in paragraphs 33  through  to  paragraph  36.   An
    explanation for the delay  is  noted.   The  Judge  considers  for  the
    reasons as set out particularly in paragraph  36  that  a  satisfactory
    explanation has  been  made  for  the  delay  thereby  not  undermining
    credibility.

11.  Mr Behbahani submits that  the  aspect  of  delay  has  been  carefully
    considered and that the findings of the Judge were properly open to  be
    made.

12.  The Judge then considers the political activities of the claimant in  a
    structured way.  Firstly the events in 1982 then  moving  to  the  more
    recent events in 2009 and later.

13.  As to the earlier arrest of the claimant the Judge considers  not  only
    what he had to say but also the background evidence relating to  events
    at that time and finds, in the conclusion  of  paragraph  39,  "Mr  M's
    account of the methods employed accords with that provided  in  the  A1
    report at page 7.  In my judgment it has the ring of truth."

14.  As to  the  claim  that  the  arrest  had  prejudiced  his  chances  of
    employment that was considered at paragraphs 40 to 44.  The  background
    material  from  Amnesty  International  was  found  by  the  Judge   to
    corroborate and explain the process.

15.  Having analysed such matters, the Judge concludes at paragraph 43  that
    the claimant has provided  a  credible  explanation  for  the  apparent
    errors and omissions identified  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    refusal letter.  His account sits  well  with  the  background  country
    evidence.  The Judge is  satisfied  on  the  appropriate  standard  and
    burden of proof that the claimant was arrested, imprisoned and tortured
    in 1982.

16.  The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge provided  no  reasons  for
    accepting the claimant's evidence in the light of the discrepancies  in
    his evidence.  I disagree.  It is clear that the Judge  has  considered
    with care the challenges which were made against the credibility of the
    claimant on that aspect and has come to a reasoned decision.

17.  It is perhaps of some considerable significance that  at  paragraph  43
    it was noted that the claimant was not cross-examined by the Presenting
    Officer on his political activities.     Thus although there  had  been
    challenges made in the refusal  letter  which  the  Judge  has  clearly
    considered and borne in mind it is a matter of importance as indeed was
    conceded most fairly by Ms Everett before me that there was  no  cross-
    examination as to political matters.

18.  The Judge went on to consider the more recent political activities  and
    once again it is, as I so find, a very balanced  consideration  of  the
    case.  Throughout the Judge bears in mind the criticisms that are  made
    of the appellant's account by the respondent  but  finds  that  overall
    there is the serious possibility that the various elements of the claim
    as presented are true.

19.  The Judge deals with the death of Dr K in paragraphs 48 to  55,  paying
    particular regard also to the Country Report on Human Rights  Practices
    2009 and to other reports.   The  Judge  also  considers  the  evidence
    relating to the relationship of the claimant with P.

20.  Finally the Judge comes to the conclusion at paragraph 55 that  she  is
    satisfied to the requisite low standard of proof that the appellant was
    involved with the Green Movement and  that  his  associates  have  been
    targeted by the Iranian authorities and that the security services  are
    aware of that involvement.

21.  I find it difficult to fault the approach taken by the Judge  to  those
    matters.  The grounds of appeal seek  to  take  a  number  of  distinct
    strands of the political profile  to  argue  that  the  Judge  has  not
    adequately dealt with those.  Nevertheless it is  entirely  clear  that
    the Judge has taken a very  careful  and  structured  approach  to  the
    situation and has done her best to reconcile the various accounts.   It
    is to be borne in mind that  it  is  not  only  the  evidence  that  is
    presented,  which  leads  to  a  conclusion  in   favour   or   against
    credibility, but also the way in  which  the  evidence  is  given,  the
    manner in which the appellant presents that evidence and  the  internal
    consistencies with the evidence and with consistencies of the  evidence
    with background material.  It is not  an  exact  science  to  determine
    credibility, indeed it is often sometimes very difficult to  articulate
    precisely why the evidence given by an individual is credible  or  not.
    There is to be accepted an element of "Judgecraft" in  the  process  of
    decision making.

22.  Indeed it is often easier for a Judge to find reasons  not  to  believe
    than to articulate reasons for believing.  Thus it seems to me that the
    Judge has done all that  she  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  do  in
    weighing up the accounts and indicating why it is that she prefers  one
    account to the other or one set of circumstances to the other.   It  is
    submitted that  phrases  like  such  as  "ring  of  truth"  are  wholly
    unacceptable.  I disagree.  There has to be some contextual support for
    the findings that  have  been  made  and  I  find  in  this  particular
    determination that, so far as the political activities of the  claimant
    are concerned, the contextual examination has been fully and accurately
    undertaken by the Judge.

23.  The Judge went on  to  consider  the  aspect  of  whether  or  not  the
    claimant has converted to Christianity.  Once again  the  determination
    is a careful one looking at  what  is  said  by  all  parties  on  that
    particular issue.

24.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department  has  been  critical  of
    the Judge in the approach taken to the letter written by the pastor  of
    St George's Church, Southall on 4th February 2014.  Objection was taken
    at the time of the hearing to the letter as can be seen at paragraph 61
    of the determination.  It was said that it did not contain a  statement
    of truth and the vicar was not present at court to be examined.  It was
    submitted to me  by  Mr  Behbahani  there  is  no  requirement  in  the
    jurisdiction of the Tribunal to have statements contained in the  usual
    statutory declaration as to truth which of statements in  the  criminal
    jurisdiction are expected to contain.

25.  He invited me to read the letter because it was not  speaking  directly
    on the issue of conversion simply stating the pastor's knowledge of the
    appellant.  In December of 2013  the  claimant  and  his  wife  started
    attending the church regularly and he was asking to be  baptised.   The
    pastor did not want to run into baptism  as  spiritual  conversion  was
    hard to discern and time was often the best indicator of the reality of
    the experience a person expresses.   Thus  the  letter  indicated  that
    baptism was not then being offered to the appellant.

26.  The witness goes on to say this:-

         "Mr M appears sincere in his request but with the language  barrier
         it is hard for me  to  explore  sufficiently  what  he  understands
         already about Christianity."


    Essentially therefore the  letter  is  confirming  the  fact  that  the
    claimant attends church on a regular basis and says  little  more  than
    that.

27.  The  situation  as  envisaged  in  the  decision  of  Ali  Dorodian  is
    essentially to expect clergy to attend to be  questioned  on  important
    matters such as faith, conversion and baptism.  Though that may be  so,
    but that was not the extent to which the letter reached.  The vicar was
    not speaking of conversion but merely to set in context  the  interests
    of the appellant in the services of  that  particular  church.   It  is
    difficult to see that such would be controversial in any event.

28.  I was asked to find that it was perfectly proper for the Judge to  take
    into account what the vicar had said albeit the vicar had not  attended
    the hearing.  The Judge noted the letter and found no reason  to  doubt
    its probity.  It seems to me that was properly open  to  the  Judge  to
    decide in any event.  Indeed the Judge, not only considered the  letter
    from the Reverend Ramsey, but also a web page from the  Open  Charities
    site included in the bundle which spoke of that particular  church  and
    of its Sunday gatherings.

29.  The Judge indicated at paragraph 64 that she had  had  the  opportunity
    of hearing evidence from the  appellant  who  impressed  her  to  be  a
    sincere witness.  The Judge concludes in paragraph 64 it is  reasonable
    to expect the appellant upon return to take part in  a  church  service
    which in the circumstances was likely to expose him to danger.

30.  Although criticism is made of that finding  it  is  also  to  be  noted
    specifically that the appellant was not cross-examined as to how he was
    likely to behave upon return to Iran.  The function of the Judge is  to
    hear the witnesses and place the evidence  within  its  proper  context
    with the background material.  There is nothing to  indicate  that  the
    Judge in this case has not done precisely that and  sought,  through  a
    combination of evidence and reports, to have come to a finding.

31.  Overall I do not detect any manifest error of approach in the way  that
    the Judge has dealt  with  the  evidence.   I  find  that  the  grounds
    generally amount to little more than an argument  as  to  merit  rather
    than identifying any material error of law.

32.  In those circumstances therefore, the appeal by the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand namely that the  asylum
    claim is allowed and that in  respect  of  human  rights,  particularly
    Article 3, is allowed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
