
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00815/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Delivered orally at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mohamad normal safi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells of Counsel instructed by Messrs M & K
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn who  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  21
    September 2015 and in a decision promulgated on 2 October 2015  allowed
    the appeal of the  Respondent  (hereinafter  called  the  Claimant),  a
    citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1996 against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 5 January 2015 to refuse to grant  to  the
    Claimant further leave and to refuse to vary leave to enter the  United
    Kingdom and to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Claimant was that he  entered  the
    United  Kingdom  illegally  as   an   unaccompanied   minor   with   no
    documentation on 29 April 2008 and claimed asylum on 28  October  2008.
    His asylum claim was refused with a right of appeal and he was  granted
    discretionary leave to  27  October  2011.   On  25  October  2011  the
    Claimant applied for further leave to remain in the UK.

3.   The Secretary of  State's  letter  of  refusal  dated  5  January  2015
    considered whether or not the  Claimant  qualified  for  the  grant  of
    asylum, in the course of which he  considered  the  Claimant's  initial
    asylum application and the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 27  October
    2008 that accompanied it.  It was noted that  the  Claimant  maintained
    that he had a continuing fear  of  returning  to  Afghanistan  for  the
    reasons stated in his original asylum claim,  in  particular  that  his
    father would forcibly recruit him to the Taliban and that he feared the
    local people from his home area, due to his father's former  membership
    of Hezb-e-Islami and present membership of the Taliban, and feared that
    on return, the authorities would seek to extract information  from  him
    regarding his father's whereabouts.

4.   It was noted that following the refusal of the Claimant's asylum  claim
    on 27 October 2008, he was given a right of  appeal  that  he  did  not
    exercise for which he provided no explanation.  It  was  concluded  the
    Claimant  (who  was  now  an  adult)  had  not  provided  any   further
    information or evidence as to any factor or events  that  had  occurred
    since his claim to asylum was refused,  that  would  materially  affect
    consideration of risk upon return or necessitate further  consideration
    and it was therefore concluded the Claimant would not be at  real  risk
    on return.

5.   In his determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  paragraph  28,
    noted that an Article 8  claim  was  pursued  on  the  basis  that  the
    Claimant had established a private life in the United Kingdom.  Notably
    the Judge continued that he would "deal with that claim first because I
    think it was the (Claimant's) strong claim and the  standard  of  proof
    was a lower standard".

6.   In regard to the Claimant's Article 8 claim, the Judge found him to  be
    "a credible and an articulate witness" and there was no doubt  that  he
    had  established  a  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    considered that a return to Afghanistan "might undo all the  good  work
    that had been effected by the Claimant in the United Kingdom" and  that
    the Claimant was "vulnerable because of his psychiatric background".

7.   Notably the Judge continued at paragraph  44,  that  "the  reality  was
    that in Afghanistan, Kabul was probably the only safe place for him  to
    go" although he had no family or friends there and was unfamiliar  with
    the city.

8.   The appeal with reference to the guidance  in  Razgar,  VW  (Uganda)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5 and Huang was allowed on Article 8 grounds.



Assessment

9.   It would appear that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  simply  failed  to
    have any regard to the relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  the  statutory
    scheme in his consideration of this appeal and in consequence I  cannot
    be satisfied that the Judge would necessarily  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion had he adopted the correct approach to his assessment of the
    evidence.  This I find in itself discloses a material error on a  point
    of law.

10.  I am further satisfied that what is in  particular  glaringly  obvious,
    is that as the Secretary of State's  grounds  contend,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to make any  clear  findings  on  the  Claimant's
    asylum or humanitarian protection claims.  In that regard all that  one
    can discern from the determination, is the Judge's recognition that  in
    his view the claim on Article 8 should be dealt with first  because  he
    thought "it was the (Claimant's) stronger claim".

11.  We thus do not know, whether he regarded the Claimant as a  refugee  or
    entitled to humanitarian protection.  The  Claimant  claimed  to  be  a
    refugee, alternatively, that his return  to  Afghanistan  would  be  in
    breach of Article 15(c).   As  rightly  submitted,  these  claims  were
    challenged by the Secretary of State in her Reasons for Refusal  Letter
    and submissions at the hearing and it was indeed incumbent on the Judge
    to make findings on these matters and his failure to do so is, I  find,
    a further material error of law.

12.  Further, the  Judge  failed  to  refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenges to the Claimant's credibility  and  in  terms  of  paragraph
    276ADE failed to satisfactorily explain as to why there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Claimant's  integration  into  Afghanistan
    and why this would meet the high test set by paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules to which the Judge simply made no reference.

13.  In that regard the Secretary of State  has  appropriately  referred  to
    the guidance in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 in
    which Haddon-Cave J stated inter alia that it was necessary for  Judges
    to identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence  and  explain  in
    clear  and  brief  terms  their  reasons  so  that  the  parties  could
    understand why they had won or lost.

14.  For the reasons I have above given I find this was not accomplished  by
    the Judge's determination.

15.  It was notable that at the outset of  the  hearing  before  me,  I  was
    informed by Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State,  that  it  was  agreed
    between himself and Mr Wells for the Claimant, that for those  reasons,
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  material
    errors of law as identified in the Secretary of State's grounds that  I
    have reflected in my  decision  and  that  in  such  circumstances  the
    parties asked that the appropriate course was to remit this case to  be
    heard afresh with no findings  preserved  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Quinn.

16.  Having considered as to how the decision should be  re-made  and  after
    discussion with the parties I find that I am in  agreement  with  their
    proposal.

17.  It was further agreed that having regard to the errors  of  law  found,
    the length of the hearing (estimated at three  hours),  the  fact  that
    there were at least four witnesses, that there were  highly  compelling
    reasons falling within  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement as to why the decision should not be re-made by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was clearly in the interests of  justice  that  the
    appeal be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  For the reasons I have above given and by agreement with  the  parties,
    I conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn to  determine
    the appeal afresh to Hatton Cross Hearing Centre on the first available
    date.  I am informed that for  that  purpose  no  interpreter  will  be
    required.

19.  I have been asked by Mr Wells to record, that the Claimant will  invite
    the First-tier Tribunal to arrange  for  a  CMR  before  a  substantive
    hearing date is fixed, as arrangements are to be  put  in  hand  for  a
    detailed psychiatric assessment to be made  upon  the  Claimant.   That
    however is a matter entirely for the First-tier Tribunal's discretion.

Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and none of its findings preserved.

21.  I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent that I remit  the
    making of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross  before
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than the Judge to whom I  have  above
    referred.

22.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
