
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00717/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 June 2014                                  |On 24 June 2014            |
|Prepared 6 June 2014                            |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR Saeed Akhtar Bhatti
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Murphy, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination I shall refer to the Appellant as  the  Secretary
    of State and to the Respondent as the claimant.  The Secretary of State
    made a decision to remove under  Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999, on 17  January  2014,  an  asylum/human  rights  claim
    having failed and a form IS151A having been served on 28 May 2012.  The
    claimant's, a national of Pakistan, dob 1 December 1956, appeal against
    that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker who,  on
    13 March 2014, allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and in  respect  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR  and  dismissed  the  appeal  with  reference  to
    humanitarian protection grounds.

2.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Mr  Manuell  on  31  March
    2014.

3.   At the hearing before me  Mr  Smart  submitted,  by  reference  to  the
    grounds seeking permission, that quite simply the judge had  approached
    the assessment of the evidence and indeed particularly the  documentary
    evidence on the wrong basis.  For it was submitted  that,  although  in
    the determination the judge set out the burden and standard  of  proof,
    the judge was diverted into error in the way he assessed the  evidence.



4.    The  judge  had  noted  that  there  was  a  significant   amount   of
    corroborative evidence and at paragraph 18 of the determination stated

         "It  is  an  unusual  case  because  we  have  a  great   deal   of
         corroboration.  I am aware of the principles in Tanveer  and  Ahmed
         [sic] and I am also aware that the  evidential  burden  is  on  the
         Respondent (Secretary of State)  to  prove  that  the  document  is
         false.  They have not proved any document before me is false."


     Even though the Secretary of State made no such allegations.

5.   The judge also said at paragraph 21,  having  referred  to  some  First
    Information Reports verified by a Pakistani advocate, Mr Imran

         "It is not argued before me that the threat does not exist  to  the
         appellant but that simply he is  not  telling  the  truth.   It  is
         suggested that the  appeal  should  be  dismissed  because  of  the
         alleged inconsistencies in his story.  It does  not  satisfactorily
         deal with the abundance of documents which is before me."

6.   The fact someone is not telling the truth  does  not  necessarily  mean
    that there is or is not a threat was a slightly confused way to address
    the matter. Be that as it may, the judge accepted the originals of  the
    FIR and the arrest warrant were held by the courts  and  had  not  been
    shown to be inconsistent. He went on to  conclude  that  the  documents
    were not in themselves fraudulent.  As the judge said at paragraph 25

         "... There is however other evidence which supports the Appellant's
         story and we are not relying on any one document.   To  merely  say
         the  documents  are  fabricated  without  supporting  evidence   is
         insufficient.  The Tanveer Ahmed principle does not apply as I have
         found him to be a credible witness.  It suggests  that  the  reason
         for coming to this country is because of  his  poor  health.   This
         case has not been made out sufficiently to damage his  credibility.
         The medical records have  been  accessed  and  show  he  was  being
         treated in Pakistan from the problems known at the time."

7.   At paragraph 26 the Judge's confusing approach to  the  reliability  of
    documents is further compounded when the judge says

         "... I would find the Appellant is telling the  truth.   I  believe
         that very importance evidence which is not successfully  challenged
         by the Respondent is Mr  Imran  advocates  letter  with  supporting
         credentials.  The Sponsor (sic) has had time to check the  validity
         of this document and it has not been successfully challenged and in
         my view convincingly proves the Appellant  is  subject  to  further
         Information Report and to arrest warrants.  He will  be  considered
         an absconded person with police records ..."

8.   The fact of the matter is that there was not raised in the reasons  for
    refusal,  or  indeed  at  the  hearing  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative, any argument that the documentation provided was  false
    or forgeries.  Rather what was said did not involve  the  necessity  of
    the Secretary  of  State  proving  documents  were  false.   It  was  a
    completely irrelevant issue.

9.     However the question is whether or not the issue of  the  fabrication
    of documents nevertheless featured in why the claim succeeded I find it
    is plain that the  judge  did  take  into  account  the  issue  of  the
    fabrication of evidence and concluded that, because  it  had  not  been
    proved or sufficiently disputed, or as he referred to  it  successfully
    challenged, the appeal succeeded.  It seems  to  me  that  the  outcome
    could be the same but the reasoning is very unclear as to what part, if
    anything, in the judge's conclusions the issue of the validity  of  the
    documents and their reliability had played a part.   As  I  have  cited
    above, the judge plainly said that the Tanveer Ahmed principle did  not
    apply because he had found the Appellant a  credible  witness.   It  is
    apparent that the judge,  although  saying  that  he  is  applying  the
    principles from  Tanveer  Ahmed,  was  not  apparently  doing  so  with
    reference to what was actually said.  In paragraph 37 of Tanveer  Ahmed
    in  the  summary  of  the  principles  set  out,  Mr  Moulden,   Senior
    Immigration Judge, said as follows

         "In summary the principles set out in this determination are:


         1.   In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on.


         2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document  is  one
             on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at
             all the evidence in the round.


         3.   Only very rarely will there be the need to make an  allegation
             of forgery, or evidence strong  enough  to  support  it.   The
             allegation should not be made without such evidence.   Failure
             to establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities to
             the higher civil standard does not show  that  a  document  is
             reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply  principles
             1 and 2."

10.  In this case the judge, whilst expressing he himself in  paragraphs  13
    and 14, to have considered the evidence in the appropriate  way,  seems
    to then reject consideration of  the  reliability  of  the  Appellant's
    documentation by reference to the absence of a challenge to  its  being
    false, or possibly thinking that by the Secretary  of  State's  reasons
    for refusal those were matters which were not in issue.

11.  The Appellant, as much as a Respondent,  in  appeals,  is  entitled  to
    sufficient and adequate reasoning. I find this is a  case  where,  most
    unfortunately, although I do not seek to second guess what might be the
    outcome of remaking the decision, the  reasons  are  confused  and  the
    reasonable  reader  will  have  difficulty  in   discerning   how   the
    reliability of the documents was assessed in the round as was  said  to
    have been the case.  Rather, by digressing repeatedly into the issue of
    fabrication of documents or their falsity,  even  though  not  actually
    alleged, it seems to me that the judge has not provided  an  adequately
    reasoned decision to meet the requirements identified in cases such  as
    R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and E and R [2004] QB 1044 CA and the many
    cases that have followed since, dealing with the adequacy of reasons.

12.  Accordingly, I find this is a case somewhat  reluctantly  where  it  is
    necessary to set aside the original Tribunal's  decision  which  cannot
    stand.  The appeal is allowed to the extent it is to be remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  Hearing - two hours.

(2)  Urdu interpreter required.

(3)  Any additional statements or documents to be submitted not  later  than
    seven working days before the further hearing and served on  the  other
    party and the Tribunal.

(4)  When relisting this case, do not  put  it  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A J Parker.

(5)  Please list for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham.

(6)    No findings of fact to stand.

Signed                                  Date 22 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
