
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00949/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 05 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AD
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McQuitty, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Sudan  born  on  1  November  1989.   He
    arrived in the UK on 12 or 13 August 2014  and  claimed  asylum  on  or
    about 22 August 2014.  The respondent's  decision  on  5  January  2015
    refused his claim for asylum and made a decision to  remove  him  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision and his appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S. T. Fox on  30  April  2015  whereby  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.   Permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier   Judge's
    decision having been granted, the appeal came before me.

 2. Mr McQuitty on behalf of the appellant relied on the grounds of  appeal
    which were not amplified in detail in relation to every ground  because
    of the way the appeal proceeded. I  asked  Mr  McQuitty  to  deal  with
    certain aspects of the  grounds.   Mr  Diwnyez  in  reply,  whilst  not
    conceding the appeal, did accept that there was merit in what was  said
    in the grounds about the judge's failure to  have  regard  to  relevant
    country guidance.

 3.  Judge  Fox  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  recorded   the
    submissions of the parties.  He referred at [10] of  the  determination
    to country guidance in AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -  location)  Sudan  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 56.  What the judge did not do however is to  have  regard
    to more recent country guidance in the decision of MM (Darfuris)  Sudan
    CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC).  That decision was promulgated on 5 January
    2015 and the appeal came before First-tier Judge Fox on 30 April  2015.
    Accordingly it is a decision that governed the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds of appeal make various complaints about the decision of the
    First-tier Judge.  I summarise the grounds with some comment of my  own
    as I summarise them.

 5. It said that the judge did not fully grasp the issues in the  case  and
    how the respective parties were advancing them.  An example of that  is
    given in [2] of the grounds  whereby  with  reference  to  [8]  of  the
    judge's determination he said that an alternative argument was made  by
    the Home Office to the effect that there was in place  a  system  which
    offered a sufficiency of protection.  In fact that was no part  of  the
    respondent's case and it does not seem to me that it could have been. I
    cannot not find any reference in the refusal letter to  that  being  an
    alternative basis on which the respondent advanced the case.

 6. The country guidance decisions are significant  because  the  appellant
    claims that he is from the Berti tribe  and  is  therefore  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri.  It is argued that in the light of AA to which I have referred
    that fact would in any event make him potentially at risk.  The  matter
    in some ways is more nuanced given the decision in  MM.   The  headnote
    states that in the country guidance case of AA, where it is stated that
    if a claimant from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri, he must succeed  in  an
    international protection claim "Darfuri" is  to  be  understood  as  an
    ethnic  term  relating  to  origins  not  as   a   geographical   term.
    Accordingly, it covers even Darfuris who are not born in Darfur.  It is
    said on behalf of the appellant that this is the position  that  he  is
    in.

 7. Moving on in the grounds, although not necessarily in terms of order of
    importance, it is said that  the  judge's  assessment  in  relation  to
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 is flawed in the sense that the judge took s.8 as his starting
    point.  So far as that is concerned, it does seem to me that there  are
    some valid points to be made in s.8 terms, but it could  be  said  that
    there is merit in the complaint that the judge appears  to  have  taken
    this issue as his starting point.  Having said that, if that  had  been
    the only ground advanced I would not have found  that  on  its  own  it
    would have been a sufficient basis for finding an error of law such  as
    to require the decision to be set aside.  It is not necessary for me to
    identify with particularity what the valid s.8  points  are;  they  are
    obvious from the facts, for  example  that  the  appellant  gave  false
    names.

 8. The appellant claims that he was arrested on two occasions, firstly  on
    20 September 2013 and secondly on  18  May  2014.   It  said  that  the
    judge's conclusions in relation to those arrests are inconsistent.   At
    [17] the judge seemed to indicate that he accepted that  the  appellant
    was detained on one occasion.  The argument on behalf of the  appellant
    is that that detention or arrest alone would put him at risk on return.



 9. By way of background it is to be noted that the  appellant's  claim  is
    that he was a member of an organisation while at university in Khartoum
    known as, amongst other things, the Organisation for the People of West
    Sudan.  In that context he helped to support  students,  would  collect
    money, attend meetings and hand out leaflets.   It  is  in  respect  of
    those activities that he says he was arrested on  the  first  occasion,
    and then latterly, and it is for that reason that he says he  would  be
    at risk.

10. Further complaint is made in relation to the judge's assessment of  the
    appellant's credibility in terms of  the  appellant  apparently  having
    escaped from hospital after his second arrest, which it is also  argued
    that the judge in one sense seems to accept.

11. More importantly it seems to me, is the issue  in  relation  to  expert
    evidence.  There was a report from Mr Peter Verney which  commented  on
    all  significant  aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim  including   his
    ethnicity, and in respect of language.   Criticisms  are  made  in  the
    decision letter of the appellant's knowledge  of  the  Berti  tribe  or
    ethnic group from which he is said to come, and Mr  Verney  deals  with
    those issues in some detail and makes an assessment of the  appellant's
    claim in that respect.

12. Although the First-tier judge was clearly cognisant of the report of Mr
    Peter Verney, referring to the fact of the expert evidence at  [11]  of
    the determination, in my judgement there is insufficient engagement  by
    the judge with the issues dealt with by Mr Verney in his expert report.



13. Thus, at [33] the judge referred to the expert report stating  that  it
    lends some support for the appellant's "story".  He said however,  that
    he had reservations about what is in the report.  Firstly, he concluded
    that the information given to Mr Verney predominantly  originates  from
    the appellant himself and stated that  many  aspects  of  the  evidence
    given by the appellant to Mr Verney were self-serving.  However,  in  a
    sense all evidence given by or on  behalf  of  an  appellant  is  self-
    serving, which is why the evidence is  given.   Secondly,  at  [34]  he
    observed that with regard to the report:

         "...  it  does  little  to  persuade   me   that   the   anomalies,
         inconsistencies and vagueness referred to in the paragraphs  above,
         are exploitable (sic) and properly dealt with in subsequent answers
         provided by the Appellant.  In my opinion they are not."

14. Whilst there the judge said that he did not  find  Mr  Verney's  report
    dealt  with  what  he  described  as  anomalies,  inconsistencies   and
    vagueness, the  judge  did  not  there  explain  what  inconsistencies,
    anomalies and vagueness are not  dealt  with  in  Mr  Verney's  report.
    Indeed, there is no reference in any detail at all to  the  substantial
    report of Mr Verney.  Of course, expert evidence does not carry the day
    in any appeal and its assessment is a matter for the  judge  seized  of
    the appeal, as Mr Diwnyez rightly pointed  out.  However,  a  judge  is
    required to engage with expert evidence in order  to  make  a  reasoned
    assessment of the credibility of an appellant's claim, where the expert
    evidence is relevant to credibility.

15. As I have already indicated, the judge also failed to  have  regard  to
    relevant country guidance which potentially has a direct bearing on the
    issues in this appeal.

16. I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge erred in law in his assessment
    of the appellant's appeal in terms of the lack of engagement  with  the
    expert evidence, the lack of engagement  with  the  up-to-date  country
    guidance and taking into account the other matters advanced  on  behalf
    of the appellant in the grounds which otherwise would not on their  own
    terms have been sufficient to  find  an  error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside.  Cumulatively I am satisfied that they are.

17. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    consider that having regard to the Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2
    it is appropriate for the matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S. T. Fox.  No findings of fact are preserved.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing
    de novo before a differently constituted tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  23/12/15

