
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00688/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 20 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     T V
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Muquit, instructed by A&P Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Vikna Thiruggunapalasingam, date of birth 1.8.94,  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. This is her appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Loughridge promulgated 14.11.16,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  26.4.16,  to  refuse  her
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 1.11.16.

 4. The matter came before  me  on  13.1.17  as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Loughridge should be set aside.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  accepted  the  appellant's  history  as
    credible, including that she was  subjected  to  torture  whilst  under
    detention in Sri Lanka, and that she had participated in some sur place
    demonstrations. However, applying the country guidance case law  of  GJ
    and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC), and for the reasons set out between  [44]  and  [60]  the  judge
    concluded that despite both her history in Sri Lanka and  her  diaspora
    activities, the appellant would not be at risk on return.

 7. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal complain at [5(a-i)] that the  finding  of  risk  is  "legally
    untenable."

 8. Ground [6] also complains that  the  judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
    separate submission that the appellant would suffer mental  anguish  if
    returned to Sri Lanka, which would, it is asserted, be a breach of  her
    human rights.

 9. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dineen  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    6.12.16.

10. Having heard the  submissions  of  the  representatives  for  both  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State and having re-read the decision, I
    find, for the reasons set out herein, that there is no  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I am satisfied  that
    the judge properly considered all the relevant facts  and  applied  the
    correct law to those facts, reaching conclusions that were open to  the
    Tribunal and for which cogent reasons were given. I cannot  agree  with
    the submission that the decision was 'legally untenable,' or irrational
    or perverse, but find that it was fully  reasoned  and  justified.  The
    grounds of appeal amount to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusions, dressed up as an argument of irrationality.

11. GJ makes clear  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  objective  is  to
    identify Tamil activists in the diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
    separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.  Its  focus
    is on preventing both (a)the resurgence of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar
    Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of  the  civil  war
    within Sri Lanka. [7] of the guidance sets out the  current  categories
    of persons at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Sri
    Lanka.

12. Mr Muquit accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's was correct  at  [45]
    to regard the country guidance of GJ as the starting point and  accepts
    that the focus of the Sri Lankan authorities is whether a person is  or
    is likely to be a destabilising threat. He also agreed that  there  was
    no basis for the judge to depart from the guidance of GJ.

13. The seriousness of the appellant's mistreatment in Sri  Lanka  was  not
    ignored or underestimated. The judge also took into  account  that  her
    brother had a greater degree of LTTE involvement than she, and  yet  he
    remains living in Sri  Lanka  with  no  apparent  difficulties.  Having
    accepted the appellant's core account, the judge reached the conclusion
    that she had been a low-level LTTE member and even taking into  account
    her activities in the UK, she was not and would not be perceived  as  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state and would not be
    perceived to have any significant role  in  relation  to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka.

14. Cogent reasons for this conclusion are given from [46] onwards. At [59]
    the judge correctly noted that following GJ the past  is  not  the  key
    issue  in  determining  whether  there  is  an  ongoing  risk  for   an
    individual, but whether they are or will be perceived as  a  threat  to
    the unity of the state. The judge took into account  the  evidence  and
    submissions but reached the view that in light of the low level of  her
    past involvement, including an assessment of her sur place  activities,
    there was no reason why the Sri Lankan authorities would  perceive  the
    appellant as a threat to unity or stability.

15. The only significant part of the appellant's case which the  judge  did
    not accept was the claim that her brother had been  questioned  by  the
    authorities about her activities in the UK. The judge  did  not  simply
    disregard this evidence or dismiss it because it was self-serving.  The
    judge was not persuaded that  such  questioning  took  place  and  gave
    reasons for not giving this claim any significant weight,  particularly
    given the length of time she had been absent from  Sri  Lanka  and  her
    failure to mention this in her asylum interview.

16. I do not accept the submission that the judge  'compartmentalised'  the
    findings and did not consider the evidence as a whole. In  reading  the
    decision as a whole it is clear that an overall  assessment  was  made,
    taking in account all of the evidence and submissions. The judge has to
    deal with the  evidence  carefully  and  the  fact  that  the  diaspora
    activities were addressed  at  some  parts  of  the  decision  and  the
    background  claim  at  other  parts  does  not  mean  that  an  overall
    assessment was not made; the judge has to start somewhere  and  has  to
    draft a decision that makes it clear whether careful attention has been
    given to all relevant evidence. I do not accept the assertion that  the
    judge looked at risk of each aspect  in  isolation.  Just  because  the
    diaspora activities  are not mentioned, for example at [57],  does  not
    mean that the judge has ignored them. Neither is it correct to  suggest
    that because the judge there  dealt  with  the  appellant  having  been
    released from detention and the issue as  to  whether  the  authorities
    would still have an interest in her, that he was addressing  the  issue
    of risk on return in isolation.

17. In essence, Mr Muquit submitted that because  the  appellant  had  been
    detained, she must have a profile  rendering  her  of  present  adverse
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities and thereby at  risk  on  return
    and that the judge was wrong to reach any different conclusion. For the
    reasons stated above, I reject that submission.  Reading  the  decision
    as a whole, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal assessed  every
    relevant aspect of the appellant's case, correctly identified the legal
    principles, and applied the guidance of GJ and the risk  categories  to
    the findings of fact. The decision may be one with which the  appellant
    disagrees, and perhaps another judge could  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion, but I find that it is legally sound and  does  not  contain
    any material error of law.

18. In relation to ground [6] I am satisfied that when reading the decision
    as a whole and in particular noting that at [60] the  judge  took  into
    account and did not underestimate the appellant's lever  of  subjective
    fear about being returned, as part of the overall findings.  The  judge
    gave cogent reasons within [60] for reaching that  conclusion.  In  the
    circumstances, I find no merit in this ground of appeal.

Conclusions:

19. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        12 July 2021


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons:      No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        12 July 2021

