
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00044/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 3rd March 2015                             |On 23rd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 MEHMET DARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Brown made following a hearing at Taylor House on 21 August 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Turkey born on 1st February 1995.  He said
    that he entered the UK on 26 January 2011 and he claimed  asylum  on  7
    February 2011. He was refused on 19th April 2011  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave until the age of 17�.

 3. During the period of his leave the claimant applied for  further  leave
    to remain on asylum  grounds.   The  application  was  refused  on  5th
    December 2013.   His appeal was initially heard by  Judge  Andonian  on
    3rd February 2014 and he allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal and, on 24th April 2014, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Perkins set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination on  the
    grounds that inadequate reasons had been given for the decision.

 4. The matter then came before  Judge  Brown  and  he  again  allowed  the
    appeal.

 5. The claimant says that he fears a return to Turkey on  the  grounds  of
    persecution because of his political opinion.  He is a Turkish national
    of Kurdish ethnicity.  His father and other  Kurdish  villagers  helped
    the PKK and everyone in the village was suspected of  supporting  them.
    The PKK used to come to his village during the night and  sometimes  he
    saw his father giving them food and clothes.  His father  was  arrested
    and detained on many occasions.  Three or four months before  he  left,
    in September or October 2010, his father disappeared.

 6. The claimant was  personally  detained  by  the  authorities  on  three
    occasions.  The first detention was in January 2009 when he was accused
    of being involved with the PKK.  A week beforehand  there  had  been  a
    meeting in the village organised by the DTP.  The claimant took part in
    the meeting and members of the DTP Youth Branch came to talk  to  them.
    A week later the police raided his house and arrested him.  His details
    were recorded from his ID card and he was interrogated.  He admitted to
    taking part in the meeting and was asked  to  give  the  names  of  the
    attendees.  He was threatened and ill-treated before being released  on
    the following morning and told that he had  to  inform  the  police  if
    there were any PKK activities in the village.

 7. The second detention took place on 25th February 2010 and the  claimant
    was arrested with his father and taken to Sakcoguzu police station.  He
    was again interrogated about the PKK and  badly  treated  before  being
    released.  He went to a  clinic  and  obtained  medical  treatment  for
    bruising and cuts although he did not have any serious injuries.

 8. The third detention took palace on  25th  December  2010  when  he  was
    detained at Gaziantep where there was a BDP  Youth  meeting  which  was
    raided by the police.  The claimant was again subjected  to  aggressive
    questioning and badly treated and again asked to provide names.  On the
    second day he was released on the agreement that he  was  attended  the
    BDP regularly and report back to the  police.   He  understood  that  a
    bribe had been paid.  Ten days later two police men came to  his  house
    and said that they were very proud that he was to work with them.

 9. His uncle was very worried and  took  him  to  his  paternal  aunt  who
    arranged for him to leave the country.

10. The judge said that the claimant's story had been relatively consistent
    and he accepted that he had been vague  in  his  answers  to  questions
    regarding his political knowledge because of his young age.  A  witness
    was able to confirm the Appellant's attendance at various meetings  and
    his subsequent arrest and detention. The problems  experienced  by  the
    Appellant were consistent with the background information.

11. He observed that there was confusion in the oral evidence as to whether
    a warrant had been issued for his arrest and there was no clear  answer
    as to the truth of the statement.  He said that it  was  possible  that
    his name and his father's name would be known as PKK supporters and  he
    would have difficulty re-entering  Turkey.  On that  basis  he  allowed
    the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not given adequate reasons for his decision.  He had done
    little more than place reliance on the  lower  standard  of  proof  and
    failed to engage with the discrepancies  in  the  claimant's  evidence.
    Neither had he indicated whether the supporting  witness  was  credible
    and, if so, how his evidence overcame the concerns that the  judge  had
    regarding the arrest warrant.  Nor had he addressed the issues relating
    to internal flight raised in the refusal letter.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer on 16th September 2014
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

14. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had
    simply failed to give proper  reasons  as  to  why  he  had  found  the
    claimant to be truthful, had  not  engaged  with  the  refusal  letter,
    particularly with respect to internal  flight,  and  had  not  properly
    applied the standard of proof.

15. Mr Hussain submitted that the Secretary of State was simply disagreeing
    with the decision. The judge had set out the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof in the determination and if he had accepted that the claimant had
    been badly treated by the authorities the question of the  warrant  was
    immaterial.  It was open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  claimant's
    profile would put him at risk.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

16. This determination is not an adequate resolution of the  issues  before
    the Immigration Judge.

17. Whilst he was fully entitled to conclude that the  claimant's  evidence
    had been relatively consistent, both internally and  with  the  country
    information, he was obliged to engage with the  very  detailed  reasons
    given by the Secretary of State in the refusal  letter.   Moreover  the
    judge clearly had concerns about discrepancies in the oral evidence  in
    relation to the warrant and was obliged to resolve them. The  issue  of
    the warrant was relevant so far as the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    credibility of the claim as a whole.  In particular, the issue  of  the
    arrest  warrant  has  an  impact  on  the  practicability  of  internal
    relocation, which was a live issue.  The Secretary of State  considered
    that the claimant did not have a political  profile  which  would  give
    rise to a real risk on return to a different area  in  reliance  on  IK
    (Returnees records IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312; the judge  simply
    did not engage with the Secretary of State's position which is that the
    claimant could reasonably live elsewhere.

18. The decision of Judge Brown is set aside and must be re-made.

The Resumed Hearing

19. I heard oral evidence from Mehmet Dari  and  from  his  friend,  Mehmet
    Yilmaz who both confirmed that the contents of their witness statements
    were true and correct.

20. The Appellant was asked abut his detentions, the first in January 2009,
    following his attendance at a meeting in the village organised  by  the
    DTP, and the second in February 2010.  In his statement he said that he
    and his father were handcuffed and taken to Sakcoguzu Gendarme  Station
    where they were fingerprinted and put in separate cells.  He  confirmed
    in his oral evidence that his fingerprints  were  taken  and  that  his
    statement was correct.  It was put to him that on arrival he  had  been
    asked whether he had ever been fingerprinted in the  UK  or  any  other
    country before and, if yes, where, when and why.  He replied "only when
    I claimed asylum on 7.2.2011 and no".

21. His explanation for the discrepancy was that he had presumed  that  the
    interviewing officer was meaning the UK.  The question was clear but  I
    take into account the fact that the Appellant was a minor  in  February
    2011 and I therefore place less  weight  upon  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence when comparing an  interview  which  was  conducted  when  the
    Appellant was a child than I would have done if he had been an adult at
    all material times.

22. In his interview the Appellant said that his father was missing and  he
    had last seen him in the October before the interview, which would have
    been in 2010.  When asked where he was now the Appellant said  that  he
    was in hiding and he came in the middle of the night  every  couple  of
    months.  He was asked why he had not mentioned in  his  statement  that
    his father was in hiding and he said that he thought that he  had  told
    his solicitor that.  I bear in mind that I  should  be  cautious  about
    holding omissions in his statement against the  Appellant  but  on  the
    other hand it is extremely detailed, running to twelve  pages  and  the
    fact that the Appellant made no mention of his father being  in  hiding
    during the course of some 42 paragraphs causes some concern.

23. In his interview the Appellant said that he signed something before  he
    was released from detention on the second occasion and told that if  he
    did not sign he and his family would be killed.  In  his  statement  of
    28th January 2014 he  specifically  said  that  his  answers  to  those
    questions were incorrect and the authorities did not say that he  would
    be killed.  When the discrepancy was put to him  in  oral  evidence  he
    said that he was not certain but he thought that is what it said and if
    he did not sign he would be killed.  He could  not  read  it  properly.
    Both the second statement and the oral evidence today were  taken  when
    the Appellant was over the age of 18 and there is  therefore  no  basis
    for any allowance to be made for the discrepancy on grounds of age.

24. The answers in relation to his ID card  are  also  contradictory.   The
    Appellant was asked whether he had an ID card and he said that  he  did
    and it was obtained by the family when he was born.   Later  in  cross-
    examination  he  said  that  the  NUFUS  card  which  he  gave  to  the
    Immigration Officer on arrival, dated 15th December 2010, was his first
    card and he got it a long time ago, about one or three years before  he
    came to the UK.  It was put to him that the date on the card  was  only
    two months before he arrived and he said that he thought it was longer.
     Mrs Pettersen asked him, if this was his first card, what ID  did  the
    gendarmes check in 2010? The Appellant modified his evidence  and  said
    that he used to have one but he lost it.  He had said that this was his
    first card because it was the first time he had gone with his uncle  to
    get the card and before that his family had got it.

25. At the interview the Appellant said that he  had  only  talked  to  his
    family, namely his mother, once since he had been in the UK.   In  oral
    evidence he said that he rang her every couple of months.  He was  told
    by her that the police kept  coming  and  asking  for  him  and  asking
    whether he was on the mountains fighting against the Turkish  Republic.
    His mother had told them that he was in the UK but  they  thought  that
    she was lying.  They had been asking her for his  whereabouts  for  the
    past four years and because they could not get hold  of  him  they  put
    pressure on his younger brother.   When  his  brother  refused  to  co-
    operate they beat him up. He had been taken away and  interrogated  and
    the police had threatened to kill him.  Once when he was  in  a  coffee
    shop, speaking Kurdish, people poured hot water on his hand. He came to
    the UK some five months ago and claimed asylum because he was afraid.

26. The Appellant confirmed that the same solicitors who  were  acting  for
    him were representing his brother.  I gave Mr Hussain an opportunity to
    contact his solicitors to see if they could provide any further details
    and in particular explain  why  there  was  nothing  from  the  younger
    brother before the Tribunal to confirm that the Appellant's  story  was
    true.  Mr Hussain was unable to  contact  them  during  the  25  minute
    adjournment.

27. The Appellant's younger brother is of course still a minor but  on  the
    other hand there is no reason at all why a  statement  could  not  have
    been taken from him since he  is  in  the  best  possible  position  to
    confirm the truth or otherwise of the Appellant's story  of  persistent
    interest in him since he left Turkey.

28. The Appellant was asked whether he was ever charged with an offence  in
    Turkey.  He said that he had not been and had never been to  court  and
    had only been detained.  He was then asked why there would therefore be
    any record of him if there were no outstanding charges.  He said it was
    because they kept coming and asking for him.

29. The Appellant's case therefore rests upon the credibility of his  claim
    that for four  years  after  his  departure  from  the  UK  the  police
    maintained a significant interest in him to the extent  of  beating  up
    his younger brother in order to get information about  the  Appellant's
    whereabouts.

30. The Appellant's friend, Mehmet Yilmaz has been granted  refugee  status
    and has known the Appellant since childhood.   He  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant attended some meetings although it was quite a long time  ago
    and he did not remember any dates or names.  He recalled  that  he  was
    detained on at least two occasions  and  after  he  was  detained  they
    talked about what had happened because he had suffered  similarly.   He
    also said that at one point he was  forced  to  be  an  agent  for  the
    authorities because the Appellant mentioned it to him.

31. The Appellant accepted that he had not  taken  part  in  any  political
    activities in the UK and he said that his friend was also not  involved
    and they very seldom spoke  about  politics  together.   Mehmet  Yilmaz
    agreed that now and again he talked about things with people but he did
    not attend specific places.

32. Mr Hussain relied on his skeleton argument which, in  essence  is  that
    the Appellant's story was consistent with the  objective  material  and
    that he falls within a risk category set out in  the  country  guidance
    case of IK (Returnees - records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312  as
    he refused to become an informer.

Findings and Conclusions

33. I accept that discrepancies and omissions in the  Appellant's  original
    interview cannot be used as the basis upon which to impugn the veracity
    of his evidence as a whole.  He was only 15 years old at the  time.   I
    also accept that his family were supporters of Kurdish parties in their
    local area. It is not inherently implausible.

34.  Whilst  some  of  the  discrepancies,  for  example  in  relation   to
    fingerprinting at the interview and the omission of the claim that  his
    father was in hiding in his SEF statement could  be  explained  by  his
    minority, others  cannot.   The  Appellant  had  attained  the  age  of
    majority by the time of the second  statement  and  there  is  a  clear
    difference between his repetition of the claim at  the  interview  that
    the authorities wrote down that he would  be  killed  and  his  present
    claim that they did not.  The  discrepancy  in  the  oral  evidence  in
    relation to the ID card also  remains  unexplained.   Moreover,  it  is
    inherently implausible that the Appellant would have almost no  contact
    with his mother after he had first arrived in the UK but now says  that
    he speaks to her every couple of months.

35. Most significantly, the Appellant's account of the police visiting  his
    home on a regular basis and ill-treating his younger brother  in  order
    to get information about him is wholly fanciful.  On his own account he
    was detained very briefly on three occasions between 2009 and 2010 when
    he was a young boy.  He is not someone who has shown  any  interest  in
    Kurdish politics  since  he  has  been  in  the  UK.   There  would  be
    absolutely no reason whatsoever for the Turkish  police  to  devote  so
    much time and resources in pursuing someone  whom  they  did  not  even
    charge with an offence before he left.

36. I accept that Mehmet Yilmaz is a friend of the Appellant but  not  that
    his evidence is reliable.  There was a discrepancy in  their  evidence,
    for example, about when the young men were  last  at  school  together.
    The Appellant first of all said that it was in 2007 or 2008 but  agreed
    that it was possible that his statement was correct when he said  2010.
    Mehmet Yilmaz was similarly vague about dates.  He said that he himself
    finished school in 2010 and the Appellant was a  year  above  him.   He
    then said that they were last at  school  together  in  2007  but  when
    challenged said it could have been 2008 or 2009.

37. Moreover I do not believe that, as claimed, the friends met  by  chance
    in Scunthorpe when the Appellant happened to see Mr Yilmaz's brother in
    a Kurdish shop. Mr Yilmaz's knowledge of the Appellant's activities  in
    the statement is spectacularly vague and in my view  intentionally  so.
    The fact that he has been  granted  status  is  not  a  basis  for  the
    Appellant to be recognised as a refugee since each case is  dealt  with
    on its own facts.

38. I conclude that there is no reasonable degree of likelihood that  there
    is any truth at all in the Appellant's claims to have been detained and
    that the decision to come to the UK was a part of the pattern of family
    migration from Turkey to the north-east of England, a pattern which has
    been continued with the arrival of the Appellant's younger brother.

39. The Appellant is a young, healthy male.  There is no reason why, if  he
    decided not to return to the south-east of Turkey,  he  could  not  re-
    establish himself here.  According to the Operational Guidance Note  on
    Turkey in the Appellant's bundle the  computerised  GBT  system  has  a
    defined and limited ambit comprising only outstanding arrest  warrants,
    previous  arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,  possible   draft
    evasion, refusal to perform military service and tax arrears.   Arrests
    as defined in the GBTS require some  court  intervention  and  must  be
    distinguished from  detentions  by  the  security  forces  followed  by
    release without charge.

40. The Appellant's case at its highest, so far as what happened to him  in
    Turkey is concerned, is that of detention and release.  Not  only  does
    the OGN support the conclusion that the Appellant would not be  of  any
    interest to the authorities on arrival but it also undermines the claim
    of continued interest in him by the police over  the  intervening  four
    years since his departure from Turkey.

41. Mr Hussain confirmed that the only ground being pursued in this  appeal
    was the asylum ground and for reasons detailed above  I  conclude  that
    the Appellant has not made out his case.





Notice of Decision

42. The original judge erred in law and his decision has  been  set  aside.
    The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


