
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00732/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27th July 2017                            |On 07th August 2017            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    A.T.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  India,  born  [  ]  1992,  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Fowell) dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant him asylum/humanitarian protection.

Background

 2. The Appellant entered the  UK  on  or  around  7th  September  2013  in
    possession of a valid visit visa.  It is said that he travelled to  the
    UK with his parents.  It is unclear however where his parents  are  now
    and whether they remain in the UK.

 3. On 28th December 2014 the Appellant was arrested as an overstayer.   He
    admitted to overstaying, saying he was saving up  for  a  solicitor  so
    that he could apply to remain in the UK as there was no work for him in
    India.  He applied for asylum.

 4. His claim to asylum was set out  in  [7]  to  [11]  of  Judge  Fowell's
    decision.  In summary he claimed that he is a Sikh from Chandigarh  and
    that his father is a journalist who interviewed politicians and exposed
    their connections to the criminal underworld and drugs mafia in  India.
    He used to assist his father as a part-time reporter.  He claimed  that
    his father interviewed two politicians and  posted  the  interviews  on
    YouTube.  This resulted in his father being arrested at the instigation
    of the politicians.  His father was released on  bail  after  making  a
    deal with the politicians to withdraw the interview.

 5. The Appellant said that he continued to help his  father,  but  claimed
    that when his father was away from home working, men came to the  house
    regularly in an attempt to make him move away from the  area.   On  one
    occasion this led to a dispute when one of these men hit the  Appellant
    on the head with a rod.  He went to the police station  to  report  the
    incident.  Medical treatment was given him by the family  doctor.   The
    attacks continued on the family  home,  car  and  dog.   The  Appellant
    believed it was the work of the local drugs mafia.

 6. He said that in July 2013 he  was  arrested.   The  arrest  took  place
    because politicians had made complaints against him.  He was  taken  to
    the police station and kept there for two weeks during  which  time  he
    was tortured, deprived of food and beaten.  He was told by  the  police
    to back off from his father's work because high level  politicians  had
    complained about him.

 7. He was released after his father paid Rs100,000 to bail  him  out.   He
    travelled to the UK with his parents in around September 2013.  He  has
    since been told by his father that an arrest warrant was issued for him
    in February 2015.  He claimed that his father is still in the UK but he
    did not know his whereabouts.  His fear is that if returned  to  India,
    the police, the drugs mafia and the politicians would kill him.

 8. The Respondent disbelieved his claim,  finding  there  was  nothing  to
    support it bearing in mind the late claim and in any event there  would
    be sufficiency of protection if returned to India. The application  for
    protection was therefore refused.   The Appellant appealed against that
    refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before the FtT, the  Appellant  attended  unrepresented.
    In  addition  for  some  unexplained  reason,  there  was  no   Punjabi
    interpreter available.  Prior to the commencement of the  hearing,  the
    judge  called  the  Appellant  in  and  outlined  that  there  was   no
    interpreter available.  The Appellant was offered an adjournment.   The
    judge noted that the Appellant informed him that he  did  not  wish  to
    seek an adjournment but instead would carry on the hearing in English.

10. The judge took great care  to  satisfy  himself  that  the  Appellant's
    English was sufficient by questioning him and making sure the appellant
    would not be   disadvantaged.

11. The judge then took oral evidence from the Appellant in the absence  of
    a witness statement and noted that he had some concerns  over  the  way
    the Appellant gave his evidence, some  of  which  was  presented  in  a
    confusing and disjointed manner.  Nevertheless, the judge was satisfied
    that the Appellant's level of English was sufficient and further,  took
    great care to ensure that any questioning of the Appellant met with the
    Presidential Guidance on the treatment of  vulnerable  witnesses.   The
    judge formed the impression that the Appellant may have  been  admitted
    to hospital in India on mental health grounds, gleaning this from  some
    of his answers in interview but had no  real  evidence  before  him  to
    support that impression.

12. Looking at the available evidence as a whole, the judge concluded  that
    the Appellant had not demonstrated  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    appropriate to protection cases, that his claim to  asylum/humanitarian
    protection was well-founded.

13. Likewise, so far as an Article 8 ECHR claim was  concerned,  the  judge
    noted that the Appellant's main claim to a family/private life  centred
    on the assertion he was living with his parents, whom it was  said  are
    now in the UK.  However by the time of the hearing before the FtT,  the
    Appellant was saying that he no longer lived with them  and  apparently
    did not know their whereabouts.  It is correct to say that  neither  of
    his parents attended the hearing with him.

14. The judge accordingly concluded that removal of the Appellant would not
    breach his Article 8 ECHR rights either.

Onward Appeal

15.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's   decision.
    Permission was initially refused in the  FtT  on  the  basis  that  the
    application made set out no substantive Grounds of  Appeal,  despite  a
    reminder to do so having been sent to the Appellant's  representatives.



16. Permission to appeal on renewed  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted.

17. The grounds seeking permission referred to the fact that  the  FtT  had
    noted that the Appellant, who was  unrepresented  at  the  hearing  and
    without an interpreter, presented his  evidence  in  a  disjointed  and
    confused manner.

18. The grounds set  out  further  that  the  Appellant  had  informed  his
    representatives that he did not wish them to represent him at  the  FtT
    hearing.  It was said that efforts had been made previously to obtain a
    medico-legal report focusing on the Appellant's mental health, but that
    those efforts had been unsuccessful.   (No  explanation  for  this  was
    given.)  The  Appellant's  representatives  said  that  they  were  re-
    instructed on 1st December 2015 (sic) by a friend of the Appellant  who
    had confirmed to the representatives that the Appellant's mental health
    had deteriorated significantly since the hearing on 16th November 2016.



19. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Kebede and the relevant part of
    the grant of permission reads as follows:

         "Whilst the judge cannot be criticised for  having  continued  with
         the appeal  in  the  difficult  circumstances  in  which  he  found
         himself, given the Appellant's apparent desire to proceed  and  the
         lack  of  legal  representation  and  medical  evidence,  I   grant
         permission in order for the matter to be  considered  further,  now
         that  there  is  legal  representation,  albeit  that  it  may   be
         ultimately  concluded  that  nothing  material  arises   from   the
         grounds."

20. Thus the matter came before me as an error of law hearing, initially on
    6th June 2017.  The Appellant did not attend.  Mr  Sharma  attended  on
    his behalf.  Mr Nath attended for the Respondent.

21. Mr Sharma made application to adjourn the hearing  on  this  basis.  He
    said it was in the interests of justice  that  a  full  and  up-to-date
    psychiatric medical report be  obtained.   This  would  deal  with  the
    question of the Appellant's historic  mental  health  history  and  the
    current state of his health.

22. Considering the length of time since the FtT hearing had taken place  I
    asked Mr Sharma to amplify what it was that he expected this report  to
    show.  He responded saying that it should give  information  concerning
    the historic mental health problems of the Appellant.  In  addition  it
    should provide a  current  up-to-date  report  which  would  assist  in
    determining whether the FtT Judge had  erred  in  proceeding  with  the
    appeal by looking at the concerns raised in  the  grounds,  which  were
    that the Appellant's health  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  was  'not
    stable'.  Mr Nath on behalf of the Respondent was content to leave  the
    matter of granting an adjournment in my hands.

23. I expressed concern that this application was only being made  now  and
    asked Mr Sharma how long he required for a report to be  obtained.   He
    asked for a period of four weeks. In the circumstances  I  granted  the
    request, and adjourned for six weeks in order to ensure that ample time
    was given for the report to be obtained.

Resumed Error of Law Hearing 27th July 2017

24. Mr Sharma appeared once again for  the  Appellant,  Mr  Avery  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Sharma's submissions centred on the production  of  two
    additional documents which were admitted into evidence.

       . a GP medical report dated 21st July 2017; and

       . a letter dated 21st May 2017 from the president  of  the  Gurdwara,
         Park Avenue, Southall.

25. He said, following the lines of the grounds  seeking  permission,  that
    the FtT had erred in not adjourning the original  hearing  because  the
    Appellant was at that time, a vulnerable witness.   He  said  that  the
    GP's report confirmed that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  severe
    depression and psychosis.  Therefore the decision of the FtT should  be
    set aside and remitted to that Tribunal for  a  fresh  decision  to  be
    made.

26. Mr Avery filed a Rule 24 response and was content  to  rely  upon  that
    response. Regarding the additional evidence set out above, he said this
    did not add any weight to the grounds, sufficient to show that the  FtT
    had erred in its decision making.  At the end of submissions I reserved
    my decision which I now give with my reasons.

Consideration

27. I begin my consideration by revisiting the grounds seeking  permission.
    The main criticism of the judge, set out in the grounds,  is  contained
    in the first paragraph, the relevant words being  as  follows:  "It  is
    submitted that the Appellant's mental health condition at the  time  of
    the hearing was not stable and the hearing ought to have been adjourned
    so that the Appellant could have been assessed under the Mental  Health
    Act."

28. The second paragraph of the  grounds  sets  out  that  the  Appellant's
    representatives at that time (different representatives were instructed
    by the time of the hearing before me) were informed  by  the  Appellant
    that he did not wish them to represent  him  at  the  hearing  on  16th
    November 2016 and that the Tribunal was accordingly informed  of  this.
    From details submitted elsewhere in the file, this event happened about
    two weeks before the hearing date.

29. I look now at the judge's decision.  Undoubtedly the  judge  was  faced
    with difficulties from the outset.  The first difficulty was  that  for
    some reason no interpreter was  available.   The  judge  very  properly
    dealt with this difficulty by  calling  the  Appellant  in  before  the
    hearing to discuss the lack of interpreter.   The  Appellant  was  then
    offered the chance of an adjournment  but  indicated  instead  that  he
    understood English and was content to proceed without  an  interpreter.
    The judge noted this and took great care to satisfy  himself  that  the
    Appellant understood sufficient English and was not merely stating what
    he thought the judge wanted to  hear.  I  am  satisfied  from  a  plain
    reading of the decision that the judge ensured that the Appellant would
    face no disadvantage or unfairness if the hearing were to  continue  in
    English.

30. I find I am satisfied therefore the judge cannot be criticised for this
    approach, nor can he be said to have fallen into error.  The conduct of
    the hearing is a matter entirely for his judgment.  It  is  clear  from
    the significant amount of oral evidence which the judge  took  that  no
    complaint can be founded on this basis.

31.  The  Appellant  appeared  unrepresented.   The  judge  noted  that  no
    documentary evidence or witness statement had been  provided  prior  to
    the hearing, even though the Appellant had been  represented  up  until
    two weeks before the hearing.   The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant
    brought  documents  with  him  and  time  was  taken  properly  in  the
    circumstances for both the judge and the Respondent  to  examine  those
    documents.

32. With great care the judge took the Appellant through  his  evidence  in
    order to ensure that he had the opportunity  of  presenting  it.    The
    judge recognised that there were difficulties in the way the  Appellant
    gave his evidence but directed himself appropriately at [61].  He noted
    further that although the Appellant had been represented up  until  two
    weeks before the hearing,  there  was  no  evidence  presented  by  his
    representatives at the  pre-hearing  review  to  show  that  there  was
    medical evidence available  which  would  assist  in  setting  out  the
    Appellant's current mental capacity.

33. The judge therefore conducted the hearing clearly keeping in  mind  the
    question of the Appellant's mental capacity.  It is hard to see how any
    criticism can attach to the judge in these  circumstances.   The  judge
    has taken care to ensure that any questioning of the Appellant met with
    the Presidential Guidelines on the treatment  of  vulnerable  witnesses
    [58].

34. By the time of the hearing before me on  27th  July  2017,  some  eight
    months after the original hearing, two further  pieces  of  documentary
    evidence were presented.  The first is  the  medical  report  from  the
    Appellant's general medical practitioner dated 21st July 2017.  I  keep
    in mind that the appeal was adjourned on 6th  June  for  six  weeks  in
    compliance with the Appellant's representative's  request  that  he  be
    given an opportunity to present a medical report.  This was to  contain
    a full assessment supporting his case that the FtT  Judge  should  have
    adjourned the hearing on 16th November  2016  because  the  Appellant's
    mental health was "not stable" at the time and therefore  there  was  a
    question  mark  regarding  the  historic  aspects  of  his   claim   to
    protection.  In this context, it is particularly disappointing to  note
    the lack of detail provided in the GP report.

35. The GP report confirms a diagnosis of severe depression and  psychosis,
    and states that the Appellant has recently  been  receiving  treatment,
    including antipsychotic medication, from the Home  Treatment  team  and
    London Mental Health team.  It further states that, as a result of  his
    mental health condition, he had been lost to  follow-up  for  a  period
    during which time he was isolated and had  been  missing  appointments.
    In fact, the GP report appears to have been  constructed  primarily  to
    explain missed appointments with "the Home Office/immigration".   There
    are no  dates  whatsoever  provided  in  the  report  as  to  when  the
    Appellant's condition may have commenced, deteriorated or improved.

36. The GP's report does indicate that,  when  his  condition  was  at  its
    worst, the Appellant "was noted as not leaving his room" and  "was  not
    engaging with anyone."  However, it would seem from the  evidence  from
    the Gurdwara dated 21st May 2017 that the Appellant  is  responding  to
    treatment, at least sufficiently to attend the Gurdwara, participate in
    various activities there and do  voluntary  work.   Looking  back,  the
    Appellant clearly attended the FtT hearing on 16th November  2016,  and
    the judge's record of the oral evidence given then indicates  that  the
    Appellant was able to engage at that time.

37. It follows that there has been no evidence produced to  show  that  the
    FtT Judge was in some way wrong in his assessment that the core of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim that he feared to return to India  because  of
    the police, drugs mafia and politicians, was not made out.  Equally  Mr
    Sharma was unable to point out to me what evidence he relied on in  the
    GP's report to  show  that  the  judge  would  have  reached  different
    conclusions to the ones he did.  There were simply no time lines  given
    in the report, nor even a date when the Appellant had been examined and
    referred for treatment.  Meanwhile, the judge  had  clearly  identified
    that the Appellant suffers from mental health problems, as demonstrated
    in paragraphs [40], [57], [60] and [61].

38. This leads me to the conclusion therefore that the judge neither  erred
    in the way that he conducted the hearing nor in the conclusions reached
    in dismissing the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

39. For the foregoing reasons therefore I find there is no error  contained
    in the FtT's decision which would vitiate that decision.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision  promulgated  on
5th December 2016.  The judge's decision dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights grounds must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
