
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00848/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 4 February 2016                   |On 3 March 2016                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                                     N I
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms O.E. Duru, Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 1 July  1973.  His  appeal
    against the decisions of the respondent to refuse his  application  for
    asylum and to remove him from the UK was dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 5 August 2015.

 2. The Judge accepted that the appellant was an Iraqi citizen  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity who originally came from the Kurdish Autonomous Area. He  did
    not however accept the core of his account that he has  a  genuine  and
    well founded fear  of  persecution  in  Iraq.  His  reasons  for  those
    findings are set out from paragraphs [51] onwards.

 3. The Judge found that if the appellant were returned to his home in  the
    Kurdish Autonomous Area, there would be no real risk that he  would  be
    persecuted by the KRG. There is no risk that he would  be  targeted  by
    members of ISIS or any other Islamist armed group [62]. Even if he were
    to be targeted by such groups, the Judge was satisfied that the KRG  is
    able and willing to provide him with a sufficiency of protection within
    his home area of KAA [62]. The Judge then noted that the appellant  has
    always claimed to be from Makhmur, "in the Nineveh province."  [63]  He
    referred to country information and guidance dated 24 December 2014.

 4. In the light of the evidence, and more recent evidence, that  indicates
    that Makhmur and the Nineveh province is now again under the control of
    the KRG, he concluded that the appellant had not  established  that  he
    would not be able to return  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  KAA  by
    obtaining the necessary documents in London, Sulaymaniyah  or  Baghdad.
    Moreover,  the  KRG  are  willing  and  able  to  provide  him  with  a
    sufficiency of protection within his home area in the KAA [64-65].

 5. On 22 October 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal. She found  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself
    insofar as he found that Mukhmur is in the KAA, when in fact it  is  in
    Nineveh, a contested area. This is likely to have an adverse effect  on
    his findings on entitlement to  humanitarian  protection  and  risk  on
    return in the light of the decision  in  AA  (Article  15(c)  Iraq)  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544.

 6. At the outset, Mr Mills submitted that  in  granting  permission  Judge
    Finch had made a factual error in stating that Mukhmur is in Nineveh, a
    contested area.

 7. One of the documents before the Tribunal had been a Human Rights  Watch
    report dated February 25, 2015, where it is stated at page 4  that  HRW
    documented  the  apparently  discriminatory  acts  in  communities   in
    Sheikhan and Tilkif Districts and Zumar Sub District,  all  in  Nineveh
    Province, "and Makhmur District in Erbil Province..." Those  areas  had
    been visited in December and January 2015. They  are  part  of  the  so
    called disputed territories  that  both  the  regional  government  and
    Iraq's central government in Baghdad claim.

 8. With the exception of  Sheikhan,  the  districts  had  been  under  the
    central Iraqi government's authority until ISIS  captured  portions  of
    them in mid 2014. Many of the residents fled before ISIS captured their
    areas. Others stayed put because  the  fighting  did  not  reach  their
    towns.

 9. Backed by US air strikes, Kurdish forces wrested several communities in
    or near the districts from ISIS between August and October. Other parts
    of the districts remain  under  ISIS  control.  Sporadic  fighting  has
    continued between ISIS and Peshmerga forces.

10. Mr Mills produced without opposition a UN map created on 9 August 2014,
    regarding the "Iraq Erbil Governorate, Makhmur Districts." In that map,
    Makhmur is shown to be within the Erbil Governorate.

11. In the north western section of the map,  the  Nineveh  Governorate  is
    shown.  The  boundary  between  these   two   Governorate   is   shown.
    Accordingly, Makhmur is in a Kurdish area.

12. He referred to the headnote in AA, supra.  With  regard  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region - IKR - the Tribunal found that the respondent will only
    return a person to the IKR if that person originates from there and his
    identity  has  been  "pre-cleared"  with  the  IKR   authorities.   The
    authorities in the IKR do not require the person to have an expired  or
    current passport, or Laissez Passer. At [18] it is  provided  that  the
    IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article 15(c)  risk  to  an
    ordinary civilian in the IKR.

13. At [19] the Tribunal held that a Kurd who does not originate  from  the
    IKR can obtain entry for ten days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this
    entry permission for a further ten days. There is no evidence that  the
    IKR authorities pro actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
    have come to an end.

14. The Tribunal found that there is at present a state of  internal  armed
    conflict in certain parts of Iraq. The intensity of this armed conflict
    in the so called "contested areas", compromising  the  governorates  of
    Ambar, Diyala, Krikuk, Ninewah and Salah Al Din,  is  such  that  as  a
    general matter there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  any
    civilian returned there, solely on  account  of  his  or  her  presence
    there, faces a real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence
    within Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

15. Mr Mills accordingly contended that both the Human Rights Watch  report
    and the United Nations map produced showed that Makhmur is in the Erbil
    Governorate and not the Ninewah Governorate.

16. Mr Mills noted that the human rights report was handed up to the First-
    tier Tribunal at the hearing. At [64] the Judge noted that Makhmur  and
    the Nineveh province is now again under the control of the KRG.

17. Mr Mills also relied on a report (Press  TV)  dated  22  December  2014
    headed "Kurds re take control of  Gwer,  Makhmur,  from  ISIL."  It  is
    stated that the Kurdish fighters recaptured two towns in northern  Iraq
    from ISIS militants. Pershmerga forces had  managed  to  drive  Takfiri
    terrorists out of Gwer and Makhmur in Nineveh province. Those areas had
    been liberated from ISIL's grip, with the Iranian forces and Iraqi army
    playing significant roles.

18. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Duru submitted that the map produced was
    created in August 2014. That showed the position at that date. The  map
    from the UN was not updated. She submitted  that  Mukhmur  is  part  of
    Nineveh. That appears to be confirmed by the Press TV report itself.

19. Ms Duru stood the matter down in order to produce a later UN  map.  She
    later presented a map which noted that the boundaries and  names  shown
    and  the  designations  used  on  this  map  did  not  imply   official
    endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. The subject  areas  by
    province referred to Ninewa and contained six areas. There  is  then  a
    further province stated to be "Ninewa-Erbil" where Makhmur is situated.



20. On the map Ms Duru produced, Makhmur is shown to be close to the  Erbil
    border. She submitted that there is some dispute as to whether  Makhmur
    is in Nineveh or Erbil.

21. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that as at the date of hearing, the UN map
    showed that Makhmur is in Erbil. The dispute related to who has control
    over the area. On the one hand, the Kurds assert that they  should  and
    on the other hand, Baghdad claims it is  no  longer  in  Kurdistan.  If
    Makhmur is in Kurdistan, the appellant would not be refused  permission
    to enter and he would not be made  to  go  back.  They  have  de  facto
    control. He would fly directly to Erbil.

22. As claimed by the appellant,  he  originates  from  the  IKR.  He  will
    accordingly be returned to the IKR as he has originated from there. His
    identity will have been  "pre  cleared"  with  the  IKR  -  AA,  supra,
    headnote paragraph 17.

    Assessment

23. The question for the First-tier Tribunal Judge was whether Makhmur  was
    a safe area as at the date of the hearing. The  country  guidance  case
    was published several months after the date of the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

24. The effect of AA, supra, is that if a person is from an area controlled
    by the Kurdish government in Erbil, a person can be returned.  He  need
    not go to Baghdad or other contested areas. There is a difference noted
    between a disputed and a contested area. Makhmur is  a  disputed  area.
    Only if Makhmur is a  contested  area  is  there  a  need  to  consider
    paragraphs 19-20 of the country guidance  in  AA.  That  refers,  inter
    alios, to a Kurd who does not originate from the IKR.

25. Since 2014, the evidence indicated that ISIS had been expelled  by  the
    Peshmerga. It has been under the control of the Erbil Governorate.  The
    United Nations map reflects this in 2014.

26. There is no date on the map produced by Ms Duru at the  hearing.  There
    was the Human Rights  Watch  report  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is evident that the Kurds have expanded  the  borders  and
    are in fact not allowing Arabs back into the area.

27. In AA there were three areas identified. There is no risk in a  Kurdish
    controlled area for this appellant. As a Kurd who originates  from  the
    IKR, the appellant can be safely returned to Erbil.

28. As already noted, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that the
    appellant was ever targeted by the KRG. Moreover,  he  did  not  accept
    that as a Kurd, he would be suspected of willingly helping ISIS or that
    he could not have gone to the KRG authorities to report that matter  or
    that the authorities would not believe his account [53].

29. The Judge examined the purported arrest warrant issued by  the  KRG  in
    August 2015 and found, having considered the evidence in the round, did
    not accept that the appellant is able to demonstrate that the  document
    is genuine and reliable. He did not accept that the KRG would  have  an
    adverse interest in the appellant [55].

30. Having regard to those findings, as well as the appellant's claim  that
    he was from Makhmur, the finding that the appellant had not established
    that he would not be able to return directly or indirectly to  the  KAA
    is sustainable. In particular  the  Country  Guidance  case  which  was
    published after the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated his decision,
    confirmed that he would only be returned to the IKR  if  he  originated
    from the IKR. That had been the appellant's claim.

31. In the result, the First-tier Tribunal stated that the appellant  would
    not be at risk if returned to the Iraqi Kurdish region.  He  originates
    from there and his identity would have to be "pre cleared" with the IKR
    authorities. He would not be required to have  an  expired  or  current
    passport, or Laissez Passer.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 24/2/2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
