
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00037/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 July 2013                                 |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Sadikou Djina

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sadikou Djina, was born on 11 February  1976  and  is  a
    citizen of Benin.  By a decision dated 1 December 2010, the  respondent
    refused the appellant asylum and decided to remove him from the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Khawar)  which,  in  a
    determination which is dated 16 February 2011,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. On 22 April 2013, I gave directions for evidence to  be  filed  by  Mrs
    Hindmarch, the respondent's  Presenting Officer at the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and also for Mrs Hindmarch and Mr  Rodney  Ison
    (the appellant's former McKenzie friend before the First-tier Tribunal)
    to attend and give evidence.  Their presence was  required  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in order to determine the question of an  error  of  law
    because the grounds assert that the appellant did not  receive  a  fair
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on account of the fact that  his
    McKenzie friend, Mr Ison, had been compelled to sit behind, rather than
    next to him, in court and had  been  unable  to  offer  assistance  and
    advice as a consequence.  Mrs Hindmarch spoke briefly to the  Tribunal.
    She explained that she  was  unable  to  remember  anything  about  the
    circumstances at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. I then heard briefly from the appellant himself  who  spoke  in  French
    with the assistance of an interpreter.  The appellant  denied  that  he
    had been able to speak with Mr Ison before  he  was  required  to  make
    submissions to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  An  application  for  an
    adjournment made by the appellant had been refused  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I note from the determination [9] that  the  appellant
    complained that he had not received the respondent's bundle before  the
    hearing.  It transpired the appellant then  claimed  that  he  had  not
    received a paginated bundle; the judge noted  that  the  appellant  had
    responded to the refusal letter in his own witness statement of January
    2011.   The  application  for  the  adjournment  is  recorded  in   the
    determination as is the judge's refusal of the application.

 4. The appellant agreed that he had been invited by the judge to make  any
    comments following  the  submissions  made  by  Mrs  Hindmarch  but  he
    repeated that he had been unable to obtain  any  advice  or  assistance
    from Mr Ison who was sitting several feet behind him at the back of the
    court at the direction of the judge.

 5. I heard evidence from Mr Ison.  Mr Ison said that  the  judge  had  not
    invited the appellant to speak following  Mrs  Hindmarch's  submission.
    Mr Ison confirmed that he had not been given any opportunity to  assist
    or advise the appellant during  the  course  of  the  hearing  and,  in
    particular, before the appellant made his own oral submissions.

 6. It is not clear to  me  why  the  judge  insisted  that  Mr  Ison,  the
    appellant's McKenzie friend, should sit at the back of the court behind
    the appellant; there is certainly no suggestion that Mr Ison  had  been
    required to do so on account of any misbehaviour or other  irregularity
    in  discharging  his  duties  as  McKensie  friend.   Over  the   years
    significant jurisprudence has accrued relating to  the  involvement  of
    McKenzie friends in Tribunal and court proceedings.  It is  established
    that a McKenzie friend can help an  appellant  or  litigant  with  case
    papers and give quiet advice on points of law or  procedure  or  issues
    that the litigant may wish to raise in the court.  He or she  may  also
    discuss questions which a litigant may wish to ask of a witness  during
    cross-examination.  It appears to me to be clear that such  duties  may
    only be properly discharged by a  McKenzie  friend  if  he  or  she  is
    sitting adjacent to  the  litigant;  sitting  some  distance  from  the
    litigant and in particular behind him or her at the back of  the  court
    imposes an impediment upon the legitimate involvement of  the  McKenzie
    friend in the proceedings which should not, in my opinion,  be  imposed
    if the litigant is to enjoy a fair hearing.  I  do  not  say  that  the
    appellant in this instance could not have insisted to the judge that he
    be allowed to turn and speak with Mr Ison or that  Judge  Khawar  would
    have denied him that opportunity.  However, I accept that the appellant
    felt constrained from involving Mr  Ison  simply  because  he  was  not
    sitting close enough to him to engage in quiet  and  easy  conversation
    during the course of the hearing.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied
    that the appellant genuinely believes that he  was  not  given  a  fair
    hearing although in reaching that  finding  I  fully  acknowledge  that
    there is no evidence whatsoever that the judge consciously chose to act
    unfairly.  It is proper for the Tribunal to err on the side of  caution
    in considering issues such as this and it is for that reason that I set
    aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, preserving none  of
    the findings of fact.  The appellant should be given the opportunity of
    appearing again before the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  he  may  either
    present  his  own  case,  engage  the  services   of   a   professional
    representative or, if he wishes, ask a McKenzie  friend,  including  Mr
    Ison, to assist him.

DECISION

 7. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its determination  falls
    to be set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Khawar) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

