

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/00285/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision Promulgated            |
|On 11 May 2016                           |  On 20 May 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     S D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order.

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Rahman &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    grant leave to remain on asylum and human  rights  grounds.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker dismissed the appeal in a decision dated  20
    April 2012. The Upper Tribunal found that  the  decision  involved  the
    making of a material error of law because  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the unchallenged evidence of  a  witness
    who gave evidence as to the appellant's sexual orientation. The  First-
    tier Tribunal decision was set aside.

2.    The appeal was listed for  a  further  hearing  and  designated  as  a
    country guidance case. A panel of the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    evidence of several expert witnesses as  well  as  background  evidence
    relating to Turkey. The panel outlined country guidance on the issue of
    military service and sexual identity.  The  Upper  Tribunal  also  made
    findings in relation to the facts of this specific case  but  concluded
    that the appellant would not be at risk on  return  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

3.    The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal's findings relating risk on return  but  did
    not seek to challenge the country guidance element of the decision. The
    parties agreed that the Upper Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the appellant would exercise  restraint  on  return
    and failed to make adequate findings relating to risk of identification
    during military service. The appeal was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal
    by consent in order for the decision to be remade.

Country guidance

4.    The country guidance given in the earlier decision in  this  case  was
    not subject to challenge. In SD (military service  -  sexual  identity)
    Turkey CG [2013] UKUT 00612 the tribunal considered a number of  pieces
    of expert evidence alongside relevant background evidence and  came  to
    the following conclusions:


      (1)   All Turkish males are required to undergo military  service  but
           exemption can be granted on the grounds of  physical  or  mental
           disability which includes "sexual identity disorder".

    (2)     Homosexuality is regarded by  the  Turkish  army  as  a  sexual
           identity disorder but the perception of homosexuality in  Turkey
           is not reduced to a person's sexual preference but  is  informed
           by an assessment of his whole personality including his  outward
           appearance and behaviour. It is associated with the passive role
           which is seen as unmanly whereas taking the active role does not
           attract the same disapproval and is not considered to  undermine
           the essence of manliness.

    (3)     The exemption process for  determining  whether  a  recruit  is
           entitled to exemption generally includes intrusive  requirements
           which do not properly respect the human dignity of someone whose
           sexual identity would qualify him for exemption such that it can
           properly be categorised as degrading and involving a  real  risk
           of a breach of article 3.

    (4)     If during his military service a recruit (whether  he  has  not
           sought exemption or  has  been  refused)  is  discovered  or  is
           perceived to be homosexual as understood in Turkey, there  is  a
           reasonable degree of likelihood of ill-treatment  of  sufficient
           severity to amount to persecution on the  basis  of  his  sexual
           identity and there is no sufficiency of protection. The risk  of
           such discovery or perception arising  during  his  service  will
           require a fact sensitive analysis of an individual's  particular
           circumstances including his appearance and mannerisms,  the  way
           in which he describes his sexual identity, the extent  to  which
           he fits the stereotype of  a  homosexual  as  understood  within
           Turkish society and the extent to  which  he  will  conceal  his
           sexual  identity  for  reasons  not  arising  from  a  fear   of
           persecution.


    (5)     Any such risk likely to arise during service is not negated  by
           the fact that there is an  exemption  process  as  that  process
           itself carries a real risk of a breach of article 3.

    (6)     MS (Risk- Homosexual) Turkey CG [2002] UKIAT is no longer to be
           regarded as providing country guidance.

Issues to be determined

5.    The decision in SD (Turkey) set out  the  factual  background  to  the
    claim in some detail. During the course  of  proceedings  a  number  of
    factual findings have been made, which it is agreed  shall  stand.  The
    scope  of  the  appeal  now  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  narrowed
    considerably. At the beginning of the hearing both parties  agreed  the
    following:

       i) It is accepted that the appellant is bi-sexual.

      ii) The assessment of risk on return is confined solely  to  military
          service in light of the Upper Tribunal's earlier finding that the
          evidence relating to the general conditions in Turkey for gay men
          did not give rise to a real risk of serious harm [110].


     iii) It is accepted that  the  appellant  is  liable  to  do  military
          service in Turkey.


      iv) It is accepted that the  appellant  should  not  be  required  to
          undergo a  degrading  application  for  exemption  from  military
          service on grounds of his sexual  orientation,  which  the  Upper
          Tribunal found would amount to a breach of Article 3  [111(iii)].



       v) The first question for determination by this tribunal is  whether
          the  appellant  is  likely  to  act  discreetly  during  military
          service, and if so, why.


      vi) The second question is whether, even if he acted discreetly,  his
          sexual identity is likely to be discovered. In such circumstances
          the Upper Tribunal concluded that a person would be  at  risk  of
          serious harm [111(iv)].

Legal Framework

6.    It is uncontentious that the relevant legal framework was set  out  by
    Lord Hope in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 31:

           "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a
           well-founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal
           must first ask itself whether it is satisfied  on  the  evidence
           that he is gay, or that he would be treated as gay by  potential
           persecutors in his country of nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
           on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would
           be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's   country   of
           nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
           applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
           If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
           exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by
           living "discreetly".
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
           would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it  must
           go on to ask itself why he would do so.
           If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
           live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
           wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g,  not  wanting
           to distress his parents  or  embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
           application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do
           not amount to persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer
           protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded  fear
           of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with
           any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt  a  way  of
           life which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
           because he is gay.
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
           reason for the applicant living discreetly on his  return  would
           be a fear of the persecution which would follow if  he  were  to
           live openly as a gay man, then, other things  being  equal,  his
           application should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded
           fear of persecution. To reject his  application  on  the  ground
           that he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would
           be to defeat the very  right  which  the  Convention  exists  to
           protect - his right to live freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man
           without fear of persecution. By  admitting  him  to  asylum  and
           allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear
           of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to  that  right
           by affording the applicant a surrogate for the  protection  from
           persecution  which  his  country  of  nationality  should   have
           afforded him."

Findings and reasons

7.    The first two questions identified in HJ (Iran) are satisfied in  this
    case. It is accepted  that  the  appellant  is  bisexual.  It  is  also
    accepted that if he carried out military service openly as  a  bisexual
    man that there is a real risk of serious harm.

8.    The appellant's evidence is that he would  seek  to  hide  his  sexual
    identity during military service i.e. he would be discreet. The central
    question for determination in this appeal is why he would do so. If  it
    were for reasons of military  discipline  or  as  a  result  of  social
    conservatism his discretion would not engage the Refugee Convention. If
    he acted discreetly because he feared that he would suffer serious harm
    then he is entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention.

9.    A number of credibility issues were raised by the  respondent  in  the
    original reasons for refusal letter including points  relating  to  the
    appellant's immigration history,  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  and
    doubts about his initial claim to have been  tested  as  HIV  positive,
    which turned out to be unfounded following a more recent test. Some  of
    these initial concerns were used to reject  the  core  aspects  of  his
    claim to be at risk on return. Mr Whitwell accepted that  a  number  of
    factual findings have  been  made  during  the  course  of  the  appeal
    proceedings. He argued that the above issues were still relevant to the
    appellant's overall credibility and whether his claim that he would act
    discreetly for fear of persecution could be believed.

10.   I have had the opportunity of hearing evidence from the appellant.  He
    gave his evidence in an open and  unhesitating  way  that  was  broadly
    consistent with his previous statements and  other  evidence  that  has
    been considered by the  tribunal.  The  fact  that  he  overstayed  his
    student visa, knowingly remained in  the  UK  for  a  number  of  years
    without leave, and only claimed asylum when he came to the attention of
    the authorities through a random incident, are  all  matters  that  are
    capable of casting doubt on his overall credibility.

11.   However, in the context of the narrow issues that  I  am  required  to
    determine I find that the appellant's evidence is credible. His account
    of various relationships with men and women over  the  years  has  been
    relatively detailed and consistent. While he states that he exercises a
    level of discretion in discussing his sexual orientation nothing in the
    evidence suggests that he seeks to hide his sexuality as  a  result  of
    social conservatism. It appears that he is open about socialising  with
    friends in gay bars and clubs and that he also socialises in less overt
    ways with groups of friends. The  appellant  says  that  he  would  not
    disclose his sexuality to people he does not  know  very  well  but  as
    friendships develop he does not seek to hide who he is either. He  says
    that he is able to be open about his sexuality  in  the  UK  if  he  so
    chooses. His description of how he lives his life in the UK is entirely
    consistent with the way in which most people would approach new friends
    or relationships where greater levels of intimacy develop over a period
    of time.

12.   In contrast the appellant says that he would feel  forced  to  conceal
    his identity if he was  required  to  carry  out  military  service  in
    Turkey. Given that he is able to live openly as a  bisexual  person  in
    the UK there is no reason to conclude that his  reasons  for  doing  so
    would  be  solely  for  reasons  of  military  discipline   or   social
    conservatism. The evidence relating to the treatment  of  men  who  are
    perceived to  be  gay  during  military  service  satisfied  the  Upper
    Tribunal that there is a real risk of persecution if a person's  sexual
    identity becomes known. The appellant is fully aware of that  evidence.
    Despite his poor immigration history I am satisfied on the low standard
    of proof that the reason why the appellant would feel forced to conceal
    his sexual identity would be because of a  fear  of  persecution.   The
    appeal succeeds on that point alone.

13.   In the alternative, I  have  also  considered  whether,  even  if  the
    appellant chose to live discreetly for other  reasons,  whether  it  is
    reasonably likely that his sexual orientation would become known during
    the course of  military  service  thereby  placing  him  at  risk.  The
    appellant has given an account of discrimination and verbal abuse while
    he was at university in Turkey. In  a  fairly  closed  environment  his
    sexual orientation became known even though, at the time,  he  did  not
    live openly as a bisexual man.  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  closed
    environment of a military unit, even for a limited period of service of
    a number  of  months,  it  is  at  least  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant's sexual identity would become known to other members of  the
    military. It is unlikely that he could live so closely with a number of
    other  people  without  more  intimate  bonds   developing   and   some
    information about his background being discovered.

14.   It is accepted that the appellant is liable for military  service  and
    would be unable to apply for exemption  without  having  to  undergo  a
    degrading assessment. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  is  able  to
    express his sexual identity in an open way in the UK and that he  would
    be unable to be open about his sexual identity during military  service
    without attracting a real risk of serious harm. I accept that the  main
    reason why the appellant would feel forced to act discreetly  would  be
    because of a fear of persecution and not because of the  normal  course
    of military discipline or for reasons of social  conservatism.  I  find
    that even if he acted discreetly there is a  serious  possibility  that
    his sexual identity would be discovered over the course of a number  of
    months service in a closed environment.

15.   For the reasons given above I conclude  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that the appellant would be at risk of persecution
    for reasons of his membership of a particular social group if  returned
    to Turkey.

DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal

Signed

[pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Canavan
                      Date 17 May 2016
