

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: AA008282015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision and Reasons promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2017                        |On 31 July 2017                     |


                                    Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Fisher instructed by Tuckers Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Petterson - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Davies ('the Judge') promulgated on 21 December 2016 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania  who  travel  to  the  United
        Kingdom with her three children where she  claimed  asylum.  Having
        set out the respective parties' cases and  the  evidence  received,
        the Judge sets out findings of fact between [72] and [104]  of  the
        decision under challenge. Those findings may be summarised  in  the
        following terms:


   i. It was found significant there had not been  a  determination  of  the
      asylum claim made by the appellant's husband either in Italy where the
      respondent was seeking to remove him or in the United Kingdom where he
      has not claimed asylum. It was unclear, if the appellant's husband has
      not made an asylum claim in Italy, why that is the case on  the  basis
      of his evidence that he left Albania in  2012  to  seek  international
      protection [72].
  ii. The appellant's asylum claim substantively arises from an incident  on
      14 October 2008 in which her husband shot, injured and it  is  claimed
      permanently disabled  the  patriarch  of  the  [R]  family  during  an
      incident at his father's business premises [73].
 iii. The Judge noted the translation of the decision of the District  Court
      of Kukes dated 6 May 2009 and noted no additional  evidence  had  been
      produced to establish the credentials of the decision or the existence
      of the judges who sentenced the appellant's husband. No  evidence  had
      been  produced  in  relation   to   documentation   concerning   those
      proceedings.  It was held reasonably likely  the  appellant's  husband
      would be in possession of such  documentation.  Bearing  in  mind  the
      evidence of corruption in Albania in many organs of the state, lack of
      documentation connected to the decision of the District Court led  the
      Judge to place little weight upon it [75].
  iv. The Judge was not satisfied it was reasonably likely  the  appellant's
      husband was convicted of criminal offences and sent to prison.  It  is
      said there is conflict of evidence between the claimed length of  that
      prison sentence. The appellant's husband says he was  sentenced  to  6
      years' imprisonment yet there is evidence that the sentence  was  four
      years and the appellant, in reply to question 55  of  her  substantive
      interview, says her husband was sentenced to two years'  imprisonment.
      Such conflict had not been explained to the Judge [76].
   v.  The  Judge  commented  upon  other  documentation  provided  in   the
      appellant's bundle. Taking into account the fact false  documents  are
      easy to obtain in Albania and the evidence as a whole,  little  weight
      was attached to a document  at  page  139  and  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's children's school at page 140 which was said  to  conflict
      with the appellants and testimony. Little weight was attached  to  any
      of the specific documents referred to [77].
  vi. The Judge place no reliance upon letters from the  police  dated  20th
      May and 4 March 2014 finding it not credible the police would be aware
      the appellant's husband had left Albania to come to the United Kingdom
      to claim asylum. The Judge found it not reasonably likely that any  of
      the documents from this source are genuine [78].
 vii. Having considered the appellants evidence in  her  substantive  asylum
      interview, the appellant's lack of knowledge both in relation  to  the
      incident which she claimed caused  a  blood  feud  and  her  husband's
      conviction and sentence indicate she has not given a truthful  account
      of the circumstances in which she left Albania [79].
viii. The appellants claim the [R] family wish to kill her children was  not
      supported by credible evidence. The Judge notes the appellant seems to
      have formed the view that this is the case as a result of an  incident
      involving her children and grandchildren of the [R] family  at  school
      but no weight was attached to the letter  from  the  school  allegedly
      confirming this incident [79]. It is said there  is  conflict  in  the
      appellant's own  statements  regarding  this  incident.  The  conflict
      exists because the appellant has not told the truth. The Judge did not
      accept the children were ever attacked as a result of  a  blood  feud.
      [79].
  ix. It was without credit that the appellant would not tell her husband of
      the incident that occurred at school.  It  was  not  credible  if  the
      appellant's son and  daughter  had  been  cut  with  a  knife  as  the
      appellant claims that a husband would not be aware  of  this  or  make
      enquiries as to how the injuries had occurred [80].
   x. Even if the appellant and the family had been the victim  of  a  blood
      feud it is clear they have been able to live initially in  their  home
      village and in a number of locations  in  Albania,  including  Tirana,
      where the [R] family had not caused them harm. It was not accepted  as
      credible that the appellant's husband was targeted by the  [R]  family
      on two or three occasions as he claims. That is said to  be  confirmed
      by the fact he delayed leaving Albania and appears from  the  evidence
      never to have actually sought  international  protection  even  though
      that is why he said he left Albania [81].
  xi. The lack of police assistance for the appellant and her husband is not
      credible.  The  appellant  claims  her  husband  was  offered   police
      protection on leaving prison and returning home and it was  not  found
      credible that the police would therefore not be willing to  assist  on
      other occasions. Lack of credibility in the assertion the police would
      not provide protection was also considered in light of the  fact  they
      have provided letters for the appellant's assistance  in  this  appeal
      [82].
 xii. The suggestion the [R] family will be able to locate the appellant and
      her family in Albania was rejected. The appellant's  own  evidence  is
      that the [R] family are a large family of labourers with no  influence
      whatsoever. It is not reasonably likely that the family, all  of  whom
      live in Has is able to  locate  the  appellant  and  her  family,  for
      instance in Tirana. [83].
xiii. The  Judge  did  not  accept  there  was  a  blood  feud  between  the
      appellant's family and the [R] family or that  the  appellant  or  her
      family are at risk on that basis, having taken all the  evidence  into
      account [84].
 xiv. The appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution she  is
      not a member of a particular social group [86].
  xv. None of the appellant's evidence supports the expert's contention that
      the [R] family would have the ability to locate the appellant's family
      in the long term [87].
 xvi. Whilst the appellant's presentation in terms of mental health was  not
      disputed, causation was not accepted  to  be  as  claimed.  The  Judge
      suggests it is reasonably likely to have arisen due  to  other  issues
      identified in the decision under challenge [90].
xvii. The appellant's claim under Article 3 was rejected as a  Judge  claims
      not to have received any evidence showing the current  medication  the
      appellant receives in the United Kingdom  or  an  equivalent  type  of
      medication is not available in Albania.  No evidence has been provided
      to suggest that no assistance for those with mental health problems is
      available in Albania. The evidence did not  enable  the  appellant  to
      succeed on the basis of either article 3 or 8 on medical grounds [92].
xviii. The appellant will be returned to Albania with  her  three  children.
      No evidence has been put forward to show why the  appellant's  husband
      cannot return to Albania with them, with whom  he  is  now  reconciled
      [94].
 xix. The best interests of the children will  be  served  by  returning  to
      Albania with their mother and father where they will  have  access  to
      education and family support [96].
  xx. The appellant did not satisfy the Judge that her removal  will  be  an
      unwarranted interference in  any  protected  right.  Family  life  can
      continue with the appellant's husband in Albania. Any interference  is
      proportionate [103 - 104].


     3. The applicant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The  operative  parts  of
        the grant being in the following terms:


             4.   The grounds, which  to  a  considerable  extent  overlap,
                  assert, in essence,  that  the  judge  failed  to  address
                  adequately  and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons   for
                  rejecting the evidence before him, particularly the expert
                  report and other documentary evidence, as well as  failing
                  to give the appellant the opportunity to  address  adverse
                  issues.  The  grounds  disclose  arguable  errors  of  law
                  capable of affecting the outcome.  Accordingly,  I  extend
                  time and the application is granted.


     4. The appeal is opposed by the Secretary of State.

Error of law


     5. Miss Fisher commenced her submissions by referring to Ground  4  of
        the application for permission to appeal, challenging the  findings
        in relation to the appellant's husband and his asylum  appeal  and,
        secondly, in relation to the appellant herself.
     6. The Judge found it significant there had been no  determination  of
        an asylum claim made by the appellant's husband either in Italy  or
        the United Kingdom. It is accepted  that  the  applicant's  husband
        claimed asylum in Italy but then came to the United Kingdom,  as  a
        result of which any application he made was refused  and  certified
        under the Dublin Convention on the basis Italy is  responsible  for
        determining the appellant's husband's asylum claim. A challenge  to
        the certification has been issued by the appellant's husband by way
        of judicial review which it is claimed has been compromised by  the
        respondent agreeing to consider the appellant's husband's  case  in
        the United Kingdom by December 2017.
     7. There is, of course, no reason why the appellant's husband's asylum
        claim could not have been determined although it may have  required
        the applicants husband to have remained in  Italy  rather  than  to
        have travelled on to the United Kingdom.
     8. The Judge may have failed to understand the operation of the Dublin
        Convention but  the  issue  is  whether  such  misunderstanding  is
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  set
        out in the decision under challenge, which has not been established
        when considering this issue in isolation.
     9. It was also submitted the Judge erred at paragraphs [76  -  79]  in
        which the Judge was not satisfied it is reasonably likely that  the
        appellant's husband was convicted of a criminal offence and sent to
        prison.
    10. The Judge refers at [76] to what was  said  to  be  a  conflict  of
        evidence between the claimed length of a prison sentence, with  the
        appellant's  husband  claiming  he  was  sentenced  to   6   years'
        imprisonment, other  evidence  suggesting  the  sentence  was  four
        years' imprisonment, whilst the appellant stated  her  husband  was
        sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
    11. At [77-8] the Judge comments upon additional documents provided  in
        the bundle and concludes that no weight may  be  attached  to  that
        evidence. At [79] the Judge finds:


             79.  I take into account the evidence given by  the  Appellant
                  to the Respondent in her substantive interview. I find the
                  Appellant's lack of knowledge  both  in  relation  to  the
                  incident which she claims caused the blood  feud  and  her
                  husband's conviction and sentencing indicate that she  has
                  not given me a truthful account of  the  circumstances  in
                  which she left Albania. She claims  that  the  [R]  family
                  want to kill her children. There is no  credible  evidence
                  that this is the  case.  The  Appellant  appears  to  have
                  formed the view that this is the case as a  result  of  an
                  incident involving her children and grandchildren and  the
                  [R] family at her school  when  she  claims  her  son  and
                  daughter were cut with a knife. I attach no weight to  the
                  letter from the school confirming this  incident  for  the
                  reasons  I  have  explained.  There  is  conflict  in  the
                  Appellant's own statements regarding this.  That  conflict
                  has not been explained to me.  In  the  Appellant's  first
                  statement she says that her children were  attacked  after
                  school had finished for the  day,  whilst  in  her  second
                  statement she says they were  attacked  on  their  way  to
                  school. This conflict exists because the Appellant has not
                  told the truth in that regard and I do not accept that her
                  children were ever attacked as a result of a  blood  feud.
                  If there was an incident involving her children the  cause
                  of that incident was not because of a blood feud with  the
                  [R] family.


    12. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that the duration of any
        prison sentence was not  the  issue  as  other  witness  statements
        indicated that it was not disputed that the appellant's husband had
        gone  to  prison.  It  is  also  submitted  that  if  there  was  a
        discrepancy this should have been put  to  the  appellant  and  her
        husband so they could have responded to the same.
    13. This submission fails to establish any arguable legal error in  the
        decision of the Judge or how the adverse findings impact  upon  the
        assessment of credibility. There was evidence from the  appellant's
        side indicating the appellant's husband had gone to prison but also
        the evidence commented upon by the Judge, in relation to  the  same
        aspect of the claim, which  was  contradictory  in  relation  to  a
        material element. It is reasonable to expect that if a  key  member
        of the family had been imprisonment those with direct knowledge  of
        the fact would be fully aware of how long  a  prison  sentence  had
        been given. The Judge was clearly concerned with the  variation  in
        that evidence, claiming that a prison sentence was six years,  four
        years and two years, which led the Judge to be arguably entitled to
        come to the conclusion that the appellant had not established  that
        her husband was convicted of the alleged offence and sent to prison
        as claimed. The challenge to this finding based upon others stating
        the  appellant's  husband  had  gone  to  prison  or  the  fact  of
        imprisonment was of more relevance than the length sentence is,  in
        reality, a challenge to the weight the Judge chose to give  to  the
        evidence as a whole and  an  assertion  that  the  appellant's  own
        evidence in relation to imprisonment should be determinative.
    14. It is clear the Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  for  the
        findings made in relation to this aspect of the case. As such,  the
        weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the  Judge.  It
        has not been shown that the adverse credibility  findings,  reached
        in an assessment of the evidence as a whole in relation to both the
        above and other matters recorded in the decision  under  challenge,
        is in any way arguably irrational or perverse.
    15. In relation to the claim the discrepancy should have  been  put  to
        the appellant, such claim has no arguable  merit.  This  is  not  a
        matter that resulted from further research undertaken by the  Judge
        or which only came to the Judges knowledge after the hearing  based
        upon evidence or matters upon which the parties have been denied an
        opportunity to comment, amounting to a procedural error based  upon
        the principle of fairness. Proceedings in the  First-tier  Tribunal
        are adversarial. The appellant was represented at  the  hearing  by
        Miss Fisher and the discrepancy identified by the Judge at [76]  is
        clear on the face of the evidence. Miss Fisher had the  opportunity
        to ask questions by way of examination in chief or to  clarify  any
        confusion that may have arisen as a result of cross examination  in
        re-examination, and also had the  opportunity  to  deal  with  such
        issues by way of her closing submissions. The fact  it  appears  no
        opportunity was taken to resolve  this  issue  does  not  impose  a
        greater obligation upon  the  Judge  on  the  facts.  No  issue  of
        fairness arises as there was ample opportunity for the appellant to
        have dealt  with  such  matters  during  the  course  of  both  the
        evidential stage of the appeal process and the hearing itself.
    16. Other discrepancies noted by the Judge and issues of concern  were,
        again, not matters upon which it has been established there was any
        legal obligation or duty upon the Judge to refer to  the  appellant
        before making adequately reasoned findings of fact.
    17. The third challenge is to  the  Judges  treatment  of  the  medical
        evidence and the appellant's mental health issues. The Judge  noted
        the material that had been provided and although the Judge does not
        make  specific  reference  to  the  practice  direction  concerning
        vulnerable adult and sensitive witnesses, it is known this forms an
        important part of the training of First-tier Tribunal judges and it
        is reasonable to assume the Judge was fully aware of the content of
        that guidance.  No specific examples have been made out  either  in
        the pleadings or submissions made to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  show
        that the Judge conducted the hearing in a manner  contrary  to  the
        guidance, in a way that denied the appellant  a  fair  hearing,  or
        that may have warranted a different approach  being  taken  to  the
        evidence the First-tier Tribunal received.
    18. Miss Fisher submitted a contravention of the  guidance  could  have
        led to findings been affected by health issues.  It  was  submitted
        the appellant was distressed through the  hearing  which  would  no
        doubt have been noted by the  Judge.  In  response  to  a  specific
        question from the Bench Miss Fisher accepted the appellant had  not
        been 'browbeaten' and was unable to identify any specific  concerns
        regarding the Judges conduct of the hearing. It was submitted  that
        the only issue is whether when weighing up the evidence  the  Judge
        did not factor the appellant's mental health into the assessment.
    19. The Judge clearly considered the mental health elements  and  makes
        findings upon the same. The conclusion of the  Judge  is  that  the
        evidence of health issues  was  determinative  of  the  appellant's
        presentation, as the mental health difficulties referred to are not
        challenged or disputed by the Judge,  but  were  not  found  to  be
        determinative of causation. The author of the  medical  report  was
        required to address the  question  of  alternative  causes  for  an
        individual's presentation. The evidence referred to in  submissions
        is a letter from a Dr Rahim dated 20 May 2015  together  with  copy
        letters from the appellant's GP one of which  dated  10th  February
        2015 indicates the appellant had been hit by a car and sustained  a
        number of physical injuries and that she remained in the care of an
        NHS mental health team.  The letter from Dr  Rahim  refers  to  the
        appellant having some tangible stressors in the form of a  physical
        injury resulting  from  the  car  accident  in  relation  to  which
        although pain was gradually improving in May 2015 it  was  limiting
        the appellant's functioning and her mobility  and,  more  pressing,
        that she was  awaiting  a  date  for  an  appeal  hearing  for  her
        immigration status which it is stated she was ruminating on,  on  a
        daily basis, making her quite distressed. The  letter  also  states
        "she also ruminates on the  incident  some  years  ago  in  Albania
        involving a family feud which has resulted in threats being made to
        her children's lives".
    20. There was no definitive diagnosis before the Judge to discount  any
        other reason for the appellant's  presentation  or  which  required
        causation to be assessed other than in line  with  the  appellant's
        overall credibility. The Judge did not accept  that  the  appellant
        had given a credible  account  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
        decision under challenge. As the core of the account had  not  been
        established it was an arguably available rational conclusion of the
        Judge that the appellant's presentation is not based upon her claim
        but on other matters.
    21. Ground 2, which Miss  Fisher  addressed  next,  asserts  the  Judge
        placed no weight upon documents other than by general reference  to
        corruption in Albania and it is not explained  why  documents  from
        the Committee of Nation Reconciliation were not reliable. The Judge
        asserts that in dismissing the documents from  the  Albanian  court
        the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  put  concerns  to  either  the
        appellant or her husband and that if this  was  a  matter  of  such
        importance the appellant should have been given an  opportunity  to
        produce further evidence from the  appellant's  chosen  expert,  Dr
        Antonia Young.
    22. As stated above, the Judge gave adequate reasons for  finding  that
        the evidence the appellant's husband had  been  convicted  was  not
        credible. The appellant instructed a  country  expert,  Dr  Antonia
        Young, whose report was contained in the appellant's appeal bundle.
        Dr Young has been criticised in other cases for lacking objectivity
        and for, in effect, becoming an advocate for an appellant  although
        no such issue was raised in this appeal.
    23. The Judge clearly considered the documentary evidence provided and,
        as stated above, the weight to be given to those  documents  was  a
        matter for the Judge. The Judge found that the documentary evidence
        provided was not genuine and that some of the evidence, such as the
        letter from the appellant's children's school conflicted  with  the
        appellant's own testimony.  The Judge gives  adequate  reasons  for
        rejecting the evidence and even if there was no  challenge  to  the
        documents in the reasons for refusal letter this does  not  prevent
        the Judge from dealing with the weight to be given to this evidence
        in the determination. The Secretary of  State  is  not  the  person
        required to make the decision on an appeal. The author of a refusal
        letter may not raise concerns in that document but  that  does  not
        tie a judge's hands. The Judge notes one of the concerns that arose
        was a discrepancy between  the  letter  from  the  school  and  the
        appellant's own testimony. If the author of the reasons for refusal
        letter was unaware of such  conflict  one  would  not  expect  such
        challenge to appear in the refusal letter. The issue of  the  court
        documents  is  also  raised.  The  Judge  clearly  considered   the
        translated documents as there is specific reference to the same  at
        [75] of the decision. The Judge noted that no  additional  evidence
        had been produced to establish  the  credentials  of  the  decision
        relied upon or in relation to those proceedings.  It was found  the
        appellant's husband would be in possession of such  documents.  The
        Judge was clearly concerned about the  evidence  of  corruption  in
        Albania when considering that  evidence  together  with  the  other
        material and concluded no weight could be  placed  upon  the  court
        documents. It goes without saying it  was  not  accepted  that  the
        appellant's husband had been imprisoned or been  subject  to  court
        proceedings, yet the documents were produced to prove that he  had.
        The Judge was entitled to place little weight upon  the  same  when
        assessing which aspects of the case were accepted  and  which  were
        not.
    24. These documents are, again, documents that were  available  to  the
        appellant throughout the proceedings and additional  comment  could
        have been made upon the same if the appellant chose to do  so.  She
        did not. It is also not established that  Dr  Antonia  Young  is  a
        document expert.
    25. Ground 1 is a direct challenge to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
        expert  report.  Miss  Fisher  contends  that  in  dismissing   the
        appellant's account that there is no blood feud no mention  of  the
        expert report is made. It is also stated that Dr Antonia Young  had
        been in contact with Gjin Marku  of  the  Committee  of  Nationwide
        Reconciliation to confirm the feud is still ongoing and the  family
        continues to refuse reconciliation.
    26. It is noted, again, that Dr Antonia Young chooses to refer  in  her
        expert report to previous charges against Gjin  Marku  having  been
        dropped,  which  is  accepted  as  true.   This   related   to   an
        investigation concerning fraudulent practices and  documents  being
        produced supporting asylum  claimants  in  countries  such  as  the
        United Kingdom claiming they could not return as a result of a real
        risk arising from an existing blood feud. It is of course  not  the
        job of Dr Young to defend Mr Marku who has himself been subject  to
        criticism in other decisions. I also referred the  advocates  to  a
        further incident involving Mr Marku who produced  a  report  for  a
        case before the Upper Tribunal heard by  myself  and  Deputy  Upper
        Tribunal Judge French (now retired)  in  which  Mr  Marku  produced
        written notes and gave oral evidence that two members of the family
        in question, both female, had been attacked in Tirana by members of
        the family allegedly involved in a blood feud. Mr Marku was adamant
        that his note recalling the incident was accurate even when it  was
        put to him that one of the named  individuals  who  he  claims  was
        attacked in Tirana on the stated day and date  was  in  the  United
        Kingdom at that time according to her own evidence. It is also  the
        case that one of the Missionaries of the  Committee  of  Nationwide
        Reconciliation who also gave oral evidence and who purportedly  saw
        the incident only referred to one family  member  and  was  adamant
        that two family members were not involved. Serious doubt  has  been
        placed upon the credibility of Mr Marku and the reliability of  his
        evidence, particularly in relation to the case referred to above.
    27. The grounds referred to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
        Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in  which  it  was  found  that  if  an
        experts evidence was rejected it was necessary to say clearly why.
    28. It is accepted in terms of reasons given that an  individual  judge
        is required to give adequate reasons for findings made. If  one  of
        those findings is that no weight can be  placed  upon  an  expert's
        opinion reasons must be given. It is not necessarily  an  error  of
        law, however, for the Judge not to have set this out in a  specific
        paragraph provide it is clear the content of the decision that  the
        expert report was considered with the required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny and an adequate explanation for the finings made has  been
        provided. In this regard, it is noted at [10] that the Judge states
        that he  has  read  and  evaluated  all  the  evidence  before  the
        respondent at the date of the decision  appealed  against  together
        with additional evidence that has been submitted.  The  Judge  also
        states he has taken into account the evidence of the appellant, her
        husband and her other two witnesses and makes findings  as  to  the
        credibility of their account, where relevant. The  evidence,  where
        submitted, will include the evidence  in  the  respondent's  appeal
        bundle.
    29. The report of Dr Young  sets  out  documents  considered  and  then
        devotes a considerable number of pages to the  background  evidence
        (pages 83 - 112 of the appellant's appeal bundle).  Dr  Young  only
        deals with the specifics of the case from section 5 which sets  out
        the definition of a blood feud at 5.1  to  5.7.  At  5.8  Dr  Young
        writes:


             "I conclude, from the documentation with  which  I  have  been
             supplied, there is an  ongoing  blood  feud  between  the  two
             families: [D] and [R]. The development of the  blood  feud  is
             consistent with numerous other such feuds.


    30. Thereafter Dr Young confirms she obtain verification from Mr  Marku
        and sets out an email received from him on 28  May  2015,  some  18
        months before the date of the hearing. There  is  then  the  letter
        regarding the suspicion concerning Mr  Marku  issuing  Certificates
        confirming the existence of specific blood  feuds  which  has  been
        commented upon above.
    31. Dr Young acknowledges in 5.9 that the opposing family  may  not  be
        able to locate the appellant if she returned to Albania immediately
        but could do so 'in the long term' without giving any  reasons  for
        why this may happen at some unidentified point in the  future.  The
        claim in the report that  notwithstanding  steps  made  to  improve
        state  protection  there  will  be  no  effective  sufficiency   of
        protection is contrary to country guidance and  up-to-date  country
        information. Dr Young at  5.13  refers  to  a  country  information
        report published in March 2012, and  to  confirmation  provided  by
        another country expert  in  October  2012  of  developments  within
        Albania following the passing of laws to improve state  protection.
        Country information indicates that steps have been taken,  as  part
        of the desire of the Albanian government to join the  EU,  to  take
        action including noting in  criminal  cases  whether  there  is  an
        element of blood feud which would serve to increase the  length  of
        any sentence given to a person convicted.
    32. The assertion by Dr Young at 5.22 that if returned to  Albania  the
        appellant  and  the  family  would  be  forced  to  live  in   self
        confinement is not arguably made out on the facts of this case. The
        issue identified by Dr Young at 5.23 is expressed in the  following
        terms "based on the documentation with which I have  been  supplied
        it seems clear that there is an ongoing blood feud between the  two
        families which neither the police nor the local  Elders  have  been
        able to resolve" shows that opinion is based upon only one part  of
        the available evidence.
    33. The Judge had much greater evidence including  hearing  and  seeing
        the appellant and others give evidence, and it has  not  been  made
        out that there was either any artificial separation by the Judge, a
        failure to consider the  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  or
        others, or that the evidence of Dr Young was determinative  of  the
        outcome of the appeal.
    34. It is also important to note in the determination  under  challenge
        that the Judge does not only note the expert evidence in [87] where
        it is written:


         "I have taken into account the evidence contained in the Appellants
         bundles regarding blood feuds and Kanun. I have taken into  account
         the expert's opinion regarding the risk to the  Appellant  and  her
         children of persecution. I do not agree that there is any  evidence
         to support the expert's contention that the [R] family  would  have
         the ability to locate the Appellant's family in the long  term  and
         that ability is considerable. That opinion is not supported by  the
         fact that the [R] family are labourers with no influence".


         But also at [83] and in relation to the relocation point.
    35. The Judge also clearly states that he  has  considered  the  expert
        report in light of the decision in the  relevant  country  guidance
        case and that he has read the expert report in its entirety  before
        making the findings which have been made in this decision.  It  was
        submitted on the respondent's behalf that the Judge considered  the
        expert evidence appropriately, which is a  sustainable  submission,
        and that the evidence of Mr Marku cannot be relied upon.
    36. Considering the evidence as a whole, it is clear the Judge did  not
        dismiss the evidence in documentary form out of hand and considered
        that material together with the  oral  evidence  given  during  the
        course of the hearing.
    37. It was also noted in the decision  that  the  applicant  gave  oral
        evidence and was subject to cross-examination  and  re-examination.
        There are no concerns made out in relation to the way in which  the
        appellant gave evidence save to it being  noted  by  Mrs  Petterson
        that when Miss Fisher was conducting re-examination  the  appellant
        was pressed for an answer by her own advocate. The Judge  notes  at
        [49] where re-examination by Miss Fisher is noted:


             49.  The Appellant was asked if she returned to  Albania  with
                  her family whether she could live with  her  other  family
                  members or whether they could offer financial  assistance.
                  She did not answer the question and was told to answer the
                  question. The question was repeated. She said no they  had
                  their own families and it was dangerous if she  went  back
                  to Albania. She was asked again why she could  not  go  to
                  live with her family in Albania. She said if she went back
                  to she would have to keep herself and her children in self
                  confinement otherwise they risk being killed.  Her  family
                  members live in Tirana.


    38. The Judges note of the re-examination does not indicate  that  Miss
        Fisher had any concerns regarding her  client's  mental  health  or
        ability to give evidence such that it was not appropriate to  press
        her in re-examination.
    39. As stated, no issues regarding the discrepancies identified by  the
        Judge were raised in the evidence given by  the  appellant  or  her
        husband.
    40. I make a finding of fact that the Judge gave adequate consideration
        to the evidence from all sources and has given adequate reasons  to
        support the findings made. I  find  there  is  no  evidence  of  an
        artificial separation between aspects of the evidence the Judge was
        required  to  consider,  with  specific  reference  to  the  expert
        material, and the overall conclusion.
    41. I make finding of fact that the weight given by the  Judge  to  the
        evidence was within the range of those the Judge  was  entitled  to
        reach based upon an assessment of the evidence as a whole.
    42. I make a finding of fact that the fact the appellant disagrees with
        the decision, considers that greater weight should be  attached  to
        certain aspects of the evidence, and/or seeks a different  outcome,
        does not warrant a finding that the Judge has materially  erred  in
        law.
    43. Considering the evidence as a whole, it is not made  out  that  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal was outside the range of  reasonable
        conclusions available or that any legal error made is  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

    44. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.




Anonymity.


    45. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 July 2017












