
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00676/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 20 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     j a

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  11  February  1992.
    He illegally entered the United Kingdom on 5 December 2011 and  claimed
    asylum.  On  6  January  2012,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claim for asylum.  On that  same  date,  the  Secretary  of
    State also made a decision to remove the appellant by way of directions
    to Iran as an illegal entrant under paras 8-10 of  Schedule  2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 14 March 2012, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Page)  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   The  appellant  successfully
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal (Mr C M G Ockelton, VP  and  UTJ  Grubb)
    which remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing.  That appeal came before Judge  Whiting  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and, in a determination promulgated on 31 January 2013,  Judge
    Whiting dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   On  22
    February 2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Froom)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the appeal
    came before me.

 4. During the course of the hearing, I indicated to  both  representatives
    that I was a part of the constitution of the Upper Tribunal  which  had
    previously set aside the decision of Judge Page and  had  remitted  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision of which  was  now  the
    subject of this appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Both  representatives
    indicated that they had no objection to my hearing this appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

 5. The basis of the appellant's claim may be summarised  as  follows.   In
    April 2011, the appellant was detained by the Basiji when  found  in  a
    park with his girlfriend.  He was detained for two days at  the  Fathol
    Mobin base but was not physically  mistreated.   He  was  not  formally
    charged and no court proceedings ensued.  He  was  released  after  the
    intervention of a Mullah ('YH') and then returned home.  Some three  or
    four days after his release he was contacted by YH, who had secured his
    release, and asked to obtain money from others as contributions  for  a
    religious group who prayed at a shrine about  ten  minutes'  travelling
    distance by car outside the appellant's home town.  The  appellant  was
    also asked to provide the names of people who were deemed to be "acting
    against the laws of God".

 6. The appellant claims that  YH  was  trying  to  brainwash  him  and  in
    September/October 2011 the appellant confronted YH when  he  discovered
    that he had been covertly given drugs by YH.  Despite the confrontation
    the appellant continued to take drugs given by YH which had  a  calming
    effect upon him.  He would be given drugs every  other  night  for  the
    purposes of praying and worship and was told  that  the  substance  was
    called the "earth of Karbala".  The appellant says that he knew YH  for
    a total of seven months during which time YH restricted the appellant's
    movements by requiring him each night  to  attend  meetings  which  the
    appellant did approximately four or five times  each  week.   At  those
    meetings, the appellant would be given drugs, would  pray  for  between
    four to five hours and engage in chest-beating for about an hour.  This
    was, the appellant says, part of the act of praying of  this  religious
    group.  About one week before leaving Iran on  14  November  2011,  the
    appellant last saw YH.  The appellant brought a classmate of his to  YH
    and the appellant saw three  people  take  his  classmate  away  to  an
    unknown destination.  He was told by YH not to tell anyone about it.

 7. Prior to the appellant leaving Iran, he says that he was  contacted  by
    YH who asked him to  bring  someone  else  to  him  but  the  appellant
    refused.  The appellant told his family and his father wanted  to  call
    the police but the appellant told him that YH's paternal cousin  worked
    at the police station and so,  instead,  through  his  paternal  uncle,
    arrangements were made for the appellant to leave Iran illegally  using
    an agent. The appellant says that YH has connections with the  Etela'at
    and that one of his brothers is a member of the Basiji.  The  appellant
    fears YH and the Iranian authorities if he returns to Iran.

The Judge's Findings

 8. Judge Whiting did not accept  the  appellant's  account.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant had been detained by the Basiji in April 2011
    as a result of being found with his girlfriend in a park.  Further, the
    judge did not accept that  the  appellant  had  been  released  at  the
    instigation of  YH  who  had  brainwashed  him  and  given  him  drugs.
    Finally, the Judge found that even if the appellant's account were true
    he could safely and reasonably internally relocate within Iran.

Error of Law

 9. The substance of the grounds of appeal challenges the judge's reasoning
    in finding  the  appellant's  account  not  to  be  credible.   In  his
    submissions, Mr  Hodgetts  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  which  he
    expanded upon orally.

10. First, he challenged the judge's reasoning in paras 25, 26  and  27  of
    his determination which led the judge not to accept that the  appellant
    had been detained in April 2011  by  the  Basiji  following  him  being
    discovered there with his girlfriend.

11. The judge's reasoning in full is at paras 25-28 as follows:

         "25. In April 2011 the appellant asserts sitting together with  [S]
             in the park around 10 a.m. one morning and  being  apprehended
             in the park by that the Basiji.  [S] was coming from school in
             Fasa and was wearing a veil.  He was forcibly taken into a car
             by two Basiji but [S] did not get into the car and he said, at
             asylum interview, that the Basiji let her be.  He said because
             she was a girl they could not touch her and she refused to get
             into the car.

         26.  The report from Sheri Laizer records that 'The Basijis  had  a
             reputation  particular  the  law  into  their  own  hands  and
             committing gross violations of human rights knowing they  have
             the support of the Islamic government ...' and 'The Basij have
             been heavily criticised in the human rights abuses  attributed
             to them during and since the elections of 2009 ... The conduct
             of the Basij include extreme use of force, beating, abduction,
             killing  and  looting.'   The  appellant's  written  statement
             records that he was approached by three Basij when in the park
             with [S] and that he was forcibly detained and placed in a car
             by two of them.  That would have left one member of that force
             free to apprehend [S].  Against that informed  statement  from
             Sheri Laizer it is clearly inconsistent that  members  of  the
             Basij would have felt constrained in apprehending a female who
             had been witnessed by them committing  acts  perceived  to  be
             against public morality.

         27.  The appellant has recorded that he was forcefully taken to the
             Fathol Mobin base where he was detained for two days.  He  was
             not  physically  mistreated  whilst  in  detention;  was   not
             formally charged and no court proceedings ensued.  He  records
             being released from detention  without  any  papers  following
             intervention by [YH] and that he returned to his home.  Citing
             extensive material  in  the  public  domain  detailed  in  the
             refusal  letter  the  respondent  rejected   the   appellant's
             assertion that he had been so arrested  and  detained  without
             consequence.  In essence whilst accepting that the  Basij  are
             responsible for monitoring moral behaviour in Iran,  including
             state of dress and relationships between men and women outside
             of marriage, such material recorded  that  the  Iranian  Penal
             Code is based upon Sharia law and is applied  in  practise  in
             Iran.  That Code states at: Article 637 - Any  man  and  woman
             who are not married and who  commit  a  crime  against  public
             morality, excluding adultery, should be sentenced to  flogging
             (99 lashes).  If one of them did not consent to the crime then
             only the one who initiated the crime should be  punished,  and
             at Article 638 - Anyone who explicitly violates any  religious
             taboo in public besides being punished for the act should also
             be imprisoned from ten  days  to  two  months,  or  should  be
             flogged (74  lashes).   Accordingly  the  respondent  did  not
             accept  that  the  appellant   has   encountered   the   Basij
             accompanied by his  girlfriend  in  a  park;  nor  was  it  in
             consequence accepted that he  was  arrested  detained  by  the
             Basij as claimed.

         28.  In cross-examination the appellant  said  that  there  was  no
             prosecution following upon him being found in the public  park
             with [S] because he had pushed the Basiji and [S] had escaped.
              Although he had been seen with the girl,  at  a  trial  there
             would be no girl.  They could not find the girl.  There  would
             be no proof that he had been seen with the girl.  He said  the
             Basiji would need to show evidence at  the  trial  which  they
             could not do.  Given the background evidence relating  to  the
             Basij and the justice system in Iran I do not find it credible
             that the first hand observational  evidence  of  three  Basiji
             would not be prohibitively accepted against  the  word  of  an
             individual  so   accused.    That   finding   undermines   the
             appellant's account in respect of consorting with a girlfriend
             in public."

12. As regards paras 25 and 26, Mr Hodgetts submitted that  the  judge  had
    been wrong to find an inconsistency between the expert report of  Sheri
    Laizer and the appellant's evidence that the Basiji would, according to
    the appellant's evidence,  have  felt  constrained  not  to  touch  his
    girlfriend.  Further, Mr Hodgetts submitted that in para 27  the  judge
    had been wrong to view the offence that the appellant  was  accused  of
    under the Iranian Penal Code as so serious that he would have only been
    detained for two  days  and  would  not  have  been  subject  to  court
    proceedings and more severe punishment.  Mr Hodgetts referred me to the
    Danish Immigration Service Report "On Certain Crimes and Punishments in
    Iran" (April 2005) at D1 of the respondent's bundle and, in particular,
    at page 9 of that report where it was stated  that:  "The  Organisation
    for Defending Victims of Violence's International  Department  reported
    that the normal  punishment  for  having  an  illegal  relationship  is
    detention for 24 hours." He further referred me to para  11.31  of  the
    Country of Origin Information Report (at E24 of the Appellant's bundle)
    which, he submitted, made  clear  that  the  appellant's  offence  fell
    within the least  serious  crimes  under  the  Iranian  Penal  Code  of
    "Ta'zir".

13. Whilst there may well be some merit in Mr Hodgetts' submission that the
    appellant's  detention  for  only  two  days  by  the  Basiji  is   not
    inconsistent with the background material to which he referred  me,  it
    is clear from para 27 of his determination that the judge did not  take
    this into account in reaching his adverse finding.   Paragraph  27  is,
    when read carefully, merely a recitation of what the Secretary of State
    took into account in the refusal letter at paras 25-28.  It is clear to
    me that the judge's reasons for not accepting the  appellant's  account
    of being detained in April 2011 are, in fact, contained in paras 26 and
    28 of his determination.

14. As regards para 26, I do not accept Mr Hodgetts'  submission  that  the
    judge was not entitled to reject  the  appellant's  evidence  that  the
    Basiji did not touch his girlfriend simply  because  she  was  a  girl.
    This does not seem to have been  a  point  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The judge was entitled to rely upon a passage in the report of
    Sheri Laizer (at A35 of the appellant's bundle)  where  she  identified
    that the Basiji have

         "a  reputation  for  taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands  and
         committing gross violations of human rights knowing they  have  the
         support of  the  Islamic  government,  the  Ayatollahs,  Imams  and
         Mullahs ...".

15. Mr Hodgetts' challenge is no more than a disagreement with the  judge's
    reasoning which was properly open to him.

16. As regards  para  28,  the  grounds  of  appeal  (although  I  did  not
    understand Mr Hodgetts to press this point  in  his  oral  submissions)
    argue that the judge was wrong to speculate  in  finding  that  it  was
    implausible that  no  prosecution  would  follow,  on  the  appellant's
    evidence, because there could be no trial as his girlfriend escaped and
    they could not find her and prove that he had been with a girl  despite
    him having  been  observed  by  three  Basiji.   Contained  within  the
    appellant's bundle is the US Department  of  State  Country  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices 2010 (Iran)  [24  May  2012].   At  B19-B21  the
    section on "Trial Procedures" makes plain that, although  in  principle
    fair procedures exist, in practice  they  are  not  respected.   In  my
    judgment, the judge was  entitled,  having  regard  to  the  background
    evidence, to find that it was not credible that the appellant would not
    face prosecution simply because his girlfriend could not be found given
    the "first hand observational evidence of three Basiji".

17. Consequently, I  reject  Mr  Hodgetts'  submissions  that  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant had not established the  incident  in  April
    2011 which led to his detention  cannot  stand.   Of  course,  if  that
    finding stands the whole of the appellant's claim as it relates  to  YH
    falls away.  Without his detention in April 2011, he could not have met
    YH who arranged his release and none of the consequences which, he  now
    claims, put him at risk on return can have  occurred.   That,  however,
    was not how the judge approached the appeal  and  he  gave  independent
    reasons for rejecting the remainder of the appellant's accounts.  It is
    to those reasons that I now turn.

18. Mr Hodgetts, in essence, made two  principal  submissions.   First,  he
    submitted that the judge had wrongly discounted the expert evidence  of
    Sheri Laizer concerning the authentication by an informant of a  number
    of aspects of the appellant's claim including that he  had  been  given
    illegal drugs by YH.  Secondly, the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the background evidence concerning the use of illegal drugs  by
    Mullahs  in  Iran  and  that  there  was  nothing  implausible  in  the
    appellant's account that he was given these by YH and that he continued
    to be given them (they being addictive) despite having challenged YH.

19. The appellant submitted a number  of  photographs  which,  he  claimed,
    showed him with YH and others.

20. The judge dealt with this evidence together with the evidence  provided
    by an informant who reported to Sheri Laizer at paras 37-40 as follows:

         "37. Submitted on behalf of the appellant are copies of photographs
             said to represent the appellant with [YH]  together  and  with
             others.  In cross-examination the appellant was asked  whether
             the  photographs  were  taken  at  the  Ashrafi  Mosque.    He
             responded negatively saying  that  all  photographs  had  been
             taken at the Imam Reza Haram shrine in Mashad.  Asked how  far
             those two locations were apart he responded that they  were  a
             long way apart.  Ashrafi Mosque was in the south-eastern  Iran
             and the shrine was in the North-East of that country.

         38.  It is  conceded  in  the  report  of  Sheri  Laizer  that  the
             individual said to be identified as [YH] within the  submitted
             photographs  is  not  dressed   like   a   mullah   in   those
             representations, said to have been taken  within  a  religious
             shrine, to where such a group  of  individuals  had  travelled
             some 600 miles for religious purposes.  That individual is  as
             casually dressed as other individuals represented within those
             photographs.

         39.  Within the report  from  Sheri  Laizer  is  to  be  found  the
             statement  that  the  author,  in  seeking  authentication  of
             certain elements in the appellant's account,  first  contacted
             an individual named as Mr Samin Rashti, a  former  lawyer  who
             fled Iran, who in turn contacted another  individual  in  Iran
             for such purposes.  The recorded responses are  therefore  not
             within the personal  expert  knowledge  of  Sheri  Laizer  but
             amount to what the author of  the  report  has  been  told  by
             another, who in turn has been told matters  by  another  ["the
             informant"].  That amounts to  what  is  known  in  evidential
             terms as second-hand  hearsay.   The  informant  also  records
             obtaining  further  information  from  others   -   third-hand
             hearsay.

         40.  The report by  Sheri  Laizer  opines  on  page  A42  that  the
             photographs  said  to  depict   the   appellant   with   [YH],
             authenticated by the informant, is said to be  in  a  location
             identified by reference to other photographs  as  the  Ashrafi
             Mosque in Fasa.  That assertion is clearly  inconsistent  with
             the appellant's oral evidence that all such  photographs  were
             taken at the Imam Reza Haram shrine in Mashad, a location some
             600 miles away from Fasa.  It is unclear whether the author or
             the informant has made  such  identification.   The  informant
             passed back certain information copied in  the  body  of  that
             report relating to locations  and  individuals  named  by  the
             appellant, including [YH]."

21. As Mr Hibbs pointed out in his submissions, Sheri Laizer  has  made  an
    obvious error.  The photographs  do  not  show  the  unofficial  Mosque
    ("Hosseiniyeh") in the appellant's home town of Fasa where YH is based.
     The photographs show, rather, the Imam Reza Shrine which is about  600
    miles away and is one of, if not the, largest  Mosques  in  the  world.
    That was, of course, where the appellant claimed these photographs were
    taken.  It is an error in the expert's report which is acknowledged  in
    her email of 8 February 2013 where she  says  that  she  was  "confused
    which Mosque it was" because the architecture was  "similar  to  Fasa".
    As Mr Hibbs submitted, it is difficult to  understand  how  the  expert
    could confuse a clear photograph showing the  appellant  and,  whom  he
    claims to be YH,  standing  by  the  world's  largest  Mosque  with  an
    unofficial backstreet Mosque in Fasa.

22. Having  considered  the  expert's  evidence  the  judge  expressed  the
    following  view  as  regards  its  reliability  at  para  41   of   his
    determination:

         "41. Whilst Sheri Laizer clearly understands the duty owed  to  the
             court in compiling such report, information  provided  in  the
             manner  described  in  relation  to  the   identification   of
             individuals,  their  occupations  and  activities  and   other
             assertions does not carry the same weight as that provided  by
             an  expert  with  first-hand  knowledge  or  in   assimilating
             reliable research, for the reasons above recorded.  Given  the
             clear unreliability of the statement contained within the body
             of that report, I do not  find  the  contents  of  the  report
             reliable or persuasive in  regard  to  the  identification  or
             activities of [YH] or [YH's] asserted relatives."

23. Leaving aside the expert's clear error, there is nothing  in  principal
    wrong with the judge's approach in para 41 of his determination.  There
    the judge is not referring to the expert's opinion as such  but  rather
    factual matters related to her by another person.  That  individual  is
    described in her report as being a "former Iranian lawyer" who is "well-
    known to me".  Despite that, it remains the case  that  the  expert  is
    neither expressing an opinion nor relating facts  directly  within  her
    knowledge.  Contrary to Mr Hodgetts' submission, the judge did not  say
    that the evidence relayed by the third party carried no  weight.   What
    the judge said was that it "does not carry the  same  weight"  as  that
    provided by an expert with first-hand knowledge or based upon research.
     Likewise, the judge was clearly entitled to take  into  account  that,
    despite her expertise, Ms Laizer had made, what can only be said to be,
    a rather elementary mistake in placing the  appellant  and  YH  in  the
    wrong Mosque in the photographs.  Those reasons justified the judge  in
    his conclusion that:

         "I do not find the contents of the report reliable or persuasive in
         regard to the identification or activities of  [YH]  or  of  [YH's]
         asserted relatives."

24. Turning to Mr Hodgetts' second submission, this concerned  the  judge's
    reasons leading to  his  finding  that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been given (illicitly  at  first  but  then  voluntarily)
    illegal drugs by YH.   The  judge's  reasons  are  at  paras  42-46  as
    follows:

         "42. Sheri  Laizer  was  requested  by  instructing  solicitors  to
             consider the use of trafficking in drugs by  mullahs.   Citing
             various  sources  it  is  opined  that  clerics  in  Iran  are
             reputedly involved in illegal business activity including drug
             trafficking.  That  may  well  be  the  case,  and  given  the
             Internet sources cited in support of the conclusion, would  be
             known to anyone accessing such information,  from  within  and
             without Iran.  The Iran COI Report 2013 records:  The  Freedom
             on the Net Report 2012.  Throughout 2011 and early  2012,  the
             Iranian authorities continued to restrict access  to  tens  of
             thousands of websites,  particularly  those  of  international
             news  sources,  the  opposition  Green  Movement,  ethnic  and
             religious  minorities,  and   human   rights   groups.    Some
             previously accessible websites  and  blogs  also  began  being
             blocked, including news sources like Yahoo News  and  Reuters.
             That  report  indicating  continuing  and  increasing  on  the
             accessibility of anti-establishment websites which  in  itself
             indicates that not all such  websites  had  been  successfully
             blocked by the Iranian government within its borders

         43.  The submitted report from Anna Enayat has  been  submitted  on
             behalf of the appellant.  That report  is  stated  to  contain
             information  not  specific  to  the  appellant's  claim   that
             replicates an account written by the author on 4 February 2011
             on  the  use  of  drugs  in  Iranian  prisons  for   obtaining
             confessions/facilitating interrogation.  The use of  drugs  by
             the authorities in Iran to obtain confessions from people held
             in custody has been accepted by the respondent in submissions.
              No such concession was made in respect of the use of drugs by
             individuals or government allied groups within Iran  in  order
             to persuade people to the government viewpoint.

         44.  The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
             arrested and detained by the Basij in Iran and therefore would
             have met [YH] but nevertheless accepted that religious leaders
             held powerful positions with much influence in day-to-day life
             in Iran and recorded in the  refusal  letter  that  background
             information  demonstrated  that  the  Iranian  Government  and
             authorities had recently taken a hardline  attitude  to  those
             trafficking  and  in  consumption   of   drugs   and   illegal
             substances, with recent changes in Iranian law regarding drugs
             extending the application of the death penalty  and  increased
             penalties for the possession of relatively  small  amounts  of
             illegal substances.  Accordingly the appellant's assertions of
             being provided with and purchasing mind-altering drugs from  a
             prominent clergy member were stated to  be  inconsistent  with
             the background information cited.  It was considered that  his
             account of being brain-washed by mullah [YH] initially by  the
             infusion of  drugs  without  the  appellant's  knowledge,  and
             subsequently with his knowledge,  was  inconsistent  with  the
             background  information  revealing  the   powerful   positions
             enjoyed by important religious figures in Iran and the Iranian
             Government's commitment to punished harshly those involved  in
             the supply and consumption of illegal substances.

         45.  The respondent in the refusal letter noted  the  inconsistency
             that when the appellant confronted [YH] upon realisation  that
             his motives towards him may have been otherwise than  that  of
             religious guidance and when challenged directly  that  he  had
             covertly been given addictive drugs to  ingest  the  appellant
             then took some more of the drugs proffered by [YH]  which  had
             the effect of calming him down.  I do  not  find  it  credible
             that the appellant having challenged  an  individual  whom  he
             believed had been drugging him  without  his  knowledge  would
             then immediately go on and consume more drugs on  a  voluntary
             basis.

         46.  In cross-examination at the appeal hearing the  appellant  was
             asked why, given the background of  the  extent  of  religious
             extremism prevalent in Iran, he thought that [YH]  would  need
             to go to the extent of recruiting teenagers and drugging them.
              He responded that he wanted to train 'us' to do anything.  He
             said [YH] was working on behalf of the government to get  them
             to agree with the government.  He said people  would  be  more
             interested following brainwashing.  I find such explanation of
              the  stated  purposes  against  the  background  evidence  of
             pervasive  religious  beliefs  in  Iran  to  be   implausible;
             religious zealotry  being  not  uncommon  within  the  country
             without resort to such extreme methods."

25. In her report Sheri Laizer states that Mullahs do  use  illegal  drugs.
    That opinion rests upon an article from the internet set out at A43-A44
    of the appellant's bundle entitled "Mullahs and  Opiates".   Ms  Laizer
    says that she agrees with this "informal appraisal".  It refers to  the
    Mullahs as being "heavy opium smokers" and speaks of the common use  of
    opium smoking by  Iranian  citizens.   Ms  Laizer  then  cites  further
    extracts from the article which, to quote her, shows:

         "The Mullahs are  involved  at  every  level  of  drug  production,
         traffic and luring Iranians into drug addiction."

26. In my judgment, this background evidence does not unravel  the  judge's
    reasoning nor is it inconsistent with it.  It may well  show  that  the
    use of drugs is, perhaps, common in Iranian society.   It  further  may
    well show that the Mullahs are actively involved in its production  and
    trafficking.  To the extent that it supports Ms Laizer's statement that
    they are involved in "luring Iranians into  drug  addiction",  this  is
    only supported in the context of Iranian society generally.  Nothing in
    the report suggests that Mullahs used opium or  heroin  to  "groom"  or
    "brainwash" specific individuals in the way that the  appellant  claims
    that YH targeted him and others to  follow  and  support  YH's  extreme
    religious views.  I accept that the report provides some support to the
    appellant's account, in particular in his reference  to  the  substance
    being the "earth of Karbala" (see Ms Laizer's report at  A42).   Taking
    the evidence as a whole, however,  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
    judge's reasons at paras 42-44 and 46 that it was implausible  that  YH
    had used illegal  substances  in  the  way  the  appellant  claimed  to
    brainwash him.  As the judge pointed out in para 43, the second  expert
    report from Ms Enayat provided no specific support for the  appellant's
    account.

27. Likewise, I do not accept Mr Hodgetts' submission that  the  judge  was
    not entitled in para 45 to take into account that the appellant, having
    challenged  YH  on  his  drugging  the  appellant  illicitly,  that  he
    nevertheless continued immediately to take the drugs  voluntarily.   In
    any event, even if that were not the case, the  implausibility  of  the
    appellant's underlying claim to have been given these drugs  by  YH  to
    brainwash him was sufficient to support the judge's adverse finding.

28. Mr Hodgetts also challenged the judge's reasoning in para 47  in  which
    the judge took into account that the appellant had failed to mention in
    his asylum interview that YH had  a  brother  in  the  Basiji,  despite
    mentioning that he had a brother in the Etela'at.  The  judge  did  not
    accept  the  appellant's  explanation  that  he  had  not  been   given
    sufficient time to do so in the interview, given that the interview was
    over three and a half hours long.  That reasoning was properly open  to
    the judge and to take it into account albeit as a relatively minor part
    of his reasons for reaching his adverse credibility finding.

29. For these reasons, the judge did not err in law in reaching his adverse
    credibility finding which stands.

30. In any event, the judge found  that  the  appellant  could  safely  and
    reasonably internally relocate within Iran.  Although  the  grounds  of
    appeal  did  not  directly  challenge   this   finding,   Mr   Hodgetts
    nevertheless argued that the grounds did  challenge  the  risk  to  the
    appellant elsewhere in Iran on the basis of the failure to consider the
    fact of his illegal exit following SB (Risk on return -  illegal  exit)
    Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.  Although it was not  referred  to  at  the
    hearing, the appellant's representatives had, in fact, on 17  May  2013
    sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal to directly  challenge
    the judge's finding in respect of internal relocation.

31. Because  of  the  view  I  have  taken  that  the  judge's  finding  is
    unassailable, I need say no more about that application other  than  to
    note that Mr Hibbs, in his submissions, sought to support  the  judge's
    decision on the basis of internal relocation.

32. At para 54 the judge noted that:

         "I have not found the  appellant's  claim  to  be  credible  and  a
         finding in respect  of  internal  relocation  is  consequently  not
         necessary.  For the sake of completeness I record that had I  found
         such claim to be  largely  credible  I  would  have  found  in  the
         alternative, as above recorded in the body of this determination on
         the appellant's own evidence relating to the limited interest taken
         only by [YH] in him since leaving this  (sic)  country  of  origin,
         that there was no evidence demonstrating at the  lower  level  that
         any state organisation had any adverse interest in  him  and  after
         taking account of all  relevant  circumstances  pertaining  to  the
         appellant and his country of origin that it would be reasonable  to
         expect the claimant to relocate to reside in  another  area  within
         Iran such as Tehran or Shiraz where he could safely reside  without
         coming to the attention of [YH] or his associates."

33.  That  finding  refers  back  to  paras  49  and  50  of  the   judge's
    determination where he dealt with the evidence concerning  any  contact
    by YH or the Iranian authorities since the appellant left Iran:

         "49. In cross-examination the  appellant  was  asked  that  if  his
             account was credible why he  could  not  reside  safely  in  a
             different part of Iran and if so how [YH] would come  to  know
             or why he would be interested.  He responded that  [YH]  would
             find him.  The fate of his classmate was in his  hands.   [YH]
             would be looking for him.  The Etela'at would find him.   They
             would  want  to  find  him  because  he  knew  that  [YH]  was
             brainwashing people.  It is the appellant's  account  of  [YH]
             was working on behalf of the Iranian government.  If [YH]  was
             brainwashing  people  towards  a  view   of   supporting   the
             government as the appellant has asserted  it  is  implausible,
             given the background evidence of state immunity  and  lack  of
             accountability  of  state  organisations  in  Iran,  that  the
             authorities would  have  any  interest  in  searching  for  or
             locating an individual making such allegations.

         50.  The appellant was asked in cross-examination when he last  had
             contact with his family.  He responded that it  was  one  week
             ago and on the morning of the hearing.  He was  asked  if  his
             family had been contacted by the Iranian authorities.  He said
             that only [YH] had been to their home on a number of occasions
             asking for him.  Asked what [YH] had been told  he  said  that
             his  mother  had  informed  him  that  he  was  staying   with
             relatives.  [YH] had last called at  his  family  home  a  few
             months previously when he had  left  the  message  asking  the
             appellant to see him as he had something  for  him.   If  that
             account the credible it would mean  that  only  [YH]  had  any
             interest in the appellant and following his absence  from  the
             family home for a period of 14 months and had not sought  from
             his family information enabling him to  locate  the  appellant
             purportedly staying  with  family  relatives.   The  appellant
             asserts that he could not live anywhere else in Iran to  avoid
             his problems because Etela'at could  find  him  in  any  city.
             There is no  evidence  that  the  Etela'at  have  evinced  any
             interest in the appellant since he left Iran in November 2011.
              He has remained in contact with his family  since  that  time
             and has recorded contact with them on the day  of  the  appeal
             hearing.  It is not demonstrated that the lower standard  that
             the Etela'at or any other government agency have  any  adverse
             interest in the appellant.  On the appellant's own account, if
             credible, no active pursuit of the appellant by [YH] had  been
             maintained, nor had any Iranian government organisation sought
             to trace or pursue him.  That would  mean,  if  credible,  the
             appellant could reasonably and safely relocated to  reside  in
             another part of Iran in accordance with  the  dictum  of  Lord
             Bingham in Januzi, Hamid, Gaafar & Mohammed v SSHD  [2006]  UK
             House of Lords 5 where he recorded  that  the  decision-maker,
             taking account of all relevant circumstances pertaining to the
             claimant and his country of origin, must decide whether it  is
             reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate  or  whether  it
             would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

34. It is worth noting that at para 56 the judge specifically  referred  to
    SB and noted that simply because of illegal exit, the  appellant  would
    not be at risk on return.

35. The judge's reasoning at paras 49 and 50 is  unassailable.   Since  the
    appellant left Iran, the Iranian authorities had shown no  interest  in
    the appellant.  Indeed, since his claimed release after  his  detention
    in April 2011 there was no evidence that the  Iranian  authorities  had
    any interest in the appellant.  Likewise, the  evidence  concerning  YH
    was that he had visited the family home, the last occasion being a  few
    months earlier, and had been told that the appellant had gone  to  stay
    with family relatives but had not sought any information  enabling  him
    to locate the appellant.

36. On the basis of this evidence, the judge was properly entitled to  find
    that the Iranian authorities had no interest in the appellant and  that
    he could safely and reasonably relocate within Iran  without  being  at
    risk from YH.  The fact of the appellant's illegal exit from  Iran  did
    not, as such, expose him to a real risk from the Iranian authorities.

37. Consequently, even if the judge's adverse credibility finding could not
    stand, the appellant's appeal fell to be dismissed on the basis that he
    could internally relocate within Iran.

Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  The decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.

39. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

