
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00613/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    C R E
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Ms Sarah Pinder instructed by Divine Legal Practice
For the Respondent:   Mr Paul Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds against the respondent's  decision  to  remove
    him  to  Jamaica  after  refusing  him  refugee  status,   humanitarian
    protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds.



Background

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 1 June 2002 as  a  visitor.
    He was then 24 years old.  He gave an untruthful  account  of  being  a
    newly married man coming to the United Kingdom for a honeymoon with his
    wife and produced a marriage certificate which he  later  admitted  was
    false,  and  he  also  admitted  that  he  had  never   been   married.
    Accordingly, before the expiry of his 6-month visit visa on 4  November
    2002 he was served with  an  IS151A  as  an  illegal  entrant  who  had
    practised verbal deception to gain leave to enter which is  an  offence
    under Section 24(1A) and a breach of Section 26(1C) of the  Immigration
    Act 1971.

 3. The appellant did not return  to  Jamaica.   The  appellant  was  given
    temporary  admission  on  reporting  conditions  and  reported  without
    incident for two and a half years  before  absconding  on  25  February
    2005.  He then disappeared for over five years.

 4. On 18 June 2010 the appellant made an application on  form  FLR(O)  for
    leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.   In  his
    application he now criticised the respondent for having failed to  give
    him an asylum interview.  The respondent in her refusal letter  treated
    the application as though it were an asylum application, and gave  only
    relatively brief consideration to family and private life.

 5. There is no evidence to indicate that the appellant has  ever  made  an
    asylum claim in person at a place  designated  by  the  respondent,  as
    section  18  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    requires. The appellant's  application  was  for  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 6. First-tier Judge Turquet in his decision dealt with  the  asylum  claim
    and the application for leave to remain outside the Rules and dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.  It does not appear  that  he  directed  his
    mind to the fact that the appellant had not made an asylum claim.  That
    is an error of law.

 7. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  allow  this
    appeal to the extent that the application remains before the respondent
    for a lawful decision on the application  actually  made  which  is  an
    application for further leave to remain outside the Rules.

 8. If the appellant wishes to have his asylum claim considered, it remains
    open to him to make an asylum application under section 18 of the  2002
    Act.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision. I re-make the decision in the appeal  by  allowing
it to the  extent  that  the  appellant's  application  remains  before  the
respondent for a lawful decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 19 January 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
