
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00273/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, instructed by Coram Children's Legal
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Morocco.  He appealed to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision  of  19  December
    2013 refusing his application for asylum and  deciding  to  remove  him
    pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

2.   The appellant was detained in the United Kingdom on 12 March 2011.   He
    is from Morocco and had travelled to the United Kingdom via  Spain  and
    France.  When interviewed on 5 September 2011  he  said  he  could  not
    return to Morocco because he would be in danger as he was a  young  boy
    and that he had left there because he felt he had no future  there  and
    was living in extreme poverty.  He was asked if anything  had  happened
    in Morocco to make him leave and he replied "no."  When asked what made
    him leave Morocco he replied "Poverty.  Life was difficult."

3.   At an appeal hearing in February 2014 the appellant made amendments  to
    his previous statement including stating that he had witnessed domestic
    violence between his father and mother  and  had  been  the  victim  of
    violence by his father and that while living on the streets in  Morocco
    he had been stabbed on two separate occasions and injured  in  a  fight
    when someone threw a stone or rock at his head and he had  witnessed  a
    rape and subsequent death of a woman  and  her  daughter  and  saw  his
    friend killed by a lorry.

4.   The appeal before the First-tier Judge  on  4  March  2015  was  a  re-
    hearing  as  a  consequence  of  errors  of  law  being  found  in  the
    determination of the judge who heard the appeal  of  the  appellant  in
    February  2014.   The  judge  found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
    inconsistent,  contradictory,  not  credible  and  unpersuasive.    She
    referred to the fact that the appellant's claim had  changed  over  the
    years and he said  that  he  had  given  information  to  his  previous
    representatives such as sniffing glue whilst living on the  streets  in
    Morocco and that he had been in danger in Morocco but he had been  told
    that that did not amount to an asylum claim and therefore  he  did  not
    say any more and did not tell the solicitor about the police in Morocco
    who he said had arrested him for attempting to gain entry onto  a  boat
    or lorry in order to leave the country.  The judge  noted  that  before
    being told by his solicitor that his story did not amount to an  asylum
    claim  he  had  consistently  said  that  he  came  for  financial  and
    educational betterment, and the judge found such matters  to  undermine
    the  credibility  of  his  asylum  claim.   The  appellant   had   also
    subsequently  in  his  February  2014  witness  statement  amended  his
    November 2013 statement to say it was not correct that he only met  his
    father once and that his father was  violent  towards  his  mother  and
    himself.  He did not say anything about that or  talk  about  it  again
    until that time because he did not want to remember it and it made  him
    too upset.  Again the judge found this to  undermine  his  credibility.
    In general terms the judge found damage to the appellant's  credibility
    in the changes  and  developments  to  his  story  since  the  original
    interview.

5.   The judge also did not accept that the appellant was vulnerable as  had
    been asserted on his behalf, in particular  by  his  foster  carer  Mrs
    Ayesha Saeed.  She gave oral evidence before the judge and referred  to
    such matters as she thought that the appellant's emotional age remained
    at about 15 years and that he continued to maintain  a  high  level  of
    dependency upon her.  The judge did not accept that the  appellant  was
    vulnerable as asserted on his behalf, the  matter  having  been  raised
    during the course of evidence.  She noted the fact that at the date  of
    the hearing the appellant was 18 years and 11 months  old  and  decided
    that he wished to marry and  spend  the  rest  of  his  life  with  his
    girlfriend.  Mrs Saeed had not given evidence to the effect that he was
    not mature enough to make such decisions.  Her evidence  was  that  the
    appellant and his girlfriend would marry but for practical reasons they
    could not live together.   The  practical  reasons  were  that  he  was
    undertaking a course of study and was not in a financial position to be
    able to support himself and his wife.  It was clear from the report  of
    Dr Walsh, a clinical psychologist that the appellant did not  meet  the
    diagnostic criteria for PTSD and nor did  he  present  with  or  report
    additional difficulties warranting further diagnostic  assessment.   He
    did not  report  symptoms  indicating  the  presence  of  a  depressive
    disorder or other mental health problems.  The judge  went  on  to  say
    that he had considered the country expert report of Dr Seddon  and  his
    comments as to  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account.   She
    commented that it was not surprising that  Dr  Seddon  would  find  the
    claim now made by the appellant to be plausible since the appellant had
    had a number of years in which to formulate it but said that as she had
    set out above she did not accept the appellant's account.   Accordingly
    she did not accept the claim that he had made to be at risk  on  return
    to Morocco.  Nor did she find that the  appeal  could  succeed  on  the
    basis of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

6.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  against  the
    judge's decision initially on the basis of grounds 1, 2 and 4  but  not
    on the basis of ground 3 though subsequently when the  application  was
    renewed permission was granted in relation to that  matter  also.   The
    essence of the  grounds  was  that  the  judge  had  not  taken  proper
    consideration of the fact that the appellant was a child at the time of
    the incidents to which he referred at the time of the asylum interview,
    that she had failed to take into account the need to consider the  best
    interests of the appellant's foster siblings in considering Article  8,
    that she had adopted the wrong approach to Dr Seddon's report in coming
    to conclusions on credibility before making findings on that report and
    that she had erred in not attaching weight to the fact that the current
    solicitors had written to the previous solicitors alerting them to  the
    allegation that they had failed to take proper instructions and  giving
    them an opportunity to respond which they had not done.

7.   Ms Kiai relied on and developed the  matters  raised  in  the  grounds.
    She addressed the issues that  were  set  out  in  the  three  Rule  24
    responses that the respondent had put in.  There had not  even  been  a
    passing reference to  the  appellant's  age  when  the  judge  assessed
    credibility.  He had only been 14 at the time of the interview.   Also,
    his age was relevant to whether  a  more  liberal  approach  should  be
    adopted with regard to giving the benefit of the doubt and the need  to
    attach greater weight to the background evidence with regard  to  risk.
    The failure to take into account  the  best  interests  of  the  foster
    siblings and evidence in that regard had been provided to the judge  as
    to the impact on them of the appellant's removal.  There  had  been  no
    response from the previous representatives to the matters put  to  them
    and therefore it was improper for the judge to  conclude  at  least  by
    implication that the previous representatives were not at fault.

8.   In his submissions Mr Tarlow relied on all the Rule  24  responses  and
    argued that there was no material error of law in the decision.  It was
    clear from paragraph 44 that the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's age and the reference to the purpose of a  visit  being  to
    learn and study.  She had made her own findings  on  the  evidence  and
    considered Dr Seddon's report and came to conclusions which  she  could
    reasonably come to.  The findings were not perverse  in  the  R  (Iran)
    sense.  Taken as a whole the determination was entirely sustainable.

9.   By way of reply Ms Kiai argued that it was not enough  to  address  the
    expert report after making credibility findings.  At paragraph 44 there
    was no indication of taking  the  appellant's  age  into  account  with
    regard to reliability and plausibility.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  I am satisfied that the points made in the grounds are made  out.   The
    appellant was only 14 at the time of the asylum interview  although  it
    may well be that the discrepancies in the account as developed are open
    to criticism, that can only be done on the basis of taking into account
    his age at that time  and  also  of  his  age  at  the  time  when  the
    experiences which he related would have taken place.  This  is  clearly
    relevant to a proper assessment of credibility.  In addition the  judge
    materially erred in the findings  in  respect  of  the  expert  report.
    There  are  elements  of  that  report  which  are  irrelevant  to  the
    credibility of the claim and although clearly credibility is  a  matter
    for the judge, on the other hand credibility findings are  required  to
    be reached as a consequence of an  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, and it is clear from paragraph 51 of the  judge's  determination
    that she had reached her conclusions on credibility before going on  to
    address Dr Seddon's evidence.  The other two matters  are  not  without
    weight though they  are  of  lesser  weight.   The  judge  should  have
    considered section 5 in the context of the impact  of  the  appellant's
    removal on his foster siblings, and the absence of a response from  the
    previous solicitors to the matters put to them was clearly  a  relevant
    matter  to  be  addressed  when  assessing  the  credibility   of   the
    appellant's claim that in effect evidence he had given to them had  not
    been put forward or had been discounted.

12.  Both representatives asked me, if I were to  find  material  errors  of
    law in the determination, to send the matter back for re-hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I agree with this joint submission.  There has to
    be a complete re-visiting of the facts in this  case  and  findings  on
    those facts by a judge and it is appropriate  therefore  in  accordance
    with paragraph 17 of the Practice Statement, for the matter to be heard
    de novo by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor  House,
    other than Judge B A Morris, who heard the appeal on this occasion, and
    Judge N M Paul who heard the appeal previously.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

