
       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00366/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 July 2013                                |On 9 July 2013               |
|Prepared 8 July 2013                          |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                 Ali Senussi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Wilding, of Counsel, instructed by Brighton
Housing Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Hayes, Senior  Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Hayes agreed that there  were
    material errors of law in the determination of the Judge of the  First-
    tier in that the Judge had made no findings on the documentary evidence
    provided: in particular he had not stated whether or not he found  that
    the appellant's  father's  old  diplomatic  passport  was  genuine  and
    therefore what that showed with  regard  to  the  appellant's  father's
    involvement with the Gaddafi regime. He had not  considered  the  other
    documentary evidence : the ID card from the Purification Committee  and
    the Gratitude and Appreciation Certificate.

2.   Findings regarding those documents and therefore the connection of  the
    appellant's father with the Gaddafi regime are clearly relevant to  the
    assessment of the  appellant's  claims  as  to  what  had  happened  in
    Libya and  an  assessment of the  appellant's fear of return.

3.   I therefore consider that this appeal should be re-heard afresh on  all
    grounds and indeed that the  requirements  of  the  present  Tribunal's
    Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2 are met.

4.   For the above reasons I allow the appeal of the Secretary of  State  to
    the limited extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    heard afresh.

5.     The appeal will be heard at  Taylor  House  on  23  October  2013,  3
    hours, North African Arabic interpreter.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

