


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/00832/2014
                                                    AA/00839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Sent        |
|On 1 July 2014                         |On 7 July 2014            |
|Prepared on 1 July 2014                |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    N.K.
                                    A.H.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan who entered  the  United
           Kingdom on 24 September 2013 by air, and  claimed  asylum  on  2
           October 2013 the basis of their assertion that they were at risk
           of harm across the entirety of Pakistan from  non  state  agents
           against whose actions the authorities could  offer  no  adequate
           protection.
        2. On 23 January 2014 the Respondent refused the asylum  claim  and
           by reference to s10 of the 1999 Act made a  decision  to  remove
           the Appellants to Pakistan as illegal entrants.
        3. The Appellants lodged an appeal with  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against the removal decision, which was heard and  dismissed  by
           Judge Cope in a Determination promulgated on 24 March  2014.  He
           rejected as untrue the Appellants' account of their  experiences
           in Pakistan and concluded the Appellants faced no risk  of  harm
           in the event of return.
        4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for  permission
           to appeal. Permission was granted by Judge PJG White on 17 April
           2014.
        5. The Respondent filed no Rule 24 Notice.
        6. The Appellant has made no Rule 15(2A)  application,  although  a
           bundle of documents was filed on  27  June  2014  that  contains
           evidence that was not before the First Tier Tribunal.
        7. Thus the matter comes before me.


           The grounds
        8. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  Documentary
           evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the
           light of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does
           not carry with it a presumption of authenticity, which  specific
           evidence must  disprove,  failing  which  its  content  must  be
           accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of  the
           evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and  background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the case,
           especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly  be
           said for a claimant's oral evidence.
        9. The error(s) of law relied upon by the Appellants are  not  easy
           to identify from the application for permission.  Before  me  it
           was argued first that the Judge had failed to give proper weight
           to the expert report of Ms Moeen, and second that the Judge  had
           failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his  rejection  of  the
           evidence of the Appellants. I am  satisfied  that  there  is  no
           merit in either proposition.
       10. The evidence of Ms Uzma Moeen of the Asian Legal Advice  Service
           was set out in a report dated 7 March 2014. She did  not  attend
           the hearing to supplement  it  with  oral  evidence.  The  Judge
           accepted that Ms Moeen had the background and the expertise  she
           had claimed to hold, and he expressly took the content  of  that
           report into  account  when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
           Appellants [34-36].
       11. Whilst on the one hand Ms Brakaj accepts that  the  question  of
           the weight to be attached to any item of the evidence before him
           was a matter  for  the  Judge,  she  appeared  on  a  number  of
           occasions during the course of her argument to suggest that  the
           Judge had no proper basis to go behind the expert's opinions.  I
           disagree.
       12. In my judgement, for the reasons that he gave, it  was  open  to
           the Judge to analyse the evidence in the way that he did. He did
           so at some length, and Ms Brakaj  was  unable  to  identify  any
           material  evidence  that  was  left  out  of  account,  or   any
           irrelevant matters that were taken into account, in  the  course
           of doing so. In consequence the Judge was right to identify that
           although Ms  Moeen's  considered  elements  of  the  Appellants'
           account were plausible, the credibility of those elements was  a
           matter for himself. There was in my judgement no  error  in  the
           Judge's reasoning in relation to the credibility  of  the  claim
           that individuals responsible  for  a  burglary  and  a  firearms
           incident in 2004 should some eight  years  or  more  later  want
           revenge for the contemporary report  of  their  actions  to  the
           police, when they had failed to take  the  opportunity  to  take
           that revenge in the intervening period [40-51] and had failed to
           make any attempt to take that revenge on the individual who  had
           actually made the report to the police [95-96].
       13. Nor was there any error in the Judge's analysis  of  the  weight
           that could be given to the evidence of the Appellants concerning
           the claim that the  Second  Appellant  was  the  subject  of  an
           attempted  kidnap  in  August  2013  by  the  same   individuals
           responsible for the burglary and firearms incidents in 2004 [60-
           68].
       14. There was also no error in the Judge's analysis  of  the  weight
           that could be given to the documents relied upon as genuine  FIR
           reports, and a genuine newspaper report [52-59].  Ms  Moeen  had
           addressed the  issue  of  whether  or  not  these  were  genuine
           documents, but she had not addressed the issue of  whether  they
           were "genuine documents" albeit issued as a result of corruption
           or in response to false reports, and  the  Judge  was  perfectly
           entitled to consider the possibility that they were.
       15. Nor was there any error in the Judge's approach to the  evidence
           of the Appellants in relation to the change in attitude of Mr  H
           towards them [69-90 and 95-96]. The Judge gave entirely adequate
           reasons for his rejection of Ms Moeen's opinions in relation  to
           the credibility/plausibility of the account of Mr H's  behaviour
           relied upon by the Appellants.


           Conclusions
       16.  In  my  judgement,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
           permission to appeal was granted,  there  is  no  merit  in  the
           grounds advanced before me. It was open to the Judge to make the
           adverse findings of fact that he did, for the  reasons  that  he
           gave, and to conclude that the Appellants were not  entitled  to
           international protection. The grounds are no more than a general
           disagreement with  the  Judge's  conclusions,  and  an  improper
           attempt to reargue the appeal, and they identify no error of law
           in the Judge's approach to the evidence before him that requires
           his decision to be set aside and remade.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      24 March 2014 contained no error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
      Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be  set  aside  and
      remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 1 July 2014

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellants  are
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This
        direction applies both to the Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 1 July 2014




