
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/00382/2016
                                                               AA/00383/2016
                                                               AA/00384/2016
                                                               AA/00386/2016
                                                               AA/00387/2016
                                                               AA/00388/2016
                                      T
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2017                            |On 08 August 2017          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               ALI ABDUJABBAR
                Master HUSSAN ALI ABDALRAHIM ALI ABDULJABBAR
                 Master MUSA ALI ABDALRAHIM ALI ABDULJABBAR
                     Mrs MASTURA GHWEEL ANDULRAHIM AMER
                 Master AHMED ALI ABDULRAHIM ALI ABDULJABBAR
                      Master ABDULRAHIM ALI ABDULJABBAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Lieu, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. These are appeals by all six Appellants against the  decision  of  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw promulgated on 12/01/2017,  which  dismissed
   the Appellants' appeals on all grounds.

Background


3. The First Appellant was born on  05/04/1969.  The  second  appellant  was
   born on 28/12/2000. The third  appellant  was  born  on  06/01/2003.  The
   fourth appellant was born on 05/12/1974. The fifth appellant was born  on
   15/02/2004. The sixth  appellant  was  born  on  13/04/2014.  The  fourth
   appellant is the first appellant's wife. The  remaining  four  appellants
   are their children. All six appellants are Libyan nationals.


4. The first appellant entered  the  UK  on  10/03/2012  as  a  student.  On
   18/07/2012 the second, third, fourth and fifth appellants entered the  UK
   in possession of visit visas. The family claimed  asylum  on  05/10/2012.
   The sixth appellant was born in the UK.


5. On 22/02/2016  the  Secretary  of  State  excluded  the  appellants  from
   protection under article 1F (a) of the 1951 convention.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  R  Bradshaw  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
   Respondent's decision.


7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  19  April  2017  Judge  Adio  gave
   permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The Judge made very clear findings of fact and made detailed  analysis
      of the appellant's evidence which he found  contradictory.  The  Judge
      noted at paragraph 46 that the appellant  had  stated  at  his  asylum
      interview that after receiving all  information  from  all  sources  a
      person will be called for questioning by the security special  section
      and in answer to whether the appellant had a knowledge of  any  abuses
      perpetrated by the secret police the appellant answered that  normally
      at any secret police these things happen but he did  not  witness  any
      abuse. The Judge also accepted that the appellant did not  commit  any
      acts of actual abuse nor that he witnessed  any  brought  by  his  own
      conduct he knew what happened once the  information  he  gathered  was
      passed on namely that people were brought in for questioning.  I  find
      that nowhere in the Judge's decision is there an  analysis  or  weight
      attached to the report of the expert Prof Christoph Bluth.  The  Judge
      refers to it at paragraph 24 of the decision.  There  is  no  analysis
      concerning the evidence in the reasoning given by the  Judge.  Failure
      to state what weight is attached to that evidence and to  resolve  any
      inconsistencies  between  that  evidence  and  the  evidence  of   the
      appellant amounts to an arguable error of law.

The Hearing

8. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, told me that the second,  third,  fourth,
fifth and sixth appellants made their own applications for asylum after  the
Judge's  decision  was  promulgated.  He  gave  an  undertaking  that  their
applications will be successful and that each of the second, third,  fourth,
fifth and sixth appellants will be granted asylum. On that basis,  he  asked
me to treat their appeals is abandoned. Ms Lieu for the appellants  told  me
that she did not oppose that motion.

9. I therefore find  that  the  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth
appellants have abandoned their appeals. They now await a  grant  of  asylum
as a result of separate applications. The first appellant's  appeal  remains
before me.

10. Ms Lieu moved the grounds of appeal. She told me, succinctly,  that  the
Judge's decision contains a material error of law  because  the  Judge  does
not deal with the expert report from Prof Bluth. She reminded  me  that  the
Judge refers to the report as part of the  evidence  for  the  appellant  at
[24] of the decision, but thereafter the report does not feature at  all  in
the decision. She told me that not only is there no reference to the  expert
report, but there is no analysis of the report nor is there  an  explanation
of what, if any, weight is attributed to the conclusions of the expert.  She
told me that as the expert report has not been considered  the  decision  is
both unsafe and unsound. She urged me to allow the appeal and to remit  this
case to the First-tier for reconsideration of new.

11. Mr Diwnycz, for  the  respondent  adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
response dated 6 June 2017, but having done so accepted that the Judge  does
not mention the expert report and appears to give no weight  to  the  expert
report without explaining why. He told me that there is an error of law  and
that this case requires reconsideration. Mr Diwnycz also  pointed  out  that
throughout the  decision,  and  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the
appellant is referred to as having the rank of major. That, he told  me,  is
incorrect, the appellant is Lieutenant Colonel. He told me  that  the  error
in relation to the appellant's rank is a matter which, in  itself,  requires
consideration.

Analysis

12. At [24] of the decision the Judge says

      I was referred to a  bundle  of  background  information  including  a
      report by Prof Christoph Bluth dated 05 /12/16.........

Thereafter the Judge makes no reference to report.

13.  Between  [12]  and  [21]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  sets  out  the
appellant's claim. At [22] and [23] the Judge  summarises  the  respondent's
position. The Judge's findings are found  between  [27]  and  [53].  Between
[27] and [53] the Judge explains why she finds the appellant to  be  neither
a credible nor a reliable witness, but no consideration  is  given  to  Prof
Christoph Bluth's report.

14. The  Judge's  record  of  proceedings  discloses  that  the  appellant's
representative opened his submissions by relying on the  witness  statement,
the records of interview and  the  expert  report.  The  Judge's  record  of
proceedings indicates that both parties' agents  made  submissions  relating
to the expert report.

15. In Detamu v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 604 the Court of Appeal said that it  was
an error of law to give no weight  to  the  report  of  an  expert  who  had
clearly indicated his expertise and the sources for his information.  In  FS
(Treatment of Expert evidence) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004 the Tribunal  held
that Immigration Judges have a duty to  consider  all  the  evidence  before
them when reaching a decision in an even handed  and  impartial  manner.  In
assessing the evidence before them they must  attach  such  weight  as  they
consider appropriate to that evidence. It may on  occasions  be  appropriate
to reject the conclusions reached by an expert. What is crucial  is  that  a
reasoned explanation is given for so doing

16. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

17. Because the Judge has given no consideration to  an  expert  report  the
decision creates the impression that a source of evidence for the  appellant
has not been analysed. The  decision  is  devoid  of  consideration  of  the
expert report so that it is impossible for  the  objective  reader  to  know
what the Judge made of that source of evidence.  It  is  impossible  to  say
what weight to the Judge placed on the opinion of the  expert.  I  have  to,
therefore, find that the decision is tainted by material errors  of  law.  I
must set the decision aside.

18. Because of the nature of  the  error  a  new  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary. That fact-finding exercise can be used  to  correct  findings  in
relation to the appellant's rank in  the  secret  police.  The  respondent's
position is that the appellant was a Lieutenant Colonel in Gaddafi's  secret
police.



Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

21. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge R Bradshaw.

Decision

22. The appeals of the second, third, fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  appellants
are all abandoned.

23. In relation to the first  appellant,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is tainted by material errors of law.

24. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  12  January  2017.  The
first appellant's appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 4 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



