
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00962/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2013                               |On 19 July 2013              |
|Prepared on 12 July 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 BEKHIM HOTI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Hoti):   Mr M Saleem, Solicitor, of Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens. For ease of reference, I  shall  refer
    to Mr Hoti, who was the original appellant, as "the  claimant"  and  to
    the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original  respondent,  as  "the
    Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant, who was born on 12 October 1969, is a citizen of  Kosovo.
    His immigration history is set out in the determination of Judge  Owens
    being appealed against and is as follows.  He arrived in the UK  on  28
    November 1997.  He was subsequently removed to Germany on  19  November
    1998 under the Dublin Agreement and returned  to  Kosovo  for  a  short
    period before returning to the UK on 4 July 1999.  He claimed asylum at
    port on the same day.

 3. Subsequently, the  claimant  submitted  a  "legacy  application"  on  5
    February 2008.  Then, following various letters before action, the last
    of which was on 4 October 2011, the claimant lodged an application  for
    judicial review in respect  of  the  delay  in  processing  his  legacy
    application in November 2011.  As a result of  these  proceedings,  the
    Secretary of State  agreed  to  make  a  decision  in  respect  of  the
    claimant.  He was interviewed in respect of his claim  for  asylum  but
    this claim was rejected on 16 January 2013.   The  Secretary  of  State
    also on that date refused the claimant leave to enter the  UK,  thereby
    generating a right of appeal.

 4. The claimant appealed against this decision and his  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  16
    April 2013.  At the outset of the hearing the claimant's representative
    confirmed that the claimant would not be pursuing his appeal on  asylum
    or humanitarian protection grounds and nor would he be seeking to argue
    that it would be a breach of Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR to remove  him
    to  Kosovo.   As  recorded  by  Judge  Owens  at  paragraph  7  of  his
    determination, the issue before the Tribunal was whether  the  claimant
    should be granted leave in  accordance  with  Rule  276ADE(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules or whether  his removal as a result of  the  decision
    under appeal would be in breach of his protected rights  under  Article
    8.  Although Judge Owens has made reference to paragraph 276ADE(iv)  of
    the  Rules,  it  is  clear  from  the  determination  that  this  is  a
    typographical error and that the relevant  sub-paragraph which  he  was
    considering was paragraph 276ADE (vi).

 5. Judge Owens allowed the claimant's appeal both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and also under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR, although it  appears
    from the determination as a whole that the  reference  to  paragraph  3
    must also have been a mistake.

 6. The Secretary of State now appeals against this decision, with leave.

 7. Before me, on behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Avery accepted  that
    there were a number of complications in this  appeal.   The  first  was
    that part of the basis of the grounds  was  that  the  refusal  letter,
    contrary to what Judge Owens found, had dealt with  the  issue  of  the
    legacy policy, whereas in fact the refusal letter which was before  the
    judge had not.  On investigation, Mr Avery had  discovered  that  there
    were in fact two refusal letters, one  of  which  had  dealt  with  the
    legacy policy but the other, the one which had been before  the  judge,
    had not.  It was clear that the Presenting Officer had had the  one  in
    which the reference was made while the judge had had the other one.  Mr
    Avery was not able to say which of the  refusal  letters  was  actually
    served on the claimant.

 8.  A more serious difficulty was that it was accepted that  at  paragraph
    45 of his determination, Judge Owens had given his reasons for allowing
    the appeal under the Rules.  This part of the  decision  had  not  been
    appealed.

Discussion

 9.  I set out the relevant parts of paragraphs 44 and 45 of  Judge  Owens'
    determination as follows:

         "Immigration Rule 276ADE

         44.  I turn to Immigration Rule 276ADE.  It  is  accepted  by  both
             parties that the [claimant] cannot satisfy the requirements of
             276ADE(iii) since he has not resided here for twenty years.  I
             have considered whether the [claimant] meets the  requirements
             of 276ADE(vi).  I find that the [claimant] has been living  in
             the UK for almost fourteen years.  I accept his evidence  that
             he left Kosovo in 1993 when he was 24 years old as a result of
             the war in the region and that he only returned there  briefly
             for a period in 1997.  He is now 43 years old.  I accept  that
             he has no family in Kosovo.  I find that he is not in  contact
             with anyone in Kosovo and after such a long period  away  from
             his country at a time when the region  went  through  so  much
             upheaval, I accept that he does not have friends  or  contacts
             there.  I find that he has not [got] property there.

         45.  I also give weight to the fact that his brother,  even  though
             he had had indefinite leave to remain in the UK since 2010 had
             not returned to Kosovo and that he has  changed  his  name  to
             Steven  MacClarence  which  indicates  his  integration   into
             British society. The [claimant] similarly is  integrated  into
             British society. The [claimant]  speaks  fluent  English.  His
             friends are from a variety of nationalities. He does speak his
             native language, however, this is likely to be  the  case  for
             anyone who  was  born  and  brought  up  in  another  country.
             However on  all  balance,  having  considered  his  individual
             circumstances I accept that  he  does  not  have  any  social,
             cultural or family ties to Kosovo. I find that  he  meets  the
             requirement of Rule 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules."

10. As indicated above, the reference to paragraph 276ADE(iv) in  paragraph
    45 should be to paragraph 276ADE(vi) as it was in paragraph 44.  It  is
    apparent  that  this  is  the  sub-paragraph  which  Judge  Owens   was
    considering.

11. The provisions of paragraph 276ADE(vi) are as follows:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE.  The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
             remain on the grounds of private life. in the UK are  that  at
             the date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of  [various  grounds
                  are set out which do not apply to this claimant]; and

             (ii)     has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                  the grounds of private life in the UK; and  ...  [one  of]
                  ...

             (vi)     is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in
                  the UK for less than twenty years (discounting any  period
                  of  imprisonment)  but  has  no  ties  (including  social,
                  cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he  would
                  have to go if required to leave the UK."

12. As accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State,  Judge  Owens  made  a
    finding that this claimant was  entitled  to  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and this finding has not been appealed.  It follows,  in  my
    judgment, that any errors of law in Judge Owens'  determination  cannot
    be material, as there has been no challenge to  the  decision  allowing
    the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

13. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Decision

14. There being no material error of law in the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Owens, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.





Signed:                                 Date: 17 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

