
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00680/2015
                                                               AA/00681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 28 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   A S A A
                                   m w a j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Grubb, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants are nationals of Iraq.  Their applications for asylum  and
   humanitarian protection were refused by the  Respondent  on  11  December
   2014. They appealed against the decision to refuse them  leave  to  enter
   under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the
   2002 Act).  Their appeals were dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Trevaskis in a decision promulgated  on  19  January  2016.  They  sought
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was granted on 22  March
   2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson.


2. The grounds seeking permission to appeal are  that  the  Judge  erred  by
   failing to consider the  personal  risk  to  the  Appellants,  given  the
   increased  sectarian  violence  in  Baghdad  after  June  2014,  and,  in
   particular, his finding at [70] that the Appellant would be perceived  to
   be a Sunni Muslim; that the Judge erred by relying solely on the  country
   guidance cases of AA (Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015], particularly as  the
   first Appellant was not relying on a  fear  of  indiscriminate  violence;
   that the Judge erred in finding that the  Appellants  could  relocate  to
   southern Iraq despite his findings that  the  first  Appellant  would  be
   perceived to be a Sunni Muslim. Further, the grounds relied on the CIG on
   Iraq (April  2015)  which  states  that  the  Southern  governorates  are
   predominately populated by Shia Arabs and the OGN reissued in August 2014
   which states that it is "not reasonable due to latent or  overt  tensions
   between ethnic or religious groups to consider relocation  of  Sunnis  to
   predominately Shi'ite  areas".  In  granting  permission,  Judge  Simpson
   considered that it was arguable that the Judge's findings  were  at  odds
   with  his  subsequent  assessment  of  risk  on   relocation   and   that
   insufficient weight had been given  to  the  first  Appellant's  personal
   circumstances. It was, he considered, also arguable that the Judge made a
   material error of fact when mistakenly assuming that the Appellants still
   had family members living in Baghdad.


   The Rule 24 Response


3. The Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal.  The  Respondent  submits
   that in AA the risk to Sunni Muslims was considered at paragraph 136  and
   it  was  stated  there  "It  is  rightly  suggested  that  the   evidence
   demonstrates that there is a real risk of Article  15  (c)  harm  arising
   solely because a person is a Sunni or Shia civilian in Baghdad and we, in
   any event, conclude that it does not."

4. It is further  submitted  that  the  evidence  relied  on  pre-dates  the
   promulgation of AA and is insufficient  to  warrant  departure  from  the
   current country guidance. It is  submitted  that  the  Judge  would  have
   fallen into error had he failed to have regard to  the  country  guidance
   case as suggested by the Appellant. It is  submitted  that  the  historic
   evidence relied on in the grounds of  appeal  does  not  demonstrate  the
   "strong grounds and cogent evidence" envisaged by the Court of Appeal  in
   SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 required to justify a  departure  from  the
   country guidance case law.


   The Hearing

5. Ms Grubb relied on the grounds of appeal  and  skeleton  argument.  There
   was a failure by the First-tier Tribunal to consider a personal  risk  to
   the first Appellant there having  been  findings  that  he  was  a  Sunni
   Muslim. His case was that there were specific risk to him in the light of
   his personal circumstances. There were two further points in relation  to
   mistakes of fact. The finding had been made that he was a  Sunni  Muslim.
   It was clear from the country guidance that Baghdad  was  80%  Shia.  The
   case was remitted on the last occasion. If I  was  minded  to  allow  the
   appeal it needed to be remitted again.

6. Ms Grubb added that there were  two  significant  mistakes  of  fact  the
   first being the finding at paragraph 77 of the judgement that related  to
   the question of internal relocation. It was stated  that  the  Appellants
   had family members in Iraq. That was not correct based on  the  evidence.
   The initial evidence was recorded at paragraph 13 where  essentially  the
   evidence was the family members were scattered and  either  had  died  or
   were living in Turkey. The oral evidence at the hearing  was  that  there
   was no family in Baghdad. More  significantly  at  paragraph  69  of  the
   determination there was a finding which infected the decision of a whole.
   In AA there were a number  of  paragraphs  providing  relevant  extracts.
   Baghdad was one of the most dangerous cities on earth.   In  relation  to
   those perceived as Sunnis paragraph 33  of  AA  dealt  with  the  Amnesty
   International report and cited relevant quotations and paragraph  35  was
   also relevant. There were a number of extracts from  background  evidence
   in the grounds of appeal. That  mistake  of  fact  clearly  infected  the
   entire decision and tied in with the failure to  consider  personal  risk
   and the issue of relying solely on AA. The decision maker  should  assess
   individual characteristics. With regard to internal relocation one of the
   factors was whether  the  person  was  from  a  minority  community.  The
   Judgment went through the Appellant's evidence and rejected his  evidence
   as to what he had experienced but it did not go on to assess the risk  on
   the basis of the findings that had been made which was a  material  error
   of law. The need to consider personal risk  was  highlighted  in  updated
   country guidance.

7. Ground 2 set out a lot of different country  guidance  available  at  the
   material time. There was evidence in AA and other evidence in the bundle.
   In terms of the Respondent's reply, it did not deal with main  thrust  of
   grounds of appeal but dealt with the addition of further evidence.


8. Mr Richards submitted that the  decision  was  adequately  reasoned.  The
   Judge found the first Appellant not to be credible in  relation  to  what
   happened in the past and therefore looked at the situation in general and
   was entitled to rely on AA. The pieces of evidence mentioned  in  grounds
   to the Upper Tribunal which were asserted to amount to grounds or reasons
   for departing from AA as the Rule 24 response noted  were  evidence  that
   predated promulgation of AA which was 30 December  2015  a  short  period
   before this  appeal.  The  First-tier  Judge  was  justified  in  placing
   reliance upon AA and again, to rely on the R24  response,  AA  considered
   risk to Sunni  Muslims  and  the  Tribunal  commented  that  it  was  not
   suggested that there is a real risk of 15(c) harm arising. Clearly  there
   was  abundant  evidence  to  show  all  was  not  well  in  Baghdad   but
   circumstances had  not  reached  the  threshold  and  given  the  Judge's
   rejection of the first Appellant's account the Judge was  fully  entitled
   to dismiss the appeal. With regard to  internal  relocation,  whilst  the
   finding was attacked  in  the  grounds  what  the  Judge  was  doing  was
   considering that issue in the alternative. He found at paragraph 75  that
   the Appellants would not need to relocate within  Iraq  but  went  on  to
   consider whether  it  was  reasonable.  The  conclusion  he  reached  was
   adequately reasoned and immaterial given his finding that  there  was  no
   need for internal relocation. He asked me to find no  material  error  of
   law and this was a determination that should stand.


9. Ms Grubb submitted that  paragraph  136  of  AA  was  specifically  about
   Sunnis and it would  be  wrong  to  look  at  that  quote  in  isolation.
   Paragraph 69 of the decision also infected the  finding  on  credibility.
   Whether the account was externally consistent was a relevant factor.  The
   Judge did not have sufficient grasp of circumstances.


   Discussion and Findings

10. The first Appellant's account to be at risk of persecution in  Iraq  was
   based on two incidents. He claimed to fear the militia  groups  in  Iraq.
   The first  incident  allegedly  occurred  on  17  March  2014  when  Shia
   militants came to his place of work. The first Appellant stated that  two
   cars containing armed men in military uniforms came to the place where he
   worked looking for his two brothers-in-law. The first Appellant told them
   that they were not there but one of the uniformed men told him that  they
   knew he was lying and pushed him to the ground, kicked him in the stomach
   and back and told him that they knew where he lived and intended to  take
   him away, but changed their mind and told him that they would  come  back
   to him again. He then closed the business and left the house. After a few
   weeks he started to work as a taxi driver. He was walking home on 25 June
   2014 at 10.30pm when he was stopped by two men who got out of  their  car
   and asked him if he was "Ali" and threatened him at gunpoint telling  him
   to leave his home within 24 hours because they claimed that he was a Shia
   living in a Sunni area.


11. The First-tier Tribunal did not find that the first Appellant had  given
   a credible account. The grounds do not impugn the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   findings save for the finding that he had family in Iraq. The  First-tier
   Tribunal assessed the first Appellant's account and found  it  internally
   consistent [60]. However, he questioned why the second Appellant did  not
   give evidence given that she could  corroborate  aspects  of  the  first-
   Appellant's account.  However, he found that it was implausible that  the
   first Appellant would work as a taxi driver in the same  area  where  the
   first attack had taken place. He did not find it plausible that  even  if
   he needed to earn a  living  he  would  return  to  the  area  of  feared
   religious  persecution  which  was  described  as  a  hotbed  of  militia
   activity. He further found it implausible that he would receive a  threat
   after three months of working in the area without incident whilst walking
   home. He found the death certificate of his  brother-in-law  provided  no
   circumstances of his death or the perpetrator and provided no support for
   the first Appellant's claim. He also found that the "threatening  letter"
   was not reliable as it was unclear why it  was  not  sent  to  the  first
   Appellant when the militia knew where he lived and  the  first  Appellant
   had not explained why it suddenly came to be written after  such  a  long
   period without any trouble  particularly  when  he  had  encountered  the
   authors of the letter previously and received  no  more  than  a  beating
   before being released and not approached again. He also  found  that  the
   first Appellant's credibility was damaged by his failure to  produce  his
   passport or travel documents and inability to name  the  transit  airport
   which he visited.


12. The First-tier Tribunal then assessed the  Appellant's  account  against
   the background evidence from paragraphs 68 to 71 of the decision:

      "68. Consistency with country guidance - The first appellant seeks  to
      explain the sudden outbursts of sectarian interest in him by reference
      to  increased  violence,  both  discriminate  and  indiscriminate.  AA
      (Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) states:


        The degree of armed conflict in the remainder  of  Iraq  (including
        Baghdad City) is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to  indiscriminate
        violence amounting to such serious harm to civilians,  irrespective
        of their individual characteristics, so as  to  engage  Article  15
        (c).


      69.   The claims of discriminate or  indiscriminate  violence  against
      the first appellant are not supported by the country guidance.


      70.   Consistency with background information -  the  first  appellant
      claims he came from Al  Adhamiya;  this  forms  part  of  the  Baghdad
      governorate; Baghdad is 80% Shia; Al Adhamiya contains a  small  Sunni
      enclave. The first appellant says that he is not  religious,  and  his
      family name is Sunni; his claim to be perceived as  Shia,  based  upon
      his first name Ali,  is  implausible,  as  is  his  account  of  being
      threatened by Sunni  militants.  He  claims  to  have  experienced  no
      problems with either sect until March  2014,  and  to  have  left  the
      country in September 2014. I consider that he is likely to be regarded
      as Sunni, based upon his identity card.


      71.    There  is  background  information  of  killings  taking  place
      throughout Baghdad; the first appellant claims to have had 2 non-fatal
      encounters with 2 opposing militant sects; despite  claiming  to  have
      been made the subject of a documented fatwa, he was able to remain  in
      Iraq, both in and  outside  Baghdad,  before  deciding  to  leave.  He
      undertook  taxi  driving,  which  must  be  regarded  as  a  hazardous
      occupation for a person who claims to be of active interest  to  armed
      militants, and I do not find it plausible that he would have done this
      in the circumstances he alleges, simply to earn money.

13.  Had the First-tier Tribunal rejected the first Appellant's  account  to
   have been at risk of persecution from sectarian  militia  solely  on  the
   basis that it was not supported by the country guidance  in  relation  to
   Article 15 (c) risk that would have  been  an  error  of  law  since  the
   section he quoted relates to  the  risk  of  serious  harm  to  civilians
   irrespective of their individual characteristics.  However, it  is  clear
   that he did not.  It is of note that the First-tier Tribunal recorded  at
   paragraph 31 that he was not referred specifically to  any  part  of  the
   country evidence in  the  Appellant's  bundle.  The  Appellants  rely  on
   information provided by the House  of  Commons  Research  paper  entitled
   "Isis and the sectarian conflict in the Middle  East  (March  2015)"  and
   asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to comprehend  the  situation
   in Iraq in relation to a sectarian war between Sunni and Shi'ite Muslims,
   and wrongly determined the Appellants' claim. This evidence  was  not  in
   the Appellants' bundle nor on is it on the  Court  file.  The  Appellants
   therefore seek to impugn the First-tier Tribunal's findings by  reference
   to material that was not before it. There is also  no  reference  to  any
   background material  in  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.   Ms Grubb also did not refer me to any background evidence  in
   the Appellants' bundle that it is said that the Judge should have but did
   not have regard to.


14. The First-tier Tribunal set out the reports that he  was  provided  with
   by the Appellants at paragraph 31 of the decision and states that he  has
   regard to the  contents  in  arriving  at  his  decision.  That  evidence
   described the sectarian tensions and the threat to the Sunni  in  Baghdad
   from the Shia  militias.  The  Judge  notes  at  paragraph  71  that  the
   background evidence supports the claim that  there  are  killings  taking
   place throughout Baghdad. He was clearly aware that the  Sunnis  were  in
   the minority in Baghdad. He did not reject the first Appellant's claim on
   the grounds that it was not plausible  that  he  could  be  a  victim  of
   sectarian  or  religiously  motivated  attacks.   He   gave   clear   and
   sustainable reasons in paragraphs 60 to 67 and 71, however,  for  finding
   that the first Appellant's claim to be subject to such  attacks  was  not
   credible.  Those  findings  were  based  on  the  inconsistency  of   the
   Appellant's behaviour and account with his claimed  fear  of  persecution
   and were open to him on the evidence.


15. It is also clear, as set out by the Respondent in the Rule 24  response,
   that the Upper Tribunal in AA considered  background  evidence  over  the
   period in which the alleged attacks took place. Ms Grubb referred  me  to
   paragraph 33 where the contents of an Amnesty International report  dated
   14 May 2015 were referred to which stated that "Baghdad city continues to
   be one  of  the  most  dangerous  cities  on  earth,  with  mass-casualty
   terrorist incidents perpetrated both by IS supporters and armed militias,
   as well as kidnappings and murders by such militias against Sunnis, other
   minority groups and those perceived as likely to be worth ransom  money".




16. The Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  addressed  the  risk  in  Baghdad  City  at
   paragraph 118 of the decision. At paragraph 136 the Upper Tribunal stated
   that there was "rightly no suggestion that the evidence demonstrates that
   there is a real risk of Article 15 (c)  harm  arising  solely  because  a
   person is a Sunni or Shia civilian in  Baghdad  and  we,  in  any  event,
   conclude that it does not." The hearing in AA took place in May  2015,  a
   year after the alleged events described by the first  Appellant  and  the
   Tribunal heard expert evidence in relation to the abduction  and  killing
   of Sunni civilian men (paragraph 124). Whilst it  does  not  follow  from
   this conclusion that a Sunni civilian could not  be  persecuted  by  Shia
   militia it does follow that Sunni civilians cannot be said on  the  basis
   of the country guidance to be persecuted per se.


17.  For the above reasons, I find the First-tier Tribunal did not  fail  to
   consider the threat of persecution to the first Appellant in light of his
   personal circumstances and  the  change  in  the  security  situation  in
   Baghdad following the emergence of ISIL. He demonstrably apprehended  his
   personal circumstances and the background evidence and  gave  sustainable
   reasons for finding his account not to be credible. I therefore find that
   his findings in relation to the Appellant's credibility stand. It is  not
   claimed by the first Appellant that he would be at risk on return  solely
   by virtue of being a Sunni civilian in Baghdad and  the  evidence  before
   the First-tier Tribunal did not support such a finding.


18. The remaining grounds relate to the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in
   respect of internal relocation. Since I have  found  that  there  was  no
   error of law in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  regarding
   the first Appellant's fear of persecution in his home area, any error  in
   his findings in relation to internal relocation could not be material. It
   is clear from paragraph 75 that the First-tier Tribunal took a  belt  and
   braces approach to the evidence as he did not need to  determine  whether
   it was reasonable for the Appellants to relocate. The grounds assert that
   the First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellants could relocate  to  the
   south of Iraq and that they had family members in Baghdad.  However,  the
   First-tier Tribunal neither found that they could  relocate  to  Baghdad,
   the Appellants' home area, where he had already determined there  was  no
   fear of persecution, nor that they could relocate to  Southern  Iraq  nor
   did he find that the Appellants had family in Baghdad. He found they  had
   family in Iraq which accorded with the evidence recorded at paragraph 13.
   Further, the evidence relied on in paragraph 11 of the grounds in support
   of the contention that the Appellants could not relocate to the  southern
   areas of Iraq was not in the Appellants' bundle nor was the argument made
   either in submissions or in the skeleton argument. Paragraph  53  of  the
   decision specifically records the Appellants' representative's submission
   that if the Appellants' intended to relocate to the south the risk  would
   be entering through Baghdad.   I therefore find that there was  no  error
   of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue that order (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008). Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted
anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
identify them or any member of their family.  This direction applies both
to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray             28 September 2016




