
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00392/2015
     AA/00394/2015
     AA/00398/2015
     AA/00399/2015
     AA/00395/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 June 2016                       |On 29 July 2016                       |
|Prepared 27 June 2016                 |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     S H
                                   S M A S
                                    S W S
                                   S A A S
                                   S T A S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Dieu, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of Pakistan, appealed against  the  Secretary
    of State's decisions refusing  to  vary  leave  to  remain  and  making
    removal directions under Section 47 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 dated 12 December 2014.

2.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Knowles, who on  or
    about 10 October 2015 promulgated his decision.  The  principal  ground
    upon which permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Reid addressed whether or not the judge had properly assessed the  best
    interests of the children the second to fifth Appellants,  and  whether
    there was sufficient or adequate reasoning to indicate that Section  55
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2007 had been addressed.

3.   A subsidiary issue, but one of the principal issues at the time of  the
    hearing before the judge, was the extent to which the first  Appellant,
    the mother of the other Appellants had  been  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence and whether or not that was properly rejected by the judge. In
    the circumstances Mr Dieu has sensibly not pursued that as a ground  of
    challenge but has turned principally to the  judge's  decision  [D  80]
    wherein the assessment of the position on  return for the children
4.   Mr Dieu rightly reminded me of the  considerations  identified  by  the
    Tribunal in MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT  475  (IAC)
    which of course iterates upon the decision in ZH (Tanzania)  [reference
    to be added].

5.   It is clear that the exercise of considering  best  interests  requires
    an assessment of the children's position in the context of  each  child
    so far as there is any material difference.

6.   In making the overall assessment of the best interests of the  children
    it  is  clear  that  it  too  must  feature  in   the   assessment   of
    proportionality.

7.   The judge [D  80]  said  as  follows,  having  rejected  a  claim  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules:

         "I am not satisfied that the first Appellant would  face  any  very
         significant obstacles to her reintegrating into Pakistan, where she
         has the support of, at  least,  her  siblings.   Nor,  for  similar
         reasons, do I consider that it would be unreasonable to expect  the
         second, third, fourth and fifth Appellants to  leave  the  UK.   In
         particular, I am not satisfied that their best interests  would  be
         severely compromised by returning to their own country  where  they
         have extended family members and where, in particular, they may  be
         reunited with their father, of whom,  on  the  evidence,  they  are
         clearly fond.  While the second Appellant has lived in the  UK  for
         some six years, he has also lived in Pakistan for  the  first  four
         years of his life.  The third and fourth  Appellants  are  probably
         less familiar with life in  Pakistan,  while  the  fifth  Appellant
         knows no country but the UK.  In my view, however, all the children
         are old enough to be able to adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan  without
         serious harm to  their  educational  and  other  aspects  of  their
         development.  I am not  satisfied  that  the  Appellants  have  any
         further claim under Article 8 on the basis of their  private  life.
         To my mind, all the issues relevant to this case are covered by the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  There is no  evidence  that  the
         first Appellant's depression is so debilitating as  to  render  her
         return to Pakistan a violation of her rights under Article 8.   Nor
         am I satisfied that the second, third, fourth and fifth  Appellants
         are particularly vulnerable for health or other reasons.  I find no
         violation of Article 8."


8.   In fairness Mr Dieu has properly  drawn  my  attention  to  generalised
    comments made by an independent social worker called on behalf  of  the
    first Appellant and the Appellants as a whole  who  opines  as  to  the
    implications of  return  but  who  perhaps  unfortunately  strays  from
    expressing views and into making findings that  domestic  violence  had
    taken place between the first Appellant and her husband.  Secondly  she
    forms a view that it is not in the best interests of  the  children  to
    return to live in Pakistan.   She  also  notes  in  general  terms  the
    children's wish to remain in the UK and quite obviously where they  are
    in  schooling,  have  friends  and  therefore  have   anxieties   about
    relocation and its consequences for them.

9.   It is only open to me to interfere  with  the  decision  if  there  are
    inadequate or insufficient reasons so as to amount to an error of  law,
    see R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and E & R [2004] QB 1044 (CA).  Simply
    because I might have reached a different decision that is not a  proper
    basis to interfere and the fact that  I  might  have  expressed  myself
    differently is similarly not a basis of itself to  interfere  with  the
    judge's decision.

10.  It is clear that  submissions  were  made  about  the  children's  best
    interests and for example as noted [D 52]  but  it  seemed  to  me  the
    principal focus, looking at the judge's decision, was the core claim by
    the  first  Appellant  of  the  risk  she  faced  on  return  and   the
    implications for her of returning to Pakistan.  Nevertheless, whilst  I
    agree with Mr Dieu that there are aspects which  are  not  specifically
    referred to, I find the broad and thorough approach the judge  took  to
    the evidence, which was not  otherwise  addressed  in  the  grounds  as
    representing  a  superficial  or  less  than  informed  approach,   was
    sufficient to show that the  best  interests  were  considered  by  the
    judge.  It might be better if the judge had specifically made reference
    to their individual wishes but of itself I do not find that  were  this
    matter to be  put  before  another  Tribunal  on  the  same  basis  any
    different outcome  is  likely  to  have  been  forthcoming.   In  those
    circumstances I do not find that the absence of  express  reference  as
    claimed is an indicator that there has been a material error of law  in
    the judge's assessment of the best interests of the children.

11.  It is more than obvious that in most cases the best  interests  of  the
    children are going to feature, given the fact-specific basis  remaining
    in the UK in many cases but I find nothing about their presence in  the
    UK that indicated that the judge has failed to consider  an  aspect  of
    any of the child Appellants' position for the purposes  of  determining
    the appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The  Original  Tribunal  made  no  material  error  of  law.   The  Original
Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

An anonymity order was previously  made  and  because  of  the  presence  of
children I am satisfied that it is appropriate  that  that  anonymity  order
should be continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.






Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

