
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00997/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Determination Promulgated|
|On  7 December 2015                          |     On 2 February 2016       |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Emma King, Counsel, instructed by Dean Manson
Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on  9  January  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Pakistan.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1978. He  first  entered
    the UK on 18 March 2013 having been issued with a visit visa  following
    a successful appeal. He returned to Pakistan on 18 April 2013.  He  re-
    entered the UK on 27 June 2013 and claimed asylum at the airport.

 4. The appellant claims that  he  is  Ahmadi,  has  suffered  problems  in
    Pakistan since before 2008, and after he returned to  Pakistan  he  was
    threatened and beaten and left nearly for dead by people after  two  of
    his co-workers considered converting as a result of conversations  with
    him. After that he received written threats and the  police  would  not
    protect him,  instead  threatening  him  not  to  preach  and  to  stop
    following  the  Ahmadi  religion.  His  family  home  was  subsequently
    attacked and the president of the local  Jamat  advised  him  to  leave
    Pakistan.

 5. The appellant further claims that since arrival in the UK, he has  been
    actively participating  in  Ahmadiyya  activities  including  preaching
    programmes, peace conferences, the annual  charity  walk  and  security
    duties at the local prayer centre. He openly refers to the  founder  of
    the Ahmadi faith as a prophet. He  does  not  wish  to  compromise  his
    religious identity anymore and live like a hypocrite.

 6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was Ahmadi or that  he
    was at risk of persecution due to his beliefs.  His  asylum  claim  was
    therefore refused.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Birmingham on 9 March 2015.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    weight of the evidence (including letters  from  the  AMA  in  the  UK)
    established that the appellant was an Ahmadi but rejected his claim  to
    have actively preached to thousands of people in Pakistan, around  five
    per day. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  arranged  for  his
    passport not to identify him as an Ahmadi because he did not  want  any
    adverse attention and  it  was  of  no  particular  importance  to  his
    religious identity  to  practise  and  manifest  his  faith  openly  in
    Pakistan. The pictures of the  appellant  standing  on  the  street  in
    Peterborough holding books or standing by a stall at an Ahmadi  meeting
    did not  establish  that  he  did  proselytise  in  the  UK.  His  past
    activities in Pakistan did not show any  inclination  to  practise  his
    faith openly and certainly not in anything other  than  the  restricted
    basis described at paragraph 2(ii) of the headnote  of  MN  and  others
    (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389;
    "It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis to  practise
    their faith on a restricted basis either in  private  or  in  community
    with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic Pakistan law". He would
    not need to modify his behaviour to avoid persecution.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 22 April 2015 on the basis
    that the judge failed to contemplate the uncontested evidence that  the
    appellant referred to himself as  a  Muslim  on  his  passport  thereby
    committing a criminal offence under 298C of the penal code,  failed  to
    consider the relevant evidence submitted by the appellant and  the  AMA
    in relation to his UK  preaching  activities  and  failed  to  consider
    whether as a consequence of his enjoyment of his faith in  the  UK  the
    threat of persecution would be a material factor (not the only  factor)
    in his behaviour on return.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on  14
    July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in
    law, having put weight on the letter from  the  AMA  dated  20  January
    2015,  in  not  taking  into  account  what  the  AMA  said  about  the
    appellant's preaching activities in the UK.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 19 August 2015, the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the judge's finding  that
    the appellant had not proselytised in Pakistan was open to him  on  the
    evidence before him. Adequate reasons were given.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Ms King submitted that the judge did not fully complete the  task.  The
    appellant identified himself as a Muslim when  he  was  really  Ahmadi;
    that is an offence and was not considered by the judge.  The  documents
    before the judge (pages 18-35 of the appellant's bundle) were not dealt
    with in terms of how the appellant presents himself in relation to  his
    faith. Paragraph 35 of the decision is  not  adequate.  Once  a  proper
    assessment had been carried out then it would only  be  at  that  stage
    that the judge could assess whether there had been  a  relevant  change
    that would cause a risk on return. Looking at how someone did behave in
    the past does not go through all of the required steps.

13. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge found that the  appellant
    was still an Ahmadi. He came to the UK on  the  same  passport  as  his
    previous trip and returned on that  passport  with  no  issues  at  the
    airport. That point was not taken before the judge and does not  affect
    the material outcome of the appeal. There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant proselytised in Pakistan before coming  to  the  UK  and  the
    judge did engage with this element of the claim. A  lot  needed  to  be
    said about how the author of the AMA letter came  by  the  information.
    The letter appears to be based upon  information  from  the  appellant.
    There was a lack of specificity in the letter about whom the  appellant
    was preaching to. The letters contained nothing to  assist  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The judge considered all that was necessary and did  not
    need to continually repeat all of the evidence that was before him. The
    conclusions cover all of  the  evidence.  The  letters  do  not  assist
    because there is no indication as to how the reported  activities  have
    been verified. The judge did refer to the AMA letters at paragraphs  39
    and 27 and in submissions at paragraphs 18-21. The AMA should  be  able
    to  explain  the  source  of  the  information  given  in  the  letters
    (paragraph 44 of AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK letters) Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00511 (IAC) ).

14. Ms King submitted in reply that the judge did not make a finding as  to
    the extent of the appellant's activities in the UK. The judge did  give
    weight to the AMA letters but then  did  not  go  on  to  consider  the
    contents of the letters relating to activities in the UK.  The  absence
    of a finding about that part  of  the  letters  displays  the  want  of
    reasoning.

15. I have considered the evidence that appears at paragraphs 18-35 of  the
    appellant's bundle that was before the judge. There is substantial  and
    specific information in relation to the appellant's  Ahmadi  activities
    in the UK. Paragraph 44 of AB does state that; "In a case such  as  the
    present where credibility is a  significant  issue,  the  more  that  a
    letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  UK  as  to  an  individual's
    activities here can be  supported  by  specific  information  the  more
    likely they are to be given significant weight.  We  would  expect  the
    Association to  be  in  a  position  to  explain  the  source  of  such
    information contained in the letter, how the source is able to speak to
    such matters and what records are kept of the activities referred to in
    the letter". However, in order to assess the weight to be given to  the
    letters it was necessary for the judge to  refer  to  the  evidence  in
    appropriate detail.

16. That was not done. At paragraph 35 of the decision, the judge  referred
    to photographs of the appellant  but  made  no  reference  to  the  AMA
    letters. I am satisfied that the judge  failed  to  consider  and  make
    findings in relation to all of the relevant evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's claimed Ahmadi activities in the UK. That  is  particularly
    significant because the judge placed weight upon  the  AMA  letters  at
    paragraph 27 of the decision and made no criticism of their  evidential
    value or probity. I am satisfied that the failure to consider  relevant
    evidence is a material error of law which infects  the  decision  as  a
    whole.

17. I have not found it necessary to make findings on the other grounds  of
    appeal. They are matters which can  be  argued  at  the  rehearing.  In
    particular, ground one was not argued before the judge at all and  will
    be a new issue to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I have also seen a bundle of First-tier decisions submitted  on  behalf
    of the appellant on 26 May 2015. They are said to be  relevant  because
    he is from District Kotli, Azad Kashmir as were the targeted Ahmadis in
    those cases. It is said  that  no  Ahmadi  case  from  Kotli  has  ever
    previously reached the Upper Tribunal. I have not found it necessary to
    consider those decisions but they can be submitted at the rehearing for
    consideration by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

20. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de novo  (save
    as mentioned below) with all issues to be considered again by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

21. I preserve the finding at paragraph 28 of the decision that the  weight
    of the evidence now establishes  that  the  appellant  genuinely  is  a
    follower of the Ahmadi faith.

22. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.






Signed   [pic]                      Date 31 January 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


