
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00757/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|On 7 August 2013                              |On 24 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         YASSIN BAKI MOHAMMED RAHIM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Forrest, Counsel, for Latta & Co Solicitors
Glasgow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  however,
    for convenience in the following determination I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 16 January  2013  refusing
    to grant him  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  His appeal was dismissed by Judge Watters in a  determination
    promulgated on 6 March 2013.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 18 April 2013.



 3. The appellant's parents, five brothers and one sister  live  in  Arbat,
    Iraq.  His brother, Hassan, died in a car  accident  in  2010  and  the
    appellant claims to have entered a sexual  relationship  with  Hassan's
    widow.  This affair was carried on in secret, but in October 2012,  the
    appellant invited his late brother's widow into the family home as  no-
    one else was there at the time.  They went in to  the  appellant's  old
    bedroom, did not close the door and  the  appellant's  younger  brother
    returned home and saw them semi-naked  and  hugging  each  other.   His
    brother told  his  father,  who,  in  turn,  told  his  sister-in-law's
    parents.  The sister-in-law was beaten and locked up and, a short while
    later, she set herself on  fire  and  died.   A  tribal  agreement  was
    reached between the appellant's family and his sister-in-law's  family,
    to search for the appellant and kill him.  The appellant fled.

The Hearing

 4. Mr Forrest, for the appellant, submitted that the judge  had  erred  in
    law by not believing that there had been a sexual  affair  between  the
    appellant and his sister-in-law.  At paragraph 16 of the determination,
    the judge commented that "it simply beggars belief that  the  appellant
    would have put his life at risk by undertaking a sexual liaison in  the
    family home."  Mr Forrest submitted that, in the field of human  sexual
    activity, extremely unlikely things do happen and it was  not  open  to
    the judge to make this finding.  Relying on Hamden [2006] CSIH  57,  he
    submitted that, if the main reason a judge does not believe  something,
    is flawed, other reasons for his decision are likely to be coloured  by
    this. He submitted that this finding infected with error  the  core  of
    the judge's findings.  Mr Forrest acknowledged that an  illicit  affair
    in Iraq can have serious consequences for an individual because of  the
    tribal nature of the society  and  the  fear  of  honour  killings  but
    nonetheless significant numbers  of  people  there  still  had  illicit
    affairs.

 5. Mr Forrest also referred us to AJ Afghanistan [2009] UKAIT  00001.   In
    that case, the appellant was a homosexual man who was  warned  that  he
    could face a death sentence if he continued a homosexual  relationship.
    Despite this the affair continued  and  the  appellant's  parents  were
    asked to hand the appellant over to the Taliban.  They had refused  and
    had been killed. Mr Forrest submitted  that  the  facts  in  that  case
    illustrated how unsafe it may be to make  assumptions  regarding  human
    sexual behaviour.  He also cited HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037; the Court  of
    Appeal had noted that "in many asylum cases  some,  even  most  of  the
    appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely, but that does not  mean
    that it is untrue".  Mr Forrest submitted that  what  happens  in  Iraq
    should not be judged by Western standards of morality or behaviour. The
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as a consequence of  adopting  the
    wrong approach to the evidence.


 6. Mr Forrest also submitted that the judge had erred by failing  to  have
    proper regard for the opinions of the expert psychiatric  report.   The
    judge  refers  to  this  report  at  paragraphs  14  and  20   of   the
    determination but it was not clear why he had attached  limited  weight
    to it.

 7. We suggested to Mr Forrest that it could be said  that,  at  paragraphs
    17, 18 and 19, the judge had given  other  discrete  reasons  separable
    from those at paragraph 16, for not believing the  appellant's  account
    and that paragraphs 18 and 19 may not be coloured  by  the  finding  at
    paragraph 16  as  they  relate  to  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence about his mother and whether she is deceased or not, what  her
    name is and also Section 8 issues raised by the respondent.  Mr Forrest
    submitted that those findings were not sufficient alone to support  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility.

 8. We also asked Mr Forrest to comment on the proposition that, whilst  it
    may be true that people may  take  risks  in  order  to  obtain  sexual
    gratification regardless of the possible  penalties,  it  was  arguably
    open to the  judge  to  have  found  it  incredible  that  this  sexual
    encounter had taken place "in the family home."  Mr  Forrest  submitted
    that the judge should not have  assessed  the  appellant's  conduct  by
    inappropriate standards.


 9. Mr Mullen asked us to note that the appellant's evidence  was  that  he
    had moved away from his family home a long time before the  affair  had
    taken place and yet he had gone to the family home, where three of  his
    family members still lived, to have an illicit  sexual  encounter.   He
    submitted that the appellant would have been aware  that  one  or  more
    members of the family could have returned at any time.   This  went  to
    the core of the appellant's account.  The  judge  was  aware  that  the
    appellant had his own  house.   The  appellant  knew  that  his  family
    members were likely to come home at any time yet he took no precautions
    to avoid discovery and did not even close the door  to  the  room.   Mr
    Mullen submitted that it is true that people do ridiculous things  when
    indulging in illicit sexual relationships but this does  not  undermine
    the judge's finding.  Further, the judge had taken other  factors  into
    account in dismissing the appellant's account as credible.  He did  not
    believe that the appellant would not have warned his sister-in-law when
    he found out that his father had been made aware of  the  relationship.
    There was also an inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to
    whether his mother at this time had been alive or dead.  (The appellant
    had subsequently explained this by claiming that he had been  referring
    to his stepmother). Mr Mullen submitted that these other findings  went
    to the core of the account and the judge had given cogent and  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility.

10. At paragraph 14, the judge summarises  the  psychiatric  report.   This
    states that the appellant drinks too much and  that  consumption  of  a
    bottle of whisky a day can affect someone's mental condition. The judge
    noted that the doctor's conclusions  are  based  on  the  documentation
    provided to  him,  the  history  provided  by  the  appellant  and  his
    observation and assessment of the appellant.  At paragraph 14 the judge
    made it clear that he intended to take the medical report into  account
    when assessing all the evidence in the round.


11. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no material error of law
    on either of the grounds.

12. We find that the judge gave proper consideration to the medical  report
    and this has been  taken  into  account  when  he  considered  all  the
    evidence in the round (see Mibanga (2005) EWCA Civ 367).  It  was  open
    to the judge to attach limited weight to a report which was based on an
    account of past  events  which  (having  assessed  the  evidence  as  a
    totality) the judge had found to be unreliable.


13. With regard to the credibility assessment as a whole, we find  that  it
    was open to the judge to find that  the  appellant's  account  was  not
    credible for the reasons he has given and which we  have  discussed  at
    length  above.  He  did  not,  as  the  appellant  submits,  test   the
    appellant's sexual conduct by inappropriate cultural standards. He  had
    the advantage of hearing the appellant give evidence and  his  findings
    (to which  he  was  able  to  bring  his  own  understanding  of  human
    behaviour) were not, in our opinion, perverse in any way. We find  that
    the grounds are, for the most part, little  more  than  a  disagreement
    with findings which  were  reasonably  open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
    evidence which was before it. Further, we agree with  Mr  Mullen  that,
    even if the judge was wrong to disbelieve the  appellant's  account  of
    the sexual encounter described at  paragraph  16,  he  had  other  good
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility and that the findings
    at paragraph 16 do not in any way "infect" the fact-finding  assessment
    as a  whole.  There  were  serious  inconsistencies  in  parts  of  the
    appellant's account and we find that the judge has given proper  weight
    to them; there is no  suggestion  that  the  judge  has  dismissed  the
    appellant's explanation of those inconsistencies  because  he  did  not
    believe his account of the alleged sexual encounter.  Finally,  he  has
    given appropriate weight to operation Section 8 of the  2008  Act.   In
    the circumstances, we find that the judge did not err in law such  that
    his determination falls to be set aside and this  appeal  is  dismissed
    accordingly.

                                  DECISION
14. This appeal is dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction has been made.




Signed                                  Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



