


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00353/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27  October 2014                           |On 5 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                             JUHENDRA NADARAJAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Ms S Akinbolu (of Counsel) instructed by Tamil Welfare
                  Association (Romford Road)

Respondent:   Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appeal to this Tribunal originates in the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 30 January 2013.  By the  terms  of  this  decision  the
    application of the Appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  now  aged  26
    years, for asylum  under  the  Refugee  Convention  was  refused.   The
    Secretary of State  further  determined  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    qualify for humanitarian protection.  Finally it was concluded that the
    dismissal of the application would not infringe any of the  Appellant's
    rights under the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") refused the Appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  In short it affirmed the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in every respect.  Permission to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  was
    granted on the basis that, inter alia, it was arguable that the FtT had
    erred in law in failing to consider the consequences of the Appellant's
    release from detention through  the payment  of  a  bribe.   The  other
    grounds of appeal, which related to specified findings  by  the  Judge,
    were also deemed arguable.

 3. The Appellant's case has been put with admirable clarity by Ms Akinbolu
    on his behalf.  Her submissions point to  two  key  factual  issues  in
    respect whereof it is contended the  FtT  has  failed  to  grapple  the
    evidence and to make appropriate findings.  The first  relates  to  the
    evidence concerning  the  circumstances  of  and  explanation  for  the
    release of the Appellant from detention.  This places the spotlight  on
    [65]  of  the  determination.   This  contains  a  series  of  findings
    favourable to the Appellant, particularly that he was detained  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities and was beaten.  This is followed by a  somewhat
    abrupt and unexplained sentence in the following terms:

         "However, he was released because there  was  no  evidence  against
         him".

    The criticism of this passage is that the Judge has  failed  to  engage
    with the evidence as recorded in [18] of the  determination,  that  the
    Appellant was released furtively, under cover of darkness and because a
    bribe had been paid.  The FtT failed to  make  any  findings  on  these
    important issues.  I conclude that there is substance in this ground of
    appeal.   The  finding  in  question,  which  is  one  of  unmistakable
    importance, is vitiated on the basis  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.

 4. The second contention canvassed on behalf of the Appellant is that  the
    Judge has committed similar errors in relation to the issue  of  mobile
    phone communications.  This arises in the context  of  the  Appellant's
    asserted food transportation activities on behalf of the LTTE to  Tamil
    terrorists.   The Judge made a finding in  [65]  of  the  determination
    that the Appellant  was  not  involved  in  such  activities.  He  then
    provided a reason in the following terms:

         "The Sri Lankan Intelligence  Service  is  very  sophisticated  and
         would have intercepted mobile phone messages".


    It is argued  that  this  finding  is  irrational  because  it  had  no
    evidential foundation and has no basis in the Country Guidance judgment
    of GJ.  I accept this argument.  I consider that  there  is  a  further
    dimension to this.  On the face of the determination,  this  issue  was
    not ventilated at the hearing.  I conclude that,  in  consequence,  the
    hearing was unfair since the Appellant  should  have  been  giving  the
    opportunity to deal with this issue in his  evidence.    This  facility
    should have been afforded either in cross-examination or in questioning
    from the bench, or by both mechanisms.

 5. The third challenge to the determination of the FtT focuses on [58]  of
    the determination. The thrust of this challenge is  comparable  to  the
    first of the main grounds advanced on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant had provided an explanation for  apparently  inconsistent  or
    incorrect dates in three places, namely in two witness  statements  and
    in his evidence to the Tribunal.  Dr Cohen's evidence also  sounded  on
    this issue. None of  this  evidence  was  considered  in  [58]  of  the
    determination.  I consider that it was incumbent on the FtT to  address
    this evidence and to make specific findings of fact accordingly.  There
    was a failure to do so.  Once again this was  an  issue  of  unarguable
    importance, given its self-evident significance.

 6. I cannot accept the argument that these  errors  were  immaterial.   To
    accept that argument would require this Tribunal to conclude  that  the
    outcome would have been the same.  I cannot make that  conclusion  with
    the necessary degree of confidence.

 7. I also draw attention to the terms in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    expressed itself in  GJ.  I  find  nothing  in  the  relevant  category
    recognised in GJ which necessarily excludes  this  Appellant  from  the
    possibility of  qualifying  for  the  protection  of  asylum.  This  is
    emphasised in the terms  in  which  Lord  Justice  Underhill  expresses
    himself in [50] of the judgment in MP. A record of past  LTTE  activism
    does not as such constitute a risk factor for Tamil's returning to  Sri
    Lanka.  However, it is not necessarily excluded.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    considered  that  diaspora  activism,  actual  or  perceived,  is   the
    principal basis on which the government of Sri Lanka is likely to treat
    returning Tamils as posing a current or future threat, viz not the only
    or exclusive one.  He then goes on to say he does  not  read  paragraph
    3567(A)  of the GJ determination as prescribing that diaspora  activism
    is the only basis on which a  returning  Tamil  might  be  regarded  as
    posing such a threat and, thus, of being at risk on return.

 8. This resolves to the following conclusion, namely, if the errors of law
    which I have found in the determination of the FtT had been avoided the
    Tribunal, properly directing itself,  might  have  concluded  that  the
    Appellant belongs to one of the recognised risk categories acknowledged
    in GJ. I need to go no further than that by well established authority.


DECISION

 9. For these reasons I conclude that  the  determination  of  the  FtT  is
    vitiated by material errors of law and must be set aside accordingly.

10. Taking into account my finding of procedural unfairness,  I  remit  the
    case to a different constitution of the FtT for the purpose of remaking
    the decision on the Appellant's appeal.








                                            [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 30 October 2014
