
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00408/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th November 2016                 |On 14th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O R
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Mughal, Montague Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant's appeal against
    the refusal  of  his  protection  claim  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and allowed on human rights grounds in a decision dated 12th  September
    2016.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on  the  basis  that  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds was inconsistent with the judge's
    reasoning in the body of the decision. It was apparent that  the  judge
    meant to dismiss the appeal under Article 8 and it was  submitted  that
    the judge had not given any reasons as to  why  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.  The  grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  following  the   Vice
    Presidential guidance given in Katsonga  ("Slip  Rule";  FtT's  general
    powers) [2016] UKUT 228 the first head note of which  stated  that  the
    slip rule, Rule 31 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure  Rules,  cannot
    be used to reverse the effect of a decision.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett
    on the grounds that she was satisfied from reading  the  decision  that
    the judge intended to dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds  and
    not to allow it because he noted at paragraph 20 that the Appellant had
    not set out any basis for a human rights claim under Article 8.

4.   In submissions, Ms Mughal sought to challenge the judge's reasoning  in
    respect of the dismissal  of  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds. However, there was no cross-appeal and
    therefore there was no basis to challenge those findings before me.

5.   Mr Melvin submitted that it was quite clear that the judge had  made  a
    slip and since there was no slip rule to  rectify  the  situation,  the
    only thing to do was to set the decision aside and remake it.

Conclusions

6.   The judge made the following findings:

         "20. The Appellant has made a  claim  that  his  appeal  should  be
             allowed on the basis of his rights under Article  8.   Nowhere
             in the notice of appeal have the grounds set out the basis for
             that claim.  I note that the Appellant has only  been  in  the
             United Kingdom since 2013 and clearly cannot comply  with  any
             of the Immigration Rules as to his family or private life.


         21.  There is nothing exceptional presented  to  me  in  this  case
             which would lead me to conclude that  his  family  or  private
             life should be considered outside the Immigration Rules."

7.   I find that it is clear from those paragraphs that the  judge  intended
    to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds and he has clearly  made  an
    error under the heading "Notice of Decision" in stating, "The appeal is
    allowed on human rights grounds."

8.   Accordingly I set aside the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds and remake it.  The appeal is dismissed  on  human
    rights grounds.

Summary of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

