
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH/CH-PMP/SA-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00816/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st November 2016                 |On 29th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the Appellant in this determination identified  as  AS.   This
    direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.   Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

The background:

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who, in a decision promulgated  on  12th  May  2015
    dismissed the Appellant's claim for asylum or humanitarian  protection.
    Permission was granted to appeal that decision by Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge McGinty on 30th July 2015 and in a determination  promulgated  on
    26th May 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker found an error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3.  In  her  error  of  law  determination,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker
    considered the arguments advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  namely
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a material error of law  in
    failing to properly consider the expert report in determining that  the
    Appellant, as a Sunni Muslim Arab would not be at risk  of  persecution
    on return to Iraq.  At paragraph [7] of her  decision,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker made reference to the  expert  evidence  and  the  risk  on
    return as a Sunni Muslim.  She recorded that the expert  expressly  had
    considered this risk but that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    engage with this element of the Appellant's claim.   Consequently,  she
    was satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in  failing
    to have regard to material evidence and set aside the decision  insofar
    as the judge's findings that returning the Appellant (and his daughter)
    to Baghdad as a Sunni Muslim Arab would not place them at risk of being
    persecuted.  The judge also preserved the other findings that had  been
    made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  listed  the  hearing  as  a
    resumed hearing.

 4. As Judge Coker was unable to continue with the appeal, a transfer order
    was made and the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

 5. As set out in the preceding paragraphs, the  earlier  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was set aside on the issue of whether returning the
    Appellant and his daughter to Baghdad as a  Sunni  Muslim  Arab  placed
    them at risk of being persecuted.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

 6. At the resumed  hearing,  further  evidence  was  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant which included an expert report of Mr Joffe  dated  9th  July
    2016.  In a section of that report, Mr Joffe sought to comment upon the
    earlier decision of the Secretary of State and also the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In particular at paragraph [21],  he  raised  the
    issue of a factual error and that the judge may have misinterpreted the
    area in which the Appellant lived.  As a result of that issue,  it  was
    agreed between the parties  that  the  Appellant  should  give  further
    evidence as to where he lived in Iraq before he left that country.

 7.  The Appellant gave oral evidence before the  Tribunal  concerning  his
    residential address, where it was in Baghdad and its ethnic  mix.   His
    evidence was the subject of cross-examination by Mr Bates on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  It is not necessary for me  to  set  out  that
    evidence as it was common ground after  hearing  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant that his place of residence  was  in  the  xxxx  district;  a
    district that is still predominantly Sunni  in  population  composition
    [see paragraph 21].  Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant conceded  that
    the evidence given  by  the  Appellant  both  in-chief  and  in  cross-
    examination supported that place of residence and thus that  issue  was
    determined.  There was no further oral evidence given by the Appellant.



 8. I therefore heard submissions of the parties.  Mr Brown had produced  a
    helpful skeleton argument dated 31st October 2016.   In  that  skeleton
    argument he made a reference to further material that had been provided
    in the form of country reports exhibited in a bundle under cover of the
    letter dated 11th May 2016 and an updated bundle  of  11th  July  2016.
    His submissions began with the findings of fact that had been preserved
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, namely that the Appellant
    had been born in Mosul in Northern Iraq but that he had moved from that
    area at the age of 3 when his family had relocated to Baghdad where  he
    had remained and where  his  association  with  the  Ba'ath  Party  was
    established.

 9.  He made reference to the judge's acceptance that the Appellant's  wife
    had been killed there in February  2013  after  being  shot.   Thus  he
    submitted that the accepted fact of the murder of the Appellant's  wife
    was relevant to the issue of reasonableness  of  return  there  by  the
    Appellant and his child and that such an accepted traumatic  historical
    event went directly to the issue  of  "undue  harshness".   Whilst  the
    expert report had raised the issue relating  to  the  Appellant's  last
    address, Mr Brown conceded that that issue had now been  clarified  and
    that he had lived in the xxxxx district.  However,  he  submitted  that
    the Tribunal would  have  to  assess,  whether  having  regard  to  the
    accepted facts it would be unduly harsh to remove the Appellant and his
    daughter back to Baghdad.  He submitted in accordance with the skeleton
    argument at paragraph 6 that the impact  of  the  Appellant's  daughter
    having to return to the place of her mother's death was a factor to  be
    considered in terms of undue harshness (relying on the decision of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AH  (Sudan)  and  Others
    [2007] UKHL 49).  He submitted that it would not  require  any  medical
    evidence to support such a factor and that to remove a young  child  to
    that area would not only be harsh but would be  unduly  harsh  and  any
    medical report would not be necessary.  In the alternative he submitted
    there would be a breach of Article 3 on the same basis.

10. He further submitted that the Appellant in the  alternative  should  be
    granted humanitarian protection under Article 15(c). This was  a  fresh
    issue raised and not one that had been identified by Judge Coker.

11.  He made reference to the current country guidance case of AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 and made reference to the extracts set
    out in the skeleton argument taken from  that  country  guidance  case.
    However, he submitted that the circumstances in Iraq were ever-changing
    and it was necessary to assess whether there was an Article 15(c)  risk
    at the date of the hearing which could be established on the  evidence.
    Thus he submitted that given the deteriorating country conditions since
    the decision in AA was promulgated,  the  Appellant  had  a  legitimate
    claim to remain on  the  basis  of  Article  15(c)  harm.   He  further
    submitted that although the expert made the point at  paragraph  43  of
    the report that -

         "the decision as to whether the levels of  indiscriminate  violence
         meets the criteria of Article 15(c) is not one that he is competent
         to make, 'the Appellant still sought to rely  on  the  comments  of
         Professor Joffe at paragraphs 24 to 34 of his report'"

    The conclusion was that -

         "However the details I have cited above indicate that, despite  the
         Secretary of State's conviction to  the  contrary,  Shia  on  Sunni
         violence is once again a significant reality in Baghdad  and  that,
         despite  being  directed  against  sectarian  groups  is   entirely
         indiscriminate in terms of location and proximity  because  of  the
         means by which it is delivered."

12. In respect of this issue, Mr Brown relied upon  the  country  materials
    filed on  the  Appellant's  behalf  and  in  particular  the  following
    material.  At page 218 of the  bundle,  a  document  entitled  "Shi'ite
    militias are flush with Iranian cash now control portions  of  Baghdad"
    made a reference to the Shi'ite militias having come  to  dominate  the
    security scene in Baghdad.  Whilst this was dated 21st  June  2014  and
    was therefore not up-to-date, the casualty figures for June 2016 gave a
    more accurate and  up-to-date  picture.   At  page  40  of  the  bundle
    referring to the United Nations Iraq, UN casualty figures for the month
    of May 2016, it noted that a  total  of  867  Iraqis  were  killed  and
    another 1,459 were injured in acts of  terrorism,  violence  and  armed
    conflict in Iraq in May 2016.   The  document  made  reference  to  the
    number of civilians killed in May was 468  including  nineteen  federal
    police, civil defence and personal security details, protection  police
    and Fire Department) and the  number  of  civilians  injured  as  1,041
    (including 96 federal police, civil defence, personal security details,
    facilities  protection  police  and  Fire  Department).   The   overall
    casualty figures have risen over the past previous month of April where
    741 were killed.  The report goes on to say:-

         "According to the casualties recorded for May 2016, Baghdad was the
         worst affected governorate  with  1,007  civilian  casualties  (267
         killed and 740 injured)."

    There was a caveat to that report that in general the  UNAIM  had  been
    hindered in effectively verifying casualties in conflict areas and that
    in some cases could only partially verify certain  incidents  and  that
    they had also received without being able to verify, reports  of  large
    numbers of casualties along with unknown numbers of  persons  who  have
    died in secondary effects of violence having fled their homes.  Thus it
    was said the figures reported have to be  considered  at  the  absolute
    minimum.  At page 41 there is a table of casualty figures.  At page  45
    of the bundle, a report of the Medecins San Frontieres (MSF) Iraq dated
    10th June 2014 made reference to the lack of  "humanitarian  actors  in
    the Baghdad area".  It made  reference  to  the  MSF  having  providing
    medical care to displaced and neglected population is in Baghdad  since
    February 2015.  It makes reference to 600,000 displaced people  in  the
    Baghdad area and that at page [45] it was reported that -

         "Baghdad  is  acutely  affected  by  the  conflict.   Bombings  and
         shootings are a daily occurrence, and somehow, after  so  long  the
         people here have become desensitised of violence.  Yet on the other
         hand, despite the tragedy that surrounds them people  retain  their
         belief in the city and hold onto their hopes for the future.  There
         is an incredible amount of resilience here."

     At page 46 of the bundle there was an article entitled "United  Nations
    Children's Fund, Iraq Crisis 3.6 million  children  now  at  risk  from
    increasing violence."  In this article,  Mr  Brown  made  reference  to
    children being at serious risk of  harm  and  that  a  total  of  1,496
    children had been abducted in the country over the past two and a  half
    years.  He accepted that that had been a figure  that  related  to  the
    whole of Iraq and not simply Baghdad and that the figure had  not  been
    broken down to reflect the area in which the Appellant would be living.
     At page 49 he made reference to an incident that had occurred  on  1st
    July 2016 whereby 662 Iraqis (half of them civilians) were  killed  and
    another 1,457 were injured in Iraq.  At page 49 there  was  an  article
    referring to a terrorist attack in Baghdad on 3rd  July  2016  where  a
    terrorist bombing in Baghdad reportedly  killed  more  than  a  hundred
    people in a busy shopping street.  It was described as  an  "avenge  by
    the terrorists of Da'esh who have suffered defeats on the battlefront".



13. Based on that material, Mr  Brown  submitted  that  that  was  relevant
    evidence to the risk on return to Baghdad either  under  Article  3  or
    Article 15(c).

14. I asked Mr Brown to consider whether the issue of undue harshness arose
    on the facts of this case given that it had now been clarified that the
    Appellant would be returning to his home area and that he would not  be
    relocating to any further area.  He agreed that it  must  be  the  case
    that now it was known that the Appellant would be returned to the  same
    address  as  before,  internal  relocation  therefore  did  not  arise.
    However, he relied upon  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  based  on
    returning to the area with his daughter, which he  submitted  would  be
    inhumane and on the basis of Article 15(c) in the light of the  country
    materials to which he had invited the Tribunal to consider  which  were
    post the AA country guidance decision.

15. Mr Bates on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  the  following
    submissions.  As to the issue as to risk on return as a  Sunni  Muslim,
    he submitted that the issue identified at paragraph [21] had  now  been
    resolved and that the Appellant would be returning to his previous home
    area.  The country guidance decision of AA had confirmed  that  Baghdad
    was an area of sufficient safety and that as a Sunni  Muslim  he  could
    return to that area.  Whilst he would be returning with  his  daughter,
    it could not be suggested that such a return would  be  "unduly  harsh"
    and that there had been no evidence in support of  such  an  assertion.
    He submitted that any such submission should be supported  by  credible
    medical evidence and that it is not simply sufficient to assert that  a
    return would cause harm of that nature.  Consequently that had not been
    demonstrated by the evidence.

16.   He submitted the county guidance decision of AA, the Appellant's  own
    evidence and the expert report all point to the conclusion that  return
    to his former area in Iraq which was a predominately Sunni  area  would
    be available  to  him.   Mr  Bates  submitted  that  whilst  there  was
    sectarian violence in Baghdad, the Tribunal would require more detailed
    information from the expert to assess whether it  was  discriminate  or
    indiscriminate violence.  He made reference  to  paragraph  43  of  the
    expert report and that there had been antagonism between Sunni and  the
    Shia in Iraq and particularly in Baghdad in 2006 to 2008 and then  over
    the eruption of ISIS within Iraq since 2014.  The report made reference
    to the role of  ISIS  inspired  attacks  which  had  been  specifically
    directed at the Shia Muslims.  He submitted that whilst the expert  had
    indicated problems in 2006 and 2008  the  situation  has  improved  and
    presently the evidence demonstrated that ISIS in Iraq had  been  forced
    back to Mosul by the Iraqi and  Kurdish  forces.   Thus  the  level  of
    threat from ISIS in Baghdad had diminished from its high point in  2014
    and that there was no reason to believe that the threat  is  sufficient
    to render indiscriminate violence throughout Baghdad.

17. The Home Office guidance as to returns to Baghdad was set  out  in  the
    Appellant's bundle at page 18.  In particular  at  paragraph  2.2.5  it
    made reference to the Tribunal's findings on the humanitarian situation
    relating to Baghdad in the country guidance decision of AA  (Iraq)  and
    that at 2.2.6 that it was clear from the evidence that Arabic  speaking
    males with family  connections  to  Baghdad  and  a  CSID  are  in  the
    strongest position but those at the other end  of  the  scale  with  no
    family connections in Baghdad who are often  minority  communities  and
    have no CSID are able to provide for themselves.  Those without  family
    connections are more vulnerable than those with  such  connections  and
    that women are more vulnerable than men.  It also referred to those who
    do not speak Arabic is less likely to obtain employment and that  those
    from minority communities are less  likely  able  to  access  community
    support than those from the Sunni and Shia communities.

18. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

19. The following findings of fact are  the  preserved  findings  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  They are as follows:-

      1) The Appellant moved to Baghdad with his family members at  the  age
         of 3 and had lived and worked there in excess of 30 years.

      2) The Appellant is a Sunni Muslim.

      3) That the Appellant's wife was killed in February 2013  after  being
         shot but that this was not a result of any connections he  held  to
         the Ba'ath Party or on account of his being  a  Sunni  Muslim  [see
         29].

      4) His involvement with the Ba'ath Party was only when  at  university
         in the 1960s and that he had never attended any meetings or had any
         further involvement.

      5) The judge rejected his claim that his home  had  been  attacked  on
         31st December 2014 and that this had been an attempt  by  the  Shia
         militia [see 28].

      6) The judge rejected his claim that the death of his brother and wife
         and the attacks on his home had been due to his Sunni  religion  or
         his membership of the Ba'ath Party.

      7) The Appellant had been in contact with  his  neighbours  via  Viber
         (see evidence at [11(xiv)].

20. The current country guidance case  relating  to  Iraq  is  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).  The decision was promulgated  on
    30th October 2015.  The summary of that decision is set out in the head
    note which reads as follows:-

                              "COUNTRY GUIDANCE

         Note: References to Iraq  herein  are  to  the  territory  of  Iraq
         excluding  the  autonomous  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  ("IKR")  unless
         otherwise stated.

         A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1.   There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
             certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
             militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
             ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
             "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
             Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
             such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
             for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
             account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
             being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
             serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive.

         2.   The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the  "Baghdad
             Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also of the
             intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving  rise
             to a generalised Article 15(c) risk. The parts of the  Baghdad
             Belts concerned are  those  forming  the  border  between  the
             Baghdad Governorate  and  the  contested  areas  described  in
             paragraph 1.

         3.   The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
             (including Baghdad City) is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
             indiscriminate violence amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to
             civilians, irrespective of their  individual  characteristics,
             so as to engage Article 15(c).

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
             465/07) and QD (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases
             should assess the individual  characteristics  of  the  person
             claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in  order  to   ascertain
             whether those characteristics are such as to put  that  person
             at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

         B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  laissez
             passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made  by  P
             cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of Iraqi identification documentation,
             if the  Tribunal  finds  that  P's  return  is  not  currently
             feasible,  given  what  is  known  about  the  state  of   P's
             documentation.

         C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
             return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk
             of harm  arising  from  an  absence  of  Iraqi  identification
             documentation will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
             ways in which it is possible for  an  Iraqi  national  in  the
             United Kingdom to obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
             Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means  of
             a  passport  or  laissez  passer,  she  will  be  expected  to
             demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,  if  any,  identification
             documentation led the Iraqi authorities to issue  P  with  the
             passport or laissez passer (or to signal their intention to do
             so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a  current  passport  or  other
             current form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
             feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide  whether  P
             has a CSID, or will be able to  obtain  one,  reasonably  soon
             after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required  in  order
             for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance   from   the
             authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
             treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or  other  members
             likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in general
             likely to face  a  real  risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to
             serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P  by  the
             Secretary of State or her agents to  assist  P's  return  have
             been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have
             no CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does
             not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.   The  evidence  does
             not demonstrate that the "Central Archive",  which  exists  in
             Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need
             of them.  There  is,  however,  a  National  Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,  however,
             unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN  THE  IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.      As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
             harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad City or (subject to paragraph  2  above)  the  Baghdad
             Belts.

         15.      In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh
             for P to relocate  to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,
             however, likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
             from Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,  suffering
             serious harm en  route  to  such  governorates  so  as  engage
             Article 15(c).

         E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17.  The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
             from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the
             IKR authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not  require  P
             to have an expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
             risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as  to  Irbil  by  air);  (b)the
             likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
             availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
             area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

         F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

         22.  This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq."

21. The evidence concerning Baghdad City was considered by the Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 118-146 of the decision.  The  Tribunal  concluded  at  [26]
    that when viewed in the context  of  the  size  of  the  population  of
    Baghdad City, they did not find that the level of civilian  deaths  and
    injuries there,  even  taken  at  its  highest  and  allowing  for  the
    likelihood of  under-reporting,  to  be  indicative  of  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence so as to engage Article  15(c).   The  Tribunal
    considered that a resident of Baghdad City  could,  of  course,  reduce
    still further the already small possibility of being caught  up  in  an
    attack by avoiding those busy public places which the evidence suggests
    are one of  the  primary  targets.   At  paragraph  [27]  the  Tribunal
    accepted that the statistics as to the level  of  civilian  deaths  and
    injuries in Baghdad were not determinative of  the  issue  and  that  a
    "more holistic approach was required".  At paragraph [128] the Tribunal
    highlighted the difference in circumstances between those described  as
    the "contested areas" and those prevailing in  Baghdad.   The  Tribunal
    found  that  there  were  "significant   differences"   between   those
    circumstances and cited the April 2015 CIG  reports  that  despite  the
    levels of violence in Baghdad,  displacement  there  had  remained  low
    (around 60,000) for the majority of  those  displaced  (40,000)  moving
    within the governorate.  This is in contrast  to  the  high  levels  of
    population displacement away from the contested areas.   At  [29],  the
    Tribunal considered that although displacement levels  were  clearly  a
    relevant factor and taking the inclusive approach to a consideration of
    Article 15(c), the Tribunal  were  cautious  about  giving  them  undue
    prominence in the holistic assessment.  They considered that the  large
    amount of people from the contested areas moving to  Baghdad  City  was
    "indicative of there being sufficiently less  violence  in  Baghdad  to
    make  the  arduous  and  upsetting  process  of   fleeing   ones   home
    worthwhile."

22. At [130] the Tribunal considered that the nature of  the  conflict  was
    very different as between the contested areas and Baghdad as  were  the
    circumstances of daily life between the two regions and that the nature
    of the conflict and the features of daily life in  Baghdad  both  being
    relevant considerations in the Tribunal's determination of  whether  an
    Article 15(c) threshold has been met.  As to the daily life in  Baghdad
    the Tribunal cited the land info report of February 2005 that:-

         "Daily life in Baghdad carries on in  amidst  of  all  the  violent
         incidents.  Somehow communications, transport, trade  and  industry
         and public business  go  on  functioning,  in  spite  of  the  many
         restrictions as a result of many years of misrule,  corruption  and
         poor security."

    The Tribunal also found that it  was  relevant  that  the  violence  in
    Baghdad was largely generated by "asymmetrical warfare  (i.e.  sporadic
    terrorist attacks) rather than all-out fighting, such as to be seen  in
    the contested areas."

23. The panel concluded at [132], having considered  all  of  the  evidence
    that they did not find that the level of violence in Baghdad  City,  or
    in the Baghdad governorate as a whole comes "even close to crossing the
    Article 15(c) threshold."  As to those who could be  considered  as  an
    "enhanced risk category" at [135] the Tribunal concluded that there was
    nothing that they had heard of seen that  led  them  to  conclude  that
    either those without connections or Kurds in Baghdad are  an  "enhanced
    risk category" and at [136] the Tribunal stated as follows:-

         "It is rightly not suggested that the  evidence  demonstrates  that
         there is a real risk of Article 15(c) harm arising solely because a
         person is a Sunni or Shia civilian in Baghdad and we, in any event,
         conclude that it does not."

    As to travel in Baghdad at [137] the Tribunal stated

         "the evidence does not disclose, and neither was  it  suggested  to
         us, that those returned to  Iraq  on  an  expired  passport,  or  a
         laissez-passer, have any  difficulties  at  the  airport,  or  when
         travelling en route to Baghdad City, for reason  of  not  having  a
         current passport or other form of Iraqi identification document."

24. The areas known as the "Baghdad Belts" is set out at paragraphs 138  to
    146 of the country guidance decision.

25. Relocation to Baghdad is considered by the Tribunal at paragraphs  151-
    170 and the conditions in Baghdad are summarised at paragraphs  188-203
    of the Tribunal.

26. As set out in the decision of FA (Libya: art  15(c)  (CG)  [2016]  UKUT
    413,  the  intention  behind  the  country  guidance  system  is   that
    frequently arising issues should be capable of  being  determined  once
    only.  The designation of a  published  judgment  as  country  guidance
    therefore has the effect of removing the issues in  question  from  the
    normal process of determination by evidence in an adversarial  process.
    Consistency is assured, and time and resources are saved.   Unless  and
    until the guidance is set aside, the decision stands as  the  Tribunals
    approach that issue.  The Tribunal went on to state at [8]  that  there
    may always be

         "supplementary  evidence,  either  confirming  or  undermining  the
         conclusion reached in the Country Guidance decision; and there will
         often be subsequent evidence that either in itself  should  not  be
         treated as requiring the issue to be determined again  (because  it
         is similar to evidence considered in the Country Guidance decision)
         or that it is met by other  subsequent  evidence  to  the  opposite
         effect, rebalancing the issue as it were."

27. The Tribunal makes it  plain  that  there  is  no  intention  that  the
    guidance should be followed when the situation in the country concerned
    has changed substantially since the guidance was issued.

28. The question before this  Tribunal  is  whether  there  have  been  any
    changes since October 2015 that are sufficient to render  the  guidance
    given in the decision of AA (Iraq) relating to Article  15(c)  as   not
    applicable.

29. The most recent evidence relied upon by the Appellant is set out in the
    report of Mr Joffe at paragraphs [24]-[34] of the report.  At  [24]  it
    makes reference to the past circumstances and that  compared  with  the
    crisis years of 2006 and  2007,  security  in  Iraq  had  significantly
    improved up to June 2014.  He refers to it recently having "undergone a
    severe decline once again" and refers to the years 2006 to 2007 as  the
    process of ethnic cleansing in mixed  Sunni  and  Shia  areas  of  Iraq
    particularly in the capital Baghdad proceeded a pace and  Al  Qaeda  in
    Iraq complicated the security situation in the Sunni dominated areas of
    the country such as the Anbar province and the towns around the capital
    Baghdad where the death rate was very high indeed.  The report goes  on
    to state that it was only when the American-lead "surge" in Baghdad  in
    February 2008 and the events  in  Basra  2008  that  the  violence  was
    reversed.  At [25] Dr Joffe refers to the "improvement  as  being  only
    relative".  In other words he considered that there had been a dramatic
    decline in violence in the height of the ethnic cleansing  and  the  Al
    Qaeda led campaign in 2006 and  2007  but  that  the  actual  level  of
    violence is still unacceptably high especially in the Baghdad to  Basra
    corridor.  The report  goes  on  at  [25]  to  make  reference  to  the
    circumstances in 2009 and 2010 and there had been upsurge in the  early
    months of 2012 as a  result  of  a  growing  crisis  within  the  Iraqi
    government.  The same pattern occurred in 2013 and was to  be  repeated
    in 2014 as  a  result  of  the  legislative  elections  and  the  Sunni
    insurgency in the north of the country around  Mosul.   Dr  Joffe  then
    cites the general picture taken from the US State Department report  of
    2015.  That report made reference to  the  sectarian  violence  by  the
    actions of Da'esh (also known as  the  Islamic  State  of  Iraq)  which
    continue to  divide  the  country  and  that  "de-stabilising  violence
    occurred throughout the year as government forces  fought  to  liberate
    territory lost to Da'esh principally in Arab Sunni and some mixed ethno
    sectarian areas."   It  made  reference  to  the  severe  human  rights
    problems which were widespread with Da'esh committing the  overwhelming
    number of  serious  human  rights  abuses,  including  attacks  against
    civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who oppose  Da'esh,  members
    of other religious and ethnic minorities, women and children.  It  also
    recorded that

         "terrorists committed the  overwhelming  number  of  serious  human
         rights abuses with Da'esh members committing acts of violence on  a
         mass scale, including  killings  by  suicide  bombings,  improvised
         explosive devices, execution-style shootings, beheadings and  other
         forms of execution."

30. At [26] Dr Joffe contrasted the statistics of 2013 when 9,851 civilians
    were said to have died and that in 2014 the Iraqi body count  concluded
    that 20,169 civilians had died at [27].   He  compared  the  statistics
    with the figures for 2014, 2015 and 2016 and recorded that Baghdad  had
    the highest number of deaths, with 4,767 civilians recorded killed this
    year while Anbar had over 3,600 civilians killed, half of them  (1,748)
    by the Iraqi military in daily airstrikes in and  around  Falluja.   In
    the year from January 1st, 2015 to January 1st, 2016  a  further  3,606
    persons died in Baghdad from violent action.  At [28] it made reference
    to the security in Iraq and that in 2015 it marked the  year  in  which
    the Iraqi security forces began the  process  of  recovering  territory
    lost to ISIS in 2014 recording that in late January  the  Iraqi  forces
    recovered control of Diyala governorate and  Kurdish  Peshmerga  forces
    took control of the areas to the east and north of Mosul.  At paragraph
    [29] it made reference to the retaliation  by  ISIS  which  included  a
    suicide bomb in the Sadr City market in  Baghdad  in  mid-August  which
    killed at least 75 people but went on to state that

         "the  western  coalition  airstrikes  on  ISIS   positions   proved
         increasingly effective  as  did  the  presence  of  special  forces
         alongside Iraqi army units and at the end of August 2015, the  army
         recaptured control of the Turcoman centre of Amirli,  thus  marking
         the beginning of the definitive rolling back  of  the  ISIS  forces
         inside Iraq."

    At [30] the report makes reference to the most striking change in  2016
    in the security situation had  been  the  fact  that  the  Iraqi  army,
    together with the Shia militias had been  moving  successfully  against
    ISIS held territory.

    At [31] Dr Joffe's  opinion  is  that  the  upsurge  in  ISIS  inspired
    bombings in Baghdad reflected a change in tactics as the movement  lost
    control elsewhere referring to most of the victims  as  "Shia  Muslims"
    and makes reference to a bombing in Karada at the start of  July  2016.
    At [34] the expert makes reference to Iraq's problems and the amount of
    displaced persons including refugees from Syria.

31. Dr Joffe was asked to consider the issue of the risk of  indiscriminate
    violence but at [43(i)] stated that the  decision  as  to  whether  the
    levels of indiscriminate violence met the criteria of Article 15(c) was
    not one that he was competent to make but went on  to  state  that  the
    details in the report indicated  that  Shia  on  Sunni  violence  is  a
    significant reality in Baghdad and that that, whilst  directed  against
    sectarian groups was entirely indiscriminate in terms of  location  and
    proximity.

32. Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant relies upon the  country  materials
    set out in the bundle to which he has directed my  attention.   I  have
    summarised those earlier in the determination  when  referring  to  the
    submissions of the parties.

33. The casualty figures set out at page 40 for May 2016 are given for  the
    whole of Iraq and the general quotes are related to  areas  outside  of
    Baghdad.  However the casualties for Baghdad are recorded as 267 killed
    and 740 injured (see page 40).  The material at pages  44  to  45  (the
    MSF, Iraq report dated 10th June  2016)  is  an  article  predominantly
    concerning the medical needs of the displaced population.  The MSF have
    been providing medical care to the population of Baghdad since February
    2015 having opened a primary healthcare centre  with  free  outpatients
    and health consultations for the displaced population and for residents
    of Baghdad.  It refers to Baghdad's housing  500,000  displaced  people
    and referring to the  lack  of  humanitarian  action  in  Baghdad.   It
    further sets out that Baghdad has been acutely affected by the conflict
    and that bombings and shootings are a daily occurrence and that  people
    have become "desensitised to the violence".  It also records:-

         "Yet on the other hand  despite  the  tragedy  that  surrounds  you
         people retain a belief in the city and hold on to their  hopes  for
         the future.  There is an incredible amount of resilience here."

    This echoes that as set out by the Tribunal in AA (Iraq) when referring
    to Baghdad.

34. The article does not support the Appellant's case that  the  degree  of
    armed conflict gives rise  to  indiscriminate  violence  sufficient  to
    engage Article 15(c).  It is  a  general  article  which  concerns  the
    provision of healthcare from the MSF and  whilst  it  refers  to  daily
    shootings and bombings, none of that information is sourced or  details
    given as to where it originates from.  Furthermore, it  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the displaced citizens and on the facts of this  case,
    the Appellant is not a displaced person and would be returning  to  his
    home area where he retains links with his  neighbours  and  with  those
    with whom he is in touch.

35. The article at page 46 refers to risk of harm to children  specifically
    making reference to abductions in Iraq.  However the figures given  are
    by reference to Iraq as a whole and are not specific to Baghdad or  the
    area the Appellant would be likely to return to.  The  last  report  at
    [49] is specific to Baghdad and refers to the terrorist attack in  July
    2006 which is referred to in the report of Dr Joffe at paragraph [29].

36. Having considered the evidence as a whole relating to Baghdad, and  the
    area in which it is said the Appellant will return, I do  not  consider
    that it has been demonstrated to have changed  significantly  from  the
    evidence that was before the Upper Tribunal in AA  (Iraq)  whereby  the
    level of violence did not cross the Article 15(c) threshold.   Much  of
    the evidence referred to  by  Dr  Joffe  was  that  considered  by  the
    Tribunal in AA (Iraq) and the statistics relied upon by Mr Brown  while
    showing an increase, must be seen against the population as a whole  in
    Baghdad even  taking  account  of  any  under-reporting  and  does  not
    demonstrate that there has been a level of indiscriminate  violence  to
    reach that threshold.  As set out in the MSF report and in  AA  (Iraq),
    the daily life of Baghdad citizens continues despite  the  events  that
    have occurred.   As set out in the MSF article and that  of  Dr  Joffe,
    many displaced persons are returning to the Baghdad area compared  with
    the other "contested areas".   The  evidence  also  confirms  that  the
    recent violence  referred  to  (bombings)  is  generated  by  terrorist
    attacks (see the article which  refers  to  July  2016  bomb,  and  the
    terrorist attacks  referred  to  in  Dr  Joffe's  report)  rather  than
    fighting which has been seen in the contested areas.

37. When looking at the Appellant's profile, he does not fall within any of
    the enhanced risk categories.  The evidence taken as a whole  does  not
    demonstrate that there is a real risk of  Article  15(c)  harm  arising
    solely from whether he is a Sunni or Shia Muslim.   The  conditions  in
    Baghdad for those who are displaced are different however the  evidence
    does  refer  to  organisations  operating  within  Baghdad  to  provide
    assistance to those who are displaced.  On the facts of this particular
    case, the Appellant is not however reasonably likely to  form  part  of
    the displaced population  nor  would  he  be  viewed  as  such,  as  he
    maintains his  links  to  Baghdad  and  has  remaining  friendships  in
    Baghdad.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  which  has  been
    preserved was that he was in touch with his friends and neighbours.  In
    the witness statement  at  paragraph  2  he  made  reference  to  being
    contacted by his neighbour whom it is said he  had  stayed  in  contact
    with since he had left Iraq and that they had spoken on  the  telephone
    and via Viber and that he had many friends in his  area  and  he  would
    also contact them by telephone.

38. The Appellant is an Arabic speaking male  with  family  connections  to
    Baghdad.  The Appellant does have a young daughter and this is a factor
    which must be taken into account, however as an Arab speaking male with
    continuing connections to Baghdad it could not be said that they  would
    be returning as displaced persons.

39. No submissions had been advanced as to any practical problems  relating
    to entry  to  Baghdad,  however  in  the  light  of  the  documentation
    currently held by the Appellant (ID card and nationality  registration)
    it has not been demonstrated that this would  create  any  difficulties
    for the Appellant.

40. Consequently the evidence taken as a whole does  not  demonstrate  that
    there has been any change  of  significance  to  demonstrate  that  the
    circumstances  in  Baghdad  cross  the  threshold   of   severity   for
    demonstrating a real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

41. The issue identified by the Upper Tribunal on remaking the decision was
    whether the Appellant and his daughter would be at risk of serious harm
    on account of their religion as Sunni Muslims.   In  this  respect  the
    Appellant relies upon the report of Dr George in the  first  bundle  at
    pages 25 to 83.  The report is dated 18th March 2015 and therefore  the
    country information relied upon is similar  to  that  set  out  in  the
    decision of AA (Iraq) which was heard in May 2015.  The report sets out
    the history of central and southern Iraq at paragraphs  37  to  65  and
    that between 2006 and 2007 Iraq was engulfed in a civil war between its
    Sunni and  Shia  communities  with  various  communities  consolidating
    within districts in which they were the  majority.   In  February  2007
    there was a gradual build-up of US  forces  in  Baghdad  known  as  the
    "surge".  The history goes on to consider the events in  2011  and  the
    final US withdrawal (paragraphs 54 to 55) and the period  between  2013
    and 2014 with an upsurge of violence reflecting in terms of occasion of
    Sunni-Shia  sectarian  events.   The  report   includes   figures   for
    casualties in 2014 at [63] which he refers to as the worse year in Iraq
    since 2008.

42. Dr George considers the risks as a Sunni Muslim at paragraph  109.   He
    makes reference to the UNHCR eligibility guidance  given  in  the  year
    2012 at paragraph [11] which records the following:-

         "To date, most of Baghdad's formerly  mixed  neighbourhoods  remain
         largely homogenised, preventing many from returning to their former
         areas of residence.  In only a few  neighbourhoods  of  Baghdad  do
         members of both  sects  live  side-by-side.   Most  returnees  have
         returned to areas under the control of their  own  community.   The
         recent political crisis, combined with a series of attacks by Sunni
         armed groups targeting  Shiite  neighbourhoods  and  pilgrims,  has
         deepened sectarian tensions.  Anecdotal  evidence  from  the  UNHCR
         protection monitoring  activities  suggest  that  some  Sunnis  are
         leaving mixed and predominantly Shiite  neighbourhoods  in  Baghdad
         fearing  retaliation.   Both  Sunnis  and  Shiites  living  in   or
         returning to areas in which they would constitute a minority may be
         exposed  to  targeted  violence  on  account  of  their   religious
         identity.  Both Shiites in Sunni dominated neighbours and Sunnis in
         Shiite dominated neighbourhoods have reportedly been  subjected  to
         threatening letters demanding that they  vacate  their  homes.   In
         cases where individuals do not comply there are reports of violence
         or harassment including killings."

    This  evidence  confirms  the  position  of  the  Appellant   and   his
    circumstances in which he would  be  returning  to  an  area  which  is
    predominantly Sunni.

43. At paragraph 114 onwards, the report is not specific to Baghdad but the
    reports relate to Iraq generally, for  example,  at  paragraph  115  it
    refers to Diyala province and at paragraph 116 to Basra.

44. The conclusions at paragraph 118 is that he would be at risk in Iraq on
    account  of  his  Sunni  religio-political   identity.     However   he
    identifies the areas of risk as the Shia dominated south  which  it  is
    not proposed that the Appellant or his daughter would return to and the
    mixed Sunni-Shia communities in central Iraq which again, are  not  the
    areas in which the applicant's home is located.

45. The report of Dr Joffe in the most up-to-date bundle makes reference to
    the risk to Sunni Muslims at paragraphs 21 to  22  and  refers  to  the
    issue of where the Appellant  lived  in  Baghdad.   He  highlights  the
    importance of where he lived in view  of  the  population  distribution
    maps and that if he lived in the xxx district, he might well  be  under
    threat due to his religion whereas if he lived in the other  identified
    district it would not apply as it is one of the very few  districts  in
    the  capital  that  is  still   predominantly   Sunni   in   population
    composition.

46. As set out earlier in the determination, this issue has  been  resolved
    and it is common ground that  the  Appellant  lived  in  and  would  be
    returning to the district which is a Sunni dominated area.

47. The rest of the report summarises events of March 2015 to  the  present
    and the issue of relocation to other parts of Iraq (Mosul and parts  of
    central Iraq) and whether there  is  indiscriminate  violence  in  Iraq
    (which has already been summarised).

48. As to the risk of return to Baghdad the  conclusions  are  set  out  at
    [43].  In his view, there is a real  risk  to  persons  who  are  Sunni
    Muslims because of the growing antagonism between Sunni  and  Shias  in
    Iraq and particularly in Baghdad.  However the  expert  refers  to  the
    historic circumstances and the period of 2006 and 2008 and the eruption
    of ISIS within Iraq since 2014.   He  also  identifies  that  the  ISIS
    inspired attacks are not directed at the Sunni population  but  at  the
    Shia community.  He returns to the issue of the Appellant's  home  area
    but as I have set out, it is common ground that the Appellant would  be
    living amongst one of the few majority Sunni  areas  in  the  city  and
    therefore compared with the xxx area in which the expert suggests  that
    the Appellant and his daughter would face  very  serious  dangers,  the
    report as a whole does not demonstrate that the Appellant, returning to
    his home area and the predominantly Sunni community would place him  at
    a risk of serious harm.  As set out  in  the  preserved  findings,  the
    Appellant who had lived in Baghdad in excess of 30 years, had not  been
    targeted as a result of his Sunni Muslim religion or on account of  any
    link to the Ba'ath Party.  The evidence that I  have  summarised,  does
    not demonstrate that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  on  return
    either he or his daughter will face the risk of  serious  harm  arising
    from his religion and that there are currently large numbers  of  Sunni
    Muslims remaining in Baghdad in the areas identified by Dr Joffe as  an
    area which provides safety for the community.  The  evidence  that  has
    been presented now does not undermine or  change  the  decision  in  AA
    (Iraq) and the conclusion that they panel reached at [136].

49. It is also submitted on behalf of the Appellant by Mr  Brown  that  the
    return of the Appellant and his daughter would be contrary  to  Article
    3.  He accepted that it was  not  a  question  of  internal  relocation
    because on the facts of this particular case  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning back to his own home area and therefore the issue of internal
    relocation and that of reasonableness of return in those  circumstances
    simply does not arise.  He therefore has advanced  his  submissions  on
    the basis that given the finding of fact that  had  been  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal that  the  Appellant's  wife  had  been  killed  in
    February  2013  was  such  that  it  would  have  an  impact  upon  the
    Appellant's young daughter having to return to that  location.   Whilst
    he does not submit now that that should be  seen  in  terms  of  "undue
    harshness" he submits that it would be contrary to Article 3.

50. Article 3 of the ECHR states that:-

         "No one should be subjected to torture or to inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

    The Strasbourg courts approach to Article 3 in general is that  Article
    3  requires  a  "minimum  level  of  severity"  to  engage  Article  3.
    "Inhuman" treatment is conduct that  causes  sufficient  mental  and/or
    physical suffering to attain the  minimum  standard  of  severity  (see
    Ireland v The UK [1978] 2 EHRR 25 at [162]).  "Degrading" treatment  is
    conduct which arouses feelings of fear, anguish and inferiority such as
    to humiliate or debase the individual (see Ireland  at  [167]).   Again
    that must reach a minimum level of severity to engage Article  3.   The
    assessment is relative and depends upon an assessment  of  all  factors
    including the duration of the treatment, its physical or mental effects
    and the  age,  sex  and  vulnerability  and  state  of  health  of  the
    individual (Ireland at [62]).  Once established, the  obligation  under
    Article 3 is absolute (see Chahal v The UK [1996] 23 EHRR 413 and Saadi
    v Italy [2009] 49 EHRR 30).  The submissions do not make  reference  to
    any evidence to support the view  that  a  return  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter would reach the minimum level  of  severity  necessary  for  a
    breach of Article 3.

    As set out above, the  Strasbourg  courts  approach  to  Article  3  in
    general requires there to be  evidence  upon  which  to  make  such  an
    assessment.  As Mr Bates submits, there has been no  evidence  provided
    that goes directly to this issue either in  the  form  of  any  medical
    evidence as to the effects of an return to  the  area  or  any  report,
    statement  or  evidence  which   makes   reference   to   her   current
    circumstances and the effect of the events in 2013 or a change from her
    current circumstances in the UK.  Whilst Mr Brown  submits  it  is  not
    necessary for a medical report, it seems to me  that  any  analysis  or
    assessment that takes place must be evidence-based  and  in  this  case
    there has been a none advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  As recorded
    by the First-tier Tribunal, the killing of the Appellant's wife  was  a
    tragic event much deserving of compassion.  But even taking it  at  its
    highest, there  has  been  no  evidence  beyond  that  to  support  the
    conclusion that a return in those circumstances would reach  a  minimum
    level of severity to engage Article 3.

    I accept the submission from both advocates that the situation in  Iraq
    is ever changing and most recently, the evidence referred to ISIS being
    driven out of areas in Iraq, around Mosul, by the Iraqi security forces
    alongside the Kurdish forces.  However having considered  the  evidence
    as a whole and for the reasons set out in the preceding  paragraphs,  I
    do not find that the evidence presented now is sufficient  to  displace
    the assessment of the Tribunal in the country guidance of AA (Iraq) and
    do not find that there is a level of indiscriminate violence in Baghdad
    sufficient to cross the threshold of severity to constitute a breach of
    Article 15(c).  Nor do I find for the reasons given that  a  return  to
    Iraq would result in the Appellant being subjected to serious  harm  on
    account of his religion as a Sunni Muslim.   Furthermore,  I  have  not
    found that a return to Iraq for the Appellant and his daughter would be
    in breach of Article 3.  Consequently the  appeal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside;  the  decision  is
    remade as follows.


Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

