
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/00608/2015
                                                               AA/05655/2015
                                                               AA/07113/2015
                                                               AA/07115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RSW
                                     JSW
                                     SK
                                     AK
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnrose (Compass Immigration Law)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Nicol dated 15 July 2015 in  which  he  allowed  the
         respondents' appeals on asylum grounds.  The  respondents  are  all
         Sikhs and citizens of Afghanistan.

      2. I have maintained the anonymity order  granted  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal as this decision refers to the respondents' asylum  claims
         and the circumstances of minor children.

      3. At the hearing before me Ms Johnstone relied upon  the  grounds  of
         appeal.  She asked me to find that the Judge had failed  to  engage
         with the SSHD's reasons why the credibility  of  the  asylum  claim
         should not be accepted.  She  took  me  to  the  relevant  passages
         within the refusal letters for the first and second respondents  to
         support her  submission  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  address
         relevant matters and  the  decision  was  therefore  insufficiently
         reasoned.  Ms Johnrose reminded me that the decision should be read
         as a whole and when it is the Judge has  carefully  considered  all
         the evidence and submissions and provided  sufficient  reasons  for
         his findings.

      4. After hearing submissions I indicated that I  would  be  dismissing
         the SSHD's appeal.  I now  provide  my  reasons  for  doing  so  by
         reference to each ground of appeal.

Ground 1 - credibility

      5. The SSHD has criticised the Judge's positive  credibility  findings
         as being unreasoned and inaccurate.  When the decision is read as a
         whole it is clear that the Judge properly directed himself  on  the
         proper approach to credibility [12] and took into account  all  the
         evidence relied upon by both parties, as well  as  the  submissions
         advanced on their behalf [13, 14, 34 and 35].  The  Judge  outlined
         the detailed background facts underpinning the respondents'  claims
         [15-26].  It is clear that the first and  second  respondents  were
         questioned in some detail [26-33].  Having carefully considered the
         evidence and submissions the  Judge  was  entitled  to  accept  the
         credibility of the incidents described by the respondents [36-45].

      6. There was no need for the Judge to refer to every point relied upon
         by the SSHD provided  that  he  has  adequately  explained  why  he
         regarded the respondents to be credible in their claims.  The Judge
         clearly did not regard the first respondent's claim  regarding  the
         timing  of  violence  against   the   second   respondent   to   be
         inconsistent.  The Judge accepted the first  respondent's  evidence
         that violence only took place  after  a  report  was  made  to  the
         police.  This is consistent with the clarification offered  by  the
         first appellant during the course of his interview.  The Judge  was
         also entitled to find  that  the  respondents  provided  consistent
         accounts.  The  Judge  at  this  stage  was  referring  to  'global
         credibility'.  When this is considered alongside the  finding  that
         the first respondent's oral evidence 'largely  confirmed'  that  of
         the second appellant, it is clear that the Judge accepted  that  in
         relation to the central aspects of the  account  he  was  satisfied
         that there was sufficient consistency.

Ground 2 - Failure to apply country guidance

      7. It is an error of law for a Judge  to  fail  to  follow  applicable
         country guidance.  Whilst the Judge did not expressly refer  to  SL
         (Afghanistan) (returning Sikhs and Hindus) CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00137
         and DSG (Afghan Sikhs departure from CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT
         00148(IAC), I am satisfied that he was aware of  these  authorities
         and took them into account.  Both authorities were included in  the
         respondents' bundle.  Relevant extracts are also  set  out  in  the
         SSHD's decision letter.  The Judge expressly  stated  that  he  had
         "careful regard to the material placed before [him] concerning  the
         situation of Sikhs in Afghanistan".  There is no reason to  believe
         that he was excluding SL from this consideration.

      8. Moreover, the Judge's findings are not in anyway inconsistent  with
         SL.  SL  makes  it  clear  that  all  Sikhs  are  not  at  risk  of
         persecution but the individual circumstances of  each  person  will
         require consideration.   The  Judge  has  not  concluded  that  the
         respondents are at risk simply because  they  are  Sikhs.   He  has
         accepted their  claims  to  have  been  targeted  in  two  separate
         incidents and concluded that in all the circumstances  there  is  a
         risk of repetition of the threat to serious harm.

      9. I accept that the Judge might have expressed himself a little  more
         clearly when setting out the nature and extent of  the  prospective
         risk.  However, when the decision is read as a whole, the Judge has
         adequately explained that there  is  a  real  risk  of  the  fourth
         respondent being targeted again and that her family members will be
         unable to protect her and may themselves come to adverse  attention
         in seeking to protect her and this places all  the  respondents  at
         risk (throughout Afghanistan).

Ground 3 - discrimination and harassment

     10. The SSHD has criticised the Judge's findings  at  [38  and  39]  as
         confusing  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  has  adequately
         explained why he considers there is a real risk of persecution  for
         these respondents.  The Judge has properly directed himself to  the
         fact that the respondents have suffered generalised  discrimination
         and harassment, in addition to the two specific incidents accepted.
          He has properly, and in line with SL reminded  himself  that  this
         general discrimination and harassment falls  short  of  persecution
         [39].

Ground 4 - Article 8

     11. Ms Johnstone accepted that any errors  in  relation  to  Article  8
         would only be material if an error of law in relation to asylum  is
         made out.  As I have found that the  Judge  has  made  no  material
         error of law in allowing the appeal on asylum grounds, there is  no
         need for me  to  address  the  ground  based  upon  the  Article  8
         assessment.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of a material error of law and is not set aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 September 2015

