
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 14 April 2015                     |On 28 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                    H B D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a female national of the  Democratic  Republic  of
         Congo. Following the refusal of her application for grant of asylum
         in the  United  Kingdom  and  the  respondent's  decision  to  give
         directions for her removal  to  the  DRC,  the  appellant's  appeal
         brought under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 was heard at Taylor House by First Tier Judge Talbot on 15
         December 2014. The appellant was present at  the  hearing  and  was
         represented by a Counsel. Judge Talbot heard oral evidence from the
         appellant as  well  as  submissions  from  representatives  of  the
         parties. For reasons given in his determination promulgated  on  30
         December 2014, he dismissed the appeal.

      2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  to  the
         Tribunal by another First Tier  Tribunal  Judge.  In  her  decision
         granting permission, the Judge said, "On reading the decision it is
         arguable that the Judge commenced  his  assessment  of  credibility
         from the wrong starting point i.e. by failing to first consider the
         albeit limited medical evidence available re the alleged rape (see:
         JL (medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT  00145  (IAC).
         In any event, the Judge ought to  have  made  findings  as  to  the
         alleged rape over and above the terse  reference  to  it  in  [22].
         Consequently, whilst the Judge has made cogent findings in relation
         to the vagueness and implausibility of A's  account,  his  findings
         have ignored a material feature of A's account."

      3. At the hearing of the appeal there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on
         behalf of the appellant. On my instructions The  Court  Clerk  made
         inquiries of the solicitors on record namely  Montague,  Solicitors
         seeking reasons for their absence and that of  the  appellant.  The
         Clerk reported that she had been told by someone at the solicitor's
         office that they had instructed Counsel to appear but  the  Counsel
         had not got  the  message.  In  the  circumstances  the  solicitors
         requested that the appeal hearing be adjourned to  a  date  in  the
         future.

      4. I refused the request for adjournment.  The  solicitors  on  record
         have their offices in London  and  if  they  had  been  serious  in
         seeking an adjournment their response to  inquiries  made  of  them
         should have been to request that the hearing be put back to  enable
         a solicitor to attend and give explanation and/or seek adjournment.
         No written application for adjournment was received on the day from
         either the solicitors or  the  chamber  of  the  Counsel  who  they
         claimed had been instructed in the case. I was not  satisfied  that
         the explanation provided was bona fide and in  any  event  did  not
         explain the absence of the appellant. I noted that the  appellant's
         address is in London ([ - ]) and she should  have  and  could  have
         attended the hearing if she had been  serious  in  pursuit  of  her
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In coming to the decision  to  refuse
         the adjournment request, I took account of the  general  merits  of
         the appeal as it stood before me and the lack of any correspondence
         such as witness statement of the appellant addressing the  concerns
         raised by the First Tier Judge and a skeleton argument  from  those
         representing the appellant. I also noted that directions  given  by
         the Principal Resident Judge in respect of  documentation  required
         to pursue the appeal (para 5 and 6) had not been complied  with  by
         the  appellant  or   her   representatives.   All   these   factors
         individually and cumulatively  suggested  to  me  that  the  appeal
         process was being used simply to prolong the  appellant's  stay  in
         the UK.

      5. I invited Mr Nath to make submissions. He asked me to find that the
         grounds of appeal upon which permission had  been  granted  had  no
         merit as the credibility findings made by the First  Tier  Tribunal
         Judge were well reasoned and soundly based. According  to  him  law
         does not require a set order for consideration of various pieces of
         evidence. He drew my attention to the respondent's written Rule  24
         response setting out the reasons for opposing this appeal. He asked
         me to find that there was no material error in the decision of  the
         First Tier Judge and to uphold his decision.

      6. I agree with the submissions made by Mr Nath. The First Tier  Judge
         did not ignore the evidence of claimed rape. It is clear  from  his
         determination that he looked at all the evidence in the  round  and
         gave very good reasons for not finding the claim of  the  appellant
         to be credible. There was no reason for the Judge to first consider
         the medical or other evidence on claimed rape as  even  if  it  had
         happened it would have had little or no bearing on how the evidence
         of the appellant on her claim to asylum would have  been  effected.
         By no means should this be  construed  as  minimising  the  heinous
         nature of the crime of rape. Had  the  appellant's  medical  report
         suggested that the claimed rape had caused her such  trauma  as  to
         effect her mental ability and memory, the  Judge  would  have  been
         arguably wrong not to look at the report first and/or appraise  the
         overall credibility of the appellant in the light of  such  medical
         findings. There was no such medical evidence before  the  Judge.  I
         note and agree with the Rule 24 response from  the  respondent.  On
         the issue of the appellant not having signed the interview  record,
         in my judgement that is of no relevance in that the  appellant  has
         not raised any  specific  points  in  the  record  with  which  she
         disagrees.

      7. As I have found no material error of law in the decision  of  Judge
         Talbot,  his  decision  must  stand.   The   appeal   against   the
         respondent's decision remains dismissed.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Date: 21 May 2015



Anonymity Direction:

On the facts of this  case  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate  and  such
direction made by Judge Talbot is retained.

Having dismissed the appeal no fee award can be made.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Date: 21 May 2015
