
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00578/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2015                            |On 26 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     ks
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker of Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

1.   The appellant is a 33 year old national of Sri  Lanka.   On  21  August
    2014 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor granted permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal against a  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Easterman who, in a determination  promulgated  in  June  2014
    following a hearing on 26 February 2014, dismissed his appeal on asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

2.   The issue before me is whether Judge Easterman materially erred in  law
    in making his findings of fact and in assessing the credibility of  the
    evidence before him.

3.   The points raised in the grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (a)  It is said that the judge erred in rejecting the evidence  of  the
         appellant and his mother of continuing interest in the appellant on
         the part of the Sri Lankan authorities.


    (b)  It is said that the judge erred in assessing  the  credibility  of
         the appellant's evidence that his sister was a high ranking  member
         of the LTTE.


    (c)  It is  said  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
         credibility of the appellant's evidence that he had been active  in
         Diaspora activities in the UK.


    (d)  At the hearing, Ms. Walker submitted that the judge  had  made  no
         finding on the  appellant's  evidence  that  his  father  had  been
         detained by the Sri Lankan authorities  following  the  appellant's
         release from detention in 2011 and that he was  interrogated  about
         the appellant's whereabouts.

4.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a Tier  4  Student  visa
    on 28 January 2011, on his own passport, direct from  Sri  Lanka.   The
    visa had been applied for on 29 December 2010.  It  was  issued  on  12
    January 2011.  He says he claimed asylum on 11 March 2011 although  the
    respondent's records indicate that he claimed asylum on 4 April 2011.

5.   The basis  of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  may  be  summarised  as
    follows: He said that he had worked for the LTTE from December 2006  in
    its finance section, supplying food and clothing to their forces for  a
    time.  He said he had two sisters, one of whom had joined the  LTTE  in
    1991.  In May 2009, he moved to an army controlled  area  and  was  put
    into a camp.  He was mistreated but the authorities at that  point  did
    not appear to be aware of his work for the LTTE.  He  was  released  on
    the payment of a bribe on 25 March 2010.  Subsequently, he was detained
    a second time when he was  stopped  at  Kodikaman  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    military who blindfolded him and took him to a C.I.D jail where he  was
    detained.  His evidence was that he was  interrogated  about  the  LTTE
    during  this  detention  and  that  he  was  scared  enough  to  reveal
    information about how long he had been with the LTTE and  what  he  had
    done for them. He was also asked to point out people  who  has  escaped
    from camp as he had done.  He was detained for  30  days  and  tortured
    severely.  A bribe was paid for his release and his identity  card  was
    kept by the  authorities.   An  agent  was  subsequently  contacted  to
    arrange the appellant's exit from Sri Lanka.

6.   It is important to note that several aspects of the  appellant's  claim
    were accepted by the respondent.  These are mentioned by the  judge  at
    paragraph 45.  They are set out in the refusal letter at paragraph  67.
    In particular, it is important to note  that  the  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant had been arrested by the army in  Sri  Lanka  twice,
    that he had been detained and tortured and that he had escaped from the
    LTTE.

7.   The judge clearly had difficulty with  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (the 2004 Act).  He
    said he was unable to understand what part of the appellant's case  now
    had to be found to be damaged given the respondent's acceptance of  the
    facts mentioned.  He said that he  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent did, that the  appellant's  case  was  credible  subject  to
    section 8 and that, pursuant to the guidance in  the  country  guidance
    case of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC) and the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  MP  and  NT  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829,  he
    would look at the appellant's case in a  wider  context.   Although  at
    paragraph 47 the judge made some comments about  the  appellant's  work
    for the LTTE, it is reasonably clear that he accepted that evidence.

8.   I will now turn to deal with the challenge to  the  judge's  assessment
    in the terms that it is brought.

9.   First, I turn to deal with the judge's assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence and that of his mother of continuing interest in the appellant
    by the Sri Lankan authorities.  This is dealt  with  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 51, 52 and 54.  The grounds make four points in relation  to
    the judge's assessment of this part of the evidence.

10.  I agree with the first point made, that the  judge  had  misapprehended
    the evidence in the statement of the appellant's mother. The judge drew
    the inference that her evidence was inconsistent as to whether  or  not
    she and the appellant had been in contact with each other.  However, in
    her statement she states: "also we  are  afraid  to  talk  to  our  son
    because government CID unit members observe us closely.  If they  found
    out that we have [sic] in contact with our son that would be  dangerous
    for us".  I agree with Ms Walker that the appellant's  mother  did  not
    say that there was no contact between  her  and  the  appellant.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the judge misapprehended this  aspect  of  the
    mother's evidence.

11.  Secondly, I also agree with the point made  in  the  grounds  that  the
    fact that the  statement  of  the  appellant's  mother  reiterated  the
    appellant's account was not a reason for giving it less  weight  as  it
    means that the judge found her evidence consistent with the appellant's
    evidence.  Given that aspects of the case had already been accepted  by
    the respondent, it is difficult to see why consistency in the  evidence
    in this respect between  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the  mother's
    evidence was not a point that went  in  his  favour  in  assessing  the
    credibility of his evidence that he was of continuing interest.

12.  Thirdly, the judge said that he did not believe the  mother's  evidence
    that the Sri Lankan authorities disclosed to her that her children were
    accused of working secretly to reorganise the LTTE.  I agree  that  the
    judge erred in law  in  his  reasoning  in  this  respect  because  the
    background material shows that accusations of this sort are made by the
    Sri Lankan authorities when questioning suspects  or  when  showing  an
    interest in remaining family members.

13.  Fourthly, given the acceptance by the  respondent  of  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim,  the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  54,  in  that  he
    effectively required corroboration of the appellant's claim that he was
    of continuing interest.

14.  A fifth point was raised at the hearing in relation to this  aspect  of
    the judge's reasoning.  Ms Walker submitted that  the  judge  erred  in
    saying at paragraph 51 that it was not known how the mother's statement
    came to be translated into English.  Ms Walker referred me to paragraph
    27 of the determination which records the appellant's evidence that the
    mother did not speak or write English and that the statement  had  been
    obtained through his solicitors.  That suggests that the solicitors may
    have  translated  the  document  to  her  but  nothing  has  been  said
    explicitly to that effect.  It seems to me that, given that  there  was
    no explanation in terms, the judge was  entitled  in  that  respect  at
    least to look at that aspect of the evidence and say that  it  had  not
    been explained to him how the statement was translated.  I do not think
    that this particular point makes any difference either way.

15.  The next ground is that the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence that his sister was a high ranking member  of  the
    LTTE.  This is dealt with at paragraph 53 which reads:

         "Whilst there is some evidence of the appellant's  sister  and  her
         position in the LTTE, I am unable to accept that just because there
         is a photograph of her apparently meeting the leader  of  the  LTTE
         that this shows  that  she  had  any  particular  position  in  the
         hierarchy of that organisation."


     Again, bearing in mind that the respondent  had  accepted  elements  of
    the  appellant's  account,  this  passage  shows  that  the  judge  was
    requiring corroboration.

16.  The next ground, raised at the hearing, was that the judge  had  failed
    to make a finding on  the  appellant's  evidence  that,  following  his
    release in 2011, the authorities visited  his  home  and  detained  his
    father for one day and interrogated him about his whereabouts.  This is
    relevant to the question whether  the  appellant  was  recorded  as  an
    escapee from his second detention or whether he was recorded by the Sri
    Lankan authorities as someone who had  been  released,  albeit  on  the
    payment of a bribe.  It is clear that there  was  no  finding  on  this
    aspect of the evidence.

17.  The next ground is that  the  judge  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
    appellant's evidence about his Diaspora activities in the UK.  This  is
    dealt with by the judge at paragraphs  49  and  50.  Having  considered
    paragraphs 49 and 50, I am also  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in
    stating that in the past there had been evidence that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities monitor meetings when it is clear that the  Upper  Tribunal
    in GJ accepted at paragraph 354 that  such  monitoring  continued.   In
    addition, I am satisfied that the judge misapprehended the  appellant's
    evidence when he rejected the appellant's evidence of his attendance at
    the demonstrations on the basis that this  was  inconsistent  with  his
    having escaped from the LTTE.

18.  Ms Walker took me to paragraph 12 of the appellant's  second  statement
    which does make it clear that he was not saying that  he  had  attended
    any LTTE activities in the UK but that he had  attended  demonstrations
    to promote the human rights of Tamils in Sri Lanka.

19.  Mr Tufan took me to GJ; in particular, paragraphs  336  and  351  where
    the Upper Tribunal made it clear that attendance at  demonstrations  in
    the Diaspora,  even  at  several  demonstrations,  was  not  in  itself
    sufficient to create a real risk.  However, this is not the only  error
    I have found.  There were other errors as I have explained.

20.  Overall, it seems to me that the  judge's  approach  in  assessing  the
    credibility of the evidence to the extent not specifically accepted  by
    the respondent was undertaken without factoring in the  fact  that  the
    respondent had accepted aspects of his case.

21.  For all of these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge made errors  on
    a point of law such that his determination falls to be set aside.   The
    errors are material  because  they  are  relevant  to  an  all  rounded
    assessment of the future risk even  if  an  individual  error  may  not
    necessarily have been material.

22.  On the issue of disposal, the parties agree that this  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to paragraph  7  of
    the Practice Statement and the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo)
    & others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that paragraph 72(a)  of
    the Practice Direction applies.

23.  So this case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  it  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Easterman.  Paragraphs 23 to  27
    of the determination of Judge Easterman which record the evidence  that
    Judge Easterman heard is evidence that will be before the  next  judge.
    There will be no need for that judge to go behind the facts accepted by
    the  respondent  which  are  summarised  at   paragraph   45   of   the
    determination and are set out at paragraph 67 of  the  refusal  letter.
    The credibility of the remaining evidence will need to be assessed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.



Signed                                  Date: 23 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


