

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2014                              |On 9 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HOLMES


                                   Between

                               MS ANNAH MAKONI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Smith of Counsel, instructed by Kirklees Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Robson dismissing an appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

 2) The appellant was born on 4 April 1977 and is a national  of  Zimbabwe.
    She came to the UK as a  visitor  in  February  1998.   Her  leave  was
    extended as a student until 2002.  In 2003 she sought leave  to  remain
    as the spouse of  a  settled  person  and  when  this  application  was
    rejected she applied as the spouse of an EEA national.  She was granted
    leave in this capacity until 2005.

 3) In 2005 her husband, who was a Portuguese national of  Angolan  origin,
    returned to Angola after the death of his father.  He did not return to
    be with the appellant and it became clear by the end of 2006  that  the
    marriage had broken down.  A decree absolute was pronounced in  January
    2012.

 4) In 2010 the appellant began a relationship with  a  man  of  Zimbabwean
    nationality, Tigere Maruta.  The relationship continued until 2013  and
    the couple had 2 children together.  Mr Maruta currently has no contact
    with the children and the appellant is unaware of his whereabouts.   In
    2010 the appellant made a human rights claim under Article  8  in  2010
    but this was refused later that year.  In July 2012  she  attempted  to
    make an application on the grounds of long residence.  She sought to do
    this prior to a change in the Rules that would remove  the  possibility
    of claiming leave to remain after 14 years'  residence.   According  to
    the appellant her solicitor did not accurately copy the number from her
    debit card onto the application form and as a  result  her  application
    was rejected by the Home Office because of non-payment of the fee.

 5) According to the appellant the only relatives she had left in  Zimbabwe
    were her elderly parents.  As a woman on  her  own  she  feared  gender
    persecution and ill-treatment.  She was concerned she would not be able
    to support herself and her children.  She had attended some meetings in
    London in 2004-2005 organised by the MDC but she was not  a  member  of
    any political party.  She was sympathetic towards the policies  of  the
    MDC.  Her ethnic origins were Shona.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant's parents
    had been able to live quite  safely  and  peacefully  in  Harare.   The
    appellant had no political profile in Zimbabwe.

 7) The judge accepted that there  was  widespread  discrimination  against
    women in Zimbabwe, particularly in rural areas, and sexual and  gender-
    based violence was widespread.  The  judge  noted,  however,  that  the
    appellant had been self sufficient for a  number  of  years.   She  was
    educated and spoke Shona.  There was no reason why she could  not  ally
    herself to her family even if they could not financially  support  her.
    The judge did not accept that the appellant would have to live  on  the
    street in Zimbabwe and did not accept that her  parents  would  not  at
    least give her shelter.  He  noted  that  the  appellant  had  obtained
    qualifications in the UK and had worked successfully for  the  City  of
    Westminster.  With her qualifications the judge was not satisfied  that
    she would not find a job and did not  accept  that  her  qualifications
    would not be transferable to Zimbabwe.

 8) The judge found that the appellant did not have a claim to family  life
    under the Immigration Rules but considered the application of paragraph
    276ADE, as it was at the date of the hearing on  14  March  2014.   The
    judge considered the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 on the question of whether the appellant had "no  ties  with
    the country to which he would have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom."  The judge noted that the appellant still had  parents
    in Zimbabwe.  Although she had been in the UK since 1998, she had spent
    the first 21 years of  her  life  in  Zimbabwe  and  would  still  have
    cultural ties with that country.

 9)  The  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   be   an
    interference with her  private life sufficient  to  engage  Article  8.
    The judge went on to consider the issue of proportionality.  The  judge
    took into account  that  the  appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    significant period and has not  been  convicted  or  charged  with  any
    criminal offence during this period.   She  sought  to  regularise  her
    position under the then 14 year rule and it was through no fault of her
    own that the opportunity to do this was lost.  The  evidence  indicated
    that this was caused by an error made  by  her  representative  writing
    down the wrong debit card details on the application form.   The  judge
    noted that this was an unusual feature of the case which would be borne
    in mind.  The judge also bore in mind that  appellant  had  a  previous
    opportunity of remaining in the UK by virtue of her marriage to an  EEA
    citizen.   There  were,  however,  no  exceptional,  compassionate   or
    compelling reasons to prevent the appellant from leaving the UK.  Given
    the age of her  children  it  would  be  in  their  best  interests  to
    accompany their mother to Zimbabwe.

Application for permission to appeal

10) An application for permission to appeal  was  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stating that the judge did not properly consider private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE and  did  not  properly  assess  proportionality
    having regard to the relevant factors.  The judge did not make findings
    upon relevant matters.  Reference was made to Ogundimu at paragraph 125
    in particular but it was said that the circumstances  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether a person has ties to the country  to  which  they
    would have to go included the length of time a person has spent in  the
    country to which he would have to go if he were required to  leave  the
    UK; the age that the person left that country; the exposure that person
    has had to the cultural norms of  that  country;  whether  that  person
    speaks the language of the  country;  the  extent  of  the  family  and
    friends the person has in the country to which he is being removed; and
    the quality of the relationships that person has with those friends and
    family members.

11) It was contended that the judge had failed to take  into  account  that
    the appellant had only her elderly parents in Zimbabwe and  they  would
    not be able to support  her.   Although  she  had  spent  21  years  in
    Zimbabwe she was studying and the ties that she created as a child  and
    a young adult would not be the same as a person created  as  an  adult.
    The  country  had  undergone  significant  changes.   The   appellant's
    application under the 14 year rule was  refused  through  no  fault  of
    hers.  The judge should have made a finding as to whether the appellant
    would have succeeded in her application for leave on the basis of  long
    residence had the incorrect card details not been submitted.  The judge
    did not properly consider the opportunities the appellant  had  had  to
    obtain leave  to  remain  upon  the  completion  of  10  years'  lawful
    residence in 2008, when her EEA residence card expired, and again  when
    she applied under the 14 years long residence rule.

12) Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  In this application  it
    was contended that the judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding  that
    the appellant did not satisfy paragraph 276ADE; failed to make findings
    upon material matters, and failed to give proper scrutiny and weight to
    relevant  factors  in  assessing  proportionality.   The  grounds  were
    similar if not identical to those out before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 5 June  2014.
    In the decision granting permission it  was  stated  that  the  judge's
    approach to Article 8 was arguably flawed and permission was granted on
    all grounds.

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

13) At the hearing before us Miss Smith submitted that the reasoning  under
    paragraph 276ADE given by the judge was not  adequate.   The  appellant
    had not had contact with her parents since October 2013.  The judge had
    not carried out a proper  assessment  of  the  relevant  factors.   The
    quality of the appellant's relationship with her parents was  relevant,
    as were the other factors in Ogundimu.

14) In relation to proportionality Miss Smith argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed to make proper  findings  in  respect  of  the  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  In relation to the application made on the
    basis of 14 years' residence, however, it was pointed  out  that  in  a
    refusal decision of 10 September 2010 the appellant was  notified  that
    she would be subject to enforcement action if she did not leave the UK.
     Reference was made to the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  FH
    (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ at 385.

15) Miss Smith nevertheless argued that the appellant had 10  years  lawful
    residence from 1998 until 2008.  It was pointed out that  there  was  a
    gap in this lawful residence from March 2002 until  March  2003.   This
    was apparent from the appellant's passport.  Misss Smith then  referred
    to Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations.  It was  then  pointed  out
    that the appellant's husband was not a qualified person at the date  of
    the termination of the marriage, as required  in  terms  of  regulation
    10(5), as he had left the UK in 2005.

16) Miss Smith submitted that the appellant had been in the UK for 16 years
    and this was a significant period.  For a considerable period  of  this
    time she had been here lawfully.  At paragraph 70 of the  determination
    the judge had accepted that there were some  facts  in  favour  of  the
    appellant  but  then  concluded  that  there   were   no   exceptional,
    compassionate or compelling  reasons  to  prevent  the  appellant  from
    leaving the UK.  Miss Smith submitted that Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  had
    been disapproved by the Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ
    985.  There was no need for an intermediate test  under  Article  8  of
    whether  there  were  good  arguable  grounds   for   considering   the
    application of Article 8 outside the Rules.

17) Miss Smith  further  submitted  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  UK
    lawfully.  She had remained here for 16 years.  During  this  time  she
    had maintained herself and had tried to remain lawfully.   She  had  no
    convictions.  She had sought to integrate into the  UK.   She  had  not
    been to Zimbabwe since 2003.  She had no contact with her parents.  She
    had two children, although they had no contact with their  father.   Ms
    Smith  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  properly  carry  out  the
    proportionality exercise. The judge set out some factors and then  said
    there were no exceptional, compassionate or compelling reasons.

18) Miss Smith further submitted that if there was an error in relation  to
    proportionality, then further evidence should be heard in  relation  to
    the issue.

19) For the respondent, Mr Dewison submitted that all the facts were known.
     The judge was directed to Gulshan.  This allowed consideration outside
    the Immigration Rules if there were good grounds  for  doing  so.   The
    judge considered all the factors and made no error.

20) Mr Dewison further submitted that if the appeal  was  reheard  for  the
    purpose of re-making the decision then the recently  inserted  sections
    117A and B of the 2002 Act would have to  be  considered.   He  further
    submitted that the decision made in  2010  stopped  the  clock  on  the
    question of 14 years' residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration
    Rules.

21) In response Miss Smith emphasised that the question  for  the  Tribunal
    was  whether  the  judge  had  properly  understood  the  question   of
    proportionality.

22) We reserved our determination subject to the qualification that  if  we
    found an error of law there would be a further hearing.

Discussion

23) We do not consider it was incumbent upon the Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider whether the 2012 application by the appellant  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  14  years'  long  residence
    would have succeeded had there not been the unfortunate error over  her
    debit card number.  Had the applicant been accepted as valid, it  would
    have to have been considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  before  any
    possibility of an appeal to the Tribunal and it was never substantively
    considered by the Secretary of State.  We do not have to make a finding
    on whether the notice served  on  the  appellant  in  2010  would  have
    constituted a notice of liability  to  removal  but,  if  it  did,  the
    appellant's  claim  to  long  residence  under  276B  would  not   have
    succeeded.  In this appeal, however, we are concerned  with  the  facts
    and circumstances as they are and not as they might have been.

24) Miss Smith helpfully gave us a  summary  of  the  positive  factors  in
    favour of the appellant in the balancing exercise under Article 8.  She
    pointed out that the appellant had arrived in the UK lawfully and tried
    to remain here lawfully.  She had no convictions.  She  had  maintained
    herself.  She had sought to integrate into the  UK  in  the  course  of
    residence here for 16 years.  The absence of negative factors, such  as
    criminal convictions, or failure  to  maintain  oneself,  or  remaining
    illegally, carries much less weight in the balancing exercise, however,
    than positive factors.

25) The main positive factor in the favour of the appellant, in addition to
    her length of residence, was the position of  her  two  children.   The
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  rightly  had  regard  to  their  best
    interests, which would be to accompany their mother  to  Zimbabwe.   We
    note that the older child was  born  in  February  2012  and  that  the
    appellant was pregnant with the younger child at the time she split  up
    with her partner in 2013.  The judge properly took account of the  ages
    of the children in relation to deciding their best interests.

26) The judge's finding that it was in the best interests of  the  children
    to accompany their mother to Zimbabwe was made on the basis, of course,
    that the mother and children would not be destitute and homeless.   The
    judge found that the appellant would be able to find shelter  with  her
    parents in Harare even if they could not support her.

27) Before us it was submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's lack of contact with her  parents.   The  judge
    recorded the evidence of the appellant that she had not spoken  to  her
    parents for a long time.  Her parents moved house in  October  2013  as
    they were unable to afford the rent in the Highfields area  of  Harare.
    The appellant learnt of the move from her sister, who lives in  London.



28) The appellant's evidence was that she had not  spoken  to  her  parents
    since before they moved house, but this move took place only about  six
    months prior to the hearing.  The appellant's parents had been in touch
    with her sister in London, with  whom  the  appellant  herself  was  in
    contact.  Accordingly, the appellant had  news  of  her  parents.   The
    judge was entitled to find on the evidence that her  parents  would  at
    least be able to provide the appellant with shelter.

29) As far as supporting herself was concerned, the judge pointed out  that
    the appellant had obtained qualifications in  the  UK  and  had  worked
    successfully for the City of Westminster.   The judge  considered  that
    her qualifications would be relevant in Zimbabwe and he  was  satisfied
    that she would be able to find work there.  The judge pointed out  that
    the appellant speaks Shona, which is  one  of  the  main  languages  in
    Zimbabwe.  The appellant had lived in Zimbabwe for at  least  20  years
    before coming to the UK.  This is not a case where  the  appellant  has
    lived in the UK since childhood, as in Ogundimu.

30) The findings upon which the balancing exercise was based were  set  out
    by the judge in paragraphs 54-61.   Looking  at  paragraph  70  of  the
    determination, we find it is difficult to identify any material  factor
    which would have affected the outcome of the balancing  exercise  which
    the judge left out of account.

31) The question was raised of whether the judge properly directed  himself
    as  to  the  application  of  the  proportionality  test.   Miss  Smith
    suggested that in following the approach in Gulshan as to whether there
    were good arguable grounds for considering Article 8 outside the  Rules
    the judge may have applied  a  requirement  which  was  not  considered
    necessary by the Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon).

32) We note that having found the appellant would  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the judge proceeded to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules and to address the  questions  set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   The  test  in  Gulshan  did  not  prevent  the
    Appellant from following this course.

33) Miss Smith raised a further issue, however, relating to the use by  the
    judge of the phrase "exceptional compassionate or  compelling  reasons"
    at paragraph 70 of the determination.  In this regard we note that  the
    Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012, and as subsequently amended,
    are intended to reflect previous domestic and Strasbourg  jurisprudence
    on Article 8 and, although they are intended to be comprehensive, there
    may still be cases falling outside the Rules in which the removal of an
    individual will amount to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
    Article 8 rights.  Although in Gulshan the Upper Tribunal  referred  to
    arguments about "exceptional" circumstances, the  phraseology  used  by
    the Tribunal in its conclusions on whether  an  appeal  should  succeed
    under Article 8 was whether there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised by the  Rules  and  whether  removal  would  be
    "unjustifiably harsh".

34) In the  present  appeal  the  judge  weighed  the  public  interest  in
    effective immigration control against the appellant's right to  private
    life in the UK, taking account of the factors  which  demonstrated  the
    establishment and strength of her private life, together with  that  of
    her children.  The factors  which  were  considered  in  the  balancing
    exercise and the reasoning which was given are sufficient to show  that
    the judge properly carried out the balancing  exercise  and  reached  a
    sustainable conclusion.  We see nothing in the judge's approach to  the
    test of proportionality which runs contrary  to  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in  MM  (Lebanon),  having  particular  regard  to  the
    analysis of the case of Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85 at  paragraph  132.   We
    find no error of law in the judge's conduct of the  balancing  exercise
    and assessment of proportionality under Article 8.

35) The remaining aspect of this appeal concerns the judge's  consideration
    of paragraph 276ADE and the question of whether the  appellant  has  no
    ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK.    We  note  that  the
    relevant wording of this provision has altered since the hearing but in
    order to assess whether the judge made an error of law, we  would  look
    at the wording as it was at that time.

36) The appellant's position is that the judge did not have  proper  regard
    to the case of Ogundimu, which the judge referred to at paragraph 63 of
    the determination.  The judge found that the appellant's  parents  were
    in Zimbabwe and although she has been in the UK since 1998 she did  not
    leave Zimbabwe until she was 21 years old and would, in the view of the
    judge, "inevitably have cultural ties with that country."

37) This reasoning is brief.  We have already commented on the position  of
    the appellant's parents and have found that the judge was  entitled  to
    take their presence in Zimbabwe into account, notwithstanding that  the
    appellant personally had had little contact with them in recent months.
     Similarly, the judge was entitled to take into account the  length  of
    time for which the appellant had lived in Zimbabwe, which included  all
    of her childhood and teenage years.  The judge had  previously  made  a
    finding about the appellant's ability to speak Shona.  On the  evidence
    the judge was entitled to find that the appellant still had  ties  with
    Zimbabwe.

38) We are satisfied that the judge made findings upon the relevant factors
    both in relation to paragraph 276ADE  and  in  relation  to  Article  8
    outside the Immigration  Rules.   Although  the  judge's  reasoning  is
    brief, the reasons are adequate to support the findings  made  and  the
    conclusions reached.

Conclusions

39) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

40) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

41) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  we  do
    not consider such an order to be necessary.



Signed      Date 8 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
