
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00242/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2017                          |On 21 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    S A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against   the
    Secretary of State's decision of 25 January 2016 refusing her claim for
    asylum.  In essence, her claim to be at risk on return to Jamaica,  her
    country of nationality, is that she fears harm at the hands of PH, with
    whom she was in a violent domestic relationship in the United  Kingdom.
    The appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  September  2002,
    initially with leave to remain as a  student  nurse  but  has  been  an
    overstayer since 2007.

2.   In an earlier decision following a hearing  in  January  2017  I  found
    errors of law in the decision of the judge who dismissed S A M's appeal
    and ordered that the matter be reheard.

3.   There has been some delay between that hearing and the remaking of  the
    decision, as a consequence of attempts to find the location of PH since
    March 2013.  The  judge  had  been  invited  by  counsel  to  draw  the
    inference that PH had the freedom to go to Jamaica  and  therefore  the
    opportunity to harm the appellant if he chose to do so, but  the  judge
    was not prepared to draw such an inference.  Efforts were  made,  as  I
    say, to try and discover where PH had been during the period from  2013
    since if he had been in Jamaica or in prison he  would  not  have  been
    able to harm the appellant in any event, whereas if he had been in  the
    United Kingdom during that period then that might indicate that  he  no
    longer had any adverse interest in her.

4.   Following investigations carried out by Mr  Norton,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer, as set out in a note to the Tribunal dated 26 May 2017, PH was
    last granted discretionary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2008 and that leave expired in November 2011.   There  was  no
    record of any application or decision or order since November 2008  and
    according to the Home Office records he had no leave to enter or remain
    in the United Kingdom at present.  Investigations  do  not  reveal  any
    record of criminal conviction concerning him.

5.   That was as far as it appears to have been possible  to  take  matters.
    It must be a matter for comment  and  regret  that  the  respondent  is
    unable to say whether a particular person is in the United  Kingdom  or
    not, but, that being said, I am grateful for the efforts that have been
    made to  obtain  information  about  PH  and  his  whereabouts  and  in
    particular to Mr Norton for taking matters as far as it appears it  was
    possible to take them.  In the circumstances Mr Chirico was content  to
    proceed with the hearing today on the basis  that  it  did  not  appear
    likely that any further evidence in relation to this  matter  would  be
    found, and, as I shall refer to later, invited  the  Tribunal  to  make
    inferences and draw conclusions in light of the situation.

6.   The appellant's evidence is that she had  an  unhappy  and  problematic
    childhood in Jamaica, including being the victim of sexual  abuse  from
    her cousins and ill-treatment by her uncle and her  father's  employer.
    As set out above, she came  to  the  United  Kingdom  from  Jamaica  in
    September 2002, leaving behind her two children, who stayed in the care
    of her mother.  Her relationship with the children's father had  broken
    down in around 2000.

7.   The appellant was not successful in renewing her student visa  in  2006
    but she wanted to stay in the United Kingdom  to  be  able  to  provide
    funds for her children in the United Kingdom.  She therefore carried on
    working.  She met PH in  May  2010.   He  became  increasingly  violent
    towards her and this culminated in an incident when  he  threatened  to
    hit her with a chopper and she managed to run away.  She did  not  want
    to involve the police because she feared that he would  report  her  to
    the immigration authorities.  She was persuaded to return  to  him  and
    for a period of time he behaved well but then he became angry again and
    among other things said he was a killer and  would  kill  her  and  her
    family.  The ill-treatment continued, including incidents of rape.  She
    left home for the final time in March 2013.  He had continued  to  ill-
    treat her and he uttered threats at the time when she left.  This  time
    she obtained the assistance of the  police,  which  led  to  her  being
    detained and transferred to an immigration centre.   She  said  in  her
    statement that she could not return to Jamaica because she and PH  were
    from the same parish and she knew he had ties there,  so  could  easily
    learn of her  return  and  his  grandparents  were  well-known  in  the
    community, so he was seen as being from a  well-respected  family.   He
    would also be able to find her because there were a limited  number  of
    hospitals and care homes in Jamaica where she could go to find work  as
    a nurse, which is the only job she has ever done.  Nor did she  believe
    she would be able to seek the protection of the police  in  Jamaica  as
    she said they are corrupt and only investigate crimes for those who are
    willing to pay them bribes.  She  says  in  her  statement  she  cannot
    return to Jamaica because PH is intent on hurting her  and  her  family
    and still has links there and she has no doubt that he would  learn  of
    her return and  ask  someone  living  in  Jamaica  to  kill  her.   She
    considered the only reason he had not killed her  earlier  was  because
    she had given him a place to stay and food to eat.  She  describes  him
    as a violent man who does not tolerate anyone who he  thinks  does  not
    respect him and who will want to seek revenge on her.

8.   In a more recent statement the appellant said  that  she  has  not  had
    contact with PH since he called her at Yarl's Wood in March 2013.   She
    described him as being genuinely scared of the  police.   She  had  had
    contact with PH's sister and was sure that his sister had called her in
    March 2015 to find whether she was in the United Kingdom and  to  relay
    that information to PH.  The appellant had said she  did  not  want  to
    talk to her and cut off the call.  She is unaware of PH's  whereabouts.
    She had been to a christening in August 2016 and a lady  had  said  she
    had seen him around but she did not know how long ago  that  had  been.
    Other people used to see him infrequently in Birmingham and  said  they
    had not seen him for a long time.  She was aware of the  fact  that  he
    was respectful of the police in the United Kingdom and scared of prison
    in the United Kingdom.

9.   I consider first the question of risk on return.

10.  It is clear that the appellant has been the victim of serious  harm  at
    the hands of PH in the past.  It is clear from paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules that the fact that a person has already been  subject
    to persecution or serious harm or to direct threats of such persecution
    or such harm would be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's
    well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm
    unless there are good reasons to  consider  that  such  persecution  or
    serious harm will not be repeated.

11.  The appellant is clearly mindful of  the  fact  that  she  has  had  no
    contact with PH since he telephoned her in Yarl's Wood in  March  2013.
    The evidence as set out in paragraph 8 of her witness  statement  of  5
    September 2016 concerning his whereabouts is  vague.   It  is  entirely
    unclear from that whether or not PH is still in Birmingham.   She  felt
    sure that his sister called her in March 2015 to find out  whether  she
    was still in the United Kingdom and to relay that information  to  him.
    That does not appear to be something said by the sister and again it is
    entirely unclear what the reasons for the call were.

12.  In the witness statement of her son MM he refers to a time when he  was
    hit by a speeding vehicle in the West Indies in 2012.  He says that  as
    far as he is aware he has never been threatened by anyone in connection
    with PH nor does he know any of PH's family but considers that the  hit
    and run was possibly connected to that relationship.

13.  There is also reference in the appellant's daughter JM's  statement  to
    a person in 2012 asking if she was a person of her surname and had just
    come from England.  She said it was possible this was connected to  PH.
    There was also an incident when she was watched by a man who she  found
    out was a police officer in plain clothing who said he wanted  to  kill
    anyone who wanted to date her and thereafter she  received  calls  from
    strange numbers.  These incidents unsurprisingly scared her, but  again
    there is no evidence that they were at all connected to PH.

14.  As regards the question of what inferences can or cannot be drawn  from
    the silence on the part of PH towards the appellant since May 2013  and
    the limited information which Mr Norton was able to discover,  which  I
    have set out above, I do not consider that this can  be  equated  to  a
    real risk.  I entirely appreciate that the appellant has  a  subjective
    fear of PH.  That is amply testified to in her witness  statements  and
    in the medical reports.  But the fact remains that  it  has  been  over
    four years since she had any contact with PH.  If he is in Jamaica then
    it might be thought that some contact would have  been  made  with  her
    family by him if he retained any adverse interest in the appellant, and
    the evidence that I have set out above is far too vague for  a  finding
    in that regard to be made.  Likewise,  although  I  bear  in  mind  the
    appellant's evidence about the fears that PH has of the police  in  the
    United Kingdom and his fears of prison here, that does  not  appear  to
    have precluded his previous ill-treatment of her over a period of  some
    time.  Again, if he retained any adverse interest  in  her,  I  do  not
    consider that it has  been  shown  that  these  potentially  inhibiting
    factors would have led  him  to  refrain  from  contact  with  her  and
    potential ill-treatment of her if he maintained the  animosity  towards
    her that he had previously  had.   I  consider,  bearing  in  mind  the
    language of paragraph 339K, that there are  good  reasons  to  consider
    that the persecution or serious harm will  not  be  repeated,  in  that
    there has been no repetition or threat of repetition over a  period  of
    more than four years since the last occurrence.

15.  As a consequence I do not consider that she has shown that she faces  a
    real risk from PH, and therefore I do not need  to  address  issues  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

16.  A further argument put forward by Mr Chirico  was  that  based  on  the
    same facts, an Article 3 claim should succeed.  He drew on the skeleton
    argument he had prepared for the case of  NG  (Morocco)  on  which  the
    Court of Appeal has granted permission in order  to  consider  how  the
    guidance given by the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Paposhvili
    (Application no. 41738/10) (13 December  2016)  is  to  be  applied  in
    Article 3 cases.  The position in this regard  is  complicated,  as  Mr
    Chirico accepted, by the fact that very recently the Upper Tribunal  in
    EA & Ors [2017] UKUT 00445 (IAC) has concluded that the test set out in
    Paposhvili is not a test that it is open to the Tribunal  to  apply  by
    reason of it being contrary to judicial precedent.  Mr  Chirico  relied
    in part on the procedural requirements set  out  in  Paposhvili,  which
    would require the respondent to make  specific  enquiries  prior  to  a
    removal  decision  and/or  to  obtain  specific  assurances  from   the
    receiving state.  A decision to  remove  without  making  enquiries  or
    obtaining assurances would be unlawful.  He argued that serious  doubts
    were raised in this case by what had happened in the past and there was
    a duty on the respondent to dispel those doubts and this had  not  been
    done and sufficient enquiries had not  been  made.   In  light  of  the
    appellant's fear of harm from PH the Secretary of State was  under  the
    same duty of enquiry as that  adumbrated  in  Paposhvili.   It  was  an
    integral part of Article 3 with regard to removal.

17.  Paragraph 339K, to which I have referred above, was also  of  relevance
    in this regard.  The process required of the Secretary of State  should
    be seen as being part of the  paragraph  339K  provision  and  the  two
    should be read together.  He argued that this was not inconsistent with
    what had been held by the Court of Appeal in GS (India)  [2015]  1  WLR
    3312, which was the authority which the Upper Tribunal in EA  concluded
    stood in the way of following Paposhvili.  Mr Bramble argued that  even
    if Paposhvili were to be taken into consideration, the  level  of  harm
    which gave rise to Article 3 breach as identified in that case was  not
    met on the facts of this case.

18.  Although I am not formally bound by the decision in EA, I am  persuaded
    by the logic in that decision that  Paposhvili  does  not  fall  to  be
    applied by the Upper Tribunal as it goes contrary to precedent, bearing
    in mind what was said in EA, quoting from  Manchester  City  Council  v
    Pinnock [2011] UKSC 6 that it would be  wrong  for  the  court  not  to
    follow a line of authority in the Court of Human Rights where there  is
    a  clear  and  consistent  line  of  decisions  whose  effect  is   not
    inconsistent with some fundamental substantive or procedural aspect  of
    UK law and whose reasoning does not appear to overlook or misunderstand
    some argument or point of principle.  In  EA  the  Tribunal  identified
    that on the one hand Paposhvili represented a departure from the  clear
    and constant case law identified  by  the  Court  of  Human  Rights  at
    paragraph 179, and also that it is a decision which was not  consistent
    with UK domestic law as set out  in  GS  (India).   I  regard  that  as
    extending to the point made by Mr Chirico concerning what was  said  in
    Paposhvili with regard to the making of enquiries and the obtaining  of
    assurances.  Such reasoning is not to be found in authorities  such  as
    GS (India).  I am of course mindful of  the  fact  that  permission  to
    appeal was granted in NG (Morocco), but that is a matter of arguability
    only at this stage, and it  is  not  clear  when  the  matter  will  be
    considered by the Court of Appeal, the hope  being  that  it  would  be
    heard in January or February of next year.  As I say, I am persuaded by
    the reasoning in EA and consider that that reasoning  extends  to  both
    the enquiry and assurance point made by  Mr  Chirico  as  part  of  the
    reasoning in Paposhvili and the  test  set  out  there  for  situations
    involving the removal  of  a  seriously  ill  person  when  substantial
    grounds have been shown for believing that he or she, whether or not at
    imminent risk of dying, would face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the
    absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or  the  lack
    of access to such treatment, or being exposed to a  serious  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
    suffering or to a significant reduction in life  expectancy.   That  is
    not  part  of  the  Article  3  test  under  United  Kingdom  law,  and
    accordingly I consider that no support in the appellant's case  can  be
    derived from Paposhvili.

19.  Mr  Chirico  also  argued  that  the  appellant  should  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  In this regard he  attached  significance  to
    the medical evidence.  There is a report of  Dr  Whittaker-Howe  of  17
    August 2016.  She concluded  that  the  appellant  met  the  diagnostic
    criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) to multiple traumatic
    events and that she had suffered from this  since  childhood.   If  she
    were to be returned to Jamaica  there  would  be  an  increase  in  the
    severity  and  frequency  of  her  PTSD  symptoms.   Dr  Whittaker-Howe
    concluded that the appellant was at low risk of suicide.  If  she  were
    returned to Jamaica she did not expect her  mental  health  to  have  a
    significant impact on her ability to  care  for  herself,  although  an
    increase in PTSD severity would make it more difficult.  If she were to
    return to Jamaica her mental health presented a  number  of  challenges
    that could make work more difficult and in addition her subjective fear
    for her own safety could prevent her from leaving the  house,  reducing
    opportunities for work.  Dr Whittaker-Howe  considered,  however,  that
    the appellant's motivation to provide for her family reduced the impact
    of her mental health on her occupational functioning.

20.  There is also a report from Professor Katona dated 4 October 2017.   He
    considered  that  the  appellant  currently  fulfils  the  criteria  of
    posttraumatic stress disorder and also has  significant  and  disabling
    depressive symptoms, although these are in his view best understood  as
    secondary to her complex PTSD.  He considered that the PTSD was  caused
    by the combination of the repeated domestic abuse  she  experienced  at
    the hands of her former partner PH and her earlier prolonged  childhood
    abuse.  Other factors such as her separation from her children and  her
    mother  and  the  breakdown  of  past  relationships   and   continuing
    immigration uncertainty might well aggravate her  mental  symptoms  but
    did not provide a clinically plausible explanation for  her  core  PTSD
    symptoms.  If returned to Jamaica, he considered that her fear  of  the
    consequences for herself and her immediate family was objectively well-
    justified and that she would feel frightened and under constant  threat
    following forced return to Jamaica which would result in  worsening  in
    her PTSD and associated depressive symptoms and hinder her severely  in
    working to support herself and her family and in meeting  her  own  and
    her family's basic needs such as  food  and  accommodation.   She  told
    Professor Katona that she would feel unable  to  access  mental  health
    care if returned to Jamaica because of the stigma attached to that.  He
    accepted that she  would  be  unlikely  to  seek  out  and  secure  the
    specialist  mental  health  care  she  needed.   There  was  consistent
    research evidence that victims of abuse are at greater  risk  of  being
    revictimised.  He considered that if  she  were  forced  to  return  to
    Jamaica without appropriate specialist therapeutic treatment to address
    her vulnerability she would in his clinical opinion be very  likely  to
    experience  further  abuse.   He  also  considered  that  her  suicidal
    thoughts would be likely to increase in intensity if she were forced to
    return to Jamaica and she would be at real risk of suicide  in  the  UK
    once she had lost all hope of being allowed to  return  and  that  risk
    would remain during the removal process  and,  despite  the  protective
    factor of being reunited with her children and  mother,  once  she  was
    back in Jamaica.  Objective reassurance about the help and support  she
    might receive in Jamaica would only  have  a  very  limited  effect  in
    reducing her suicide risk.

21.  The hurdle that the appellant  has  to  surmount  in  succeeding  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is that there exist very significant  obstacles
    to her integration into Jamaica.  Mr Chirico referred to  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Kamara [2016] 4 WLR 152  concerned  with  the
    concept of a foreign criminal's integration into a country but which it
    was argued was equally applicable in this case, as not  being  confined
    to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life  while  living  in
    the other country.  The idea of "integration", it was said, calls for a
    broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual  will
    be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding  how  life  in  the
    society in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
    participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
    society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of  human
    relationships to give substance to the individual's private  or  family
    life.

22.  In this regard, as Mr Chirico accepted, the appellant is  of  course  a
    national of Jamaica and lived there for over 30 years before coming  to
    the United Kingdom.  She would return to her children and  her  mother.
    Into this would have to be factored her subjective fear of PH  and  the
    medical evidence which I have  set  out  above  concerning  her  mental
    health and the impact on her of return.

23.  I do not  downplay  the  significance  of  the  difficulties  that  the
    appellant would experience on return to Jamaica.  She has some  complex
    PTSD depressive elements,  and  there  is  a  risk  of  suicide  albeit
    assessed by the doctors as low in the case  of  Dr  Whittaker-Howe  and
    somewhat higher in  the  case  of  Professor  Katona.   I  think  these
    assessments  ought  to  have  factored  into  them  to  an  extent  the
    conclusions that I have come to that there is no real risk on return to
    the appellant.  I appreciate the subjective fear that she has, but  the
    absence of an objective basis for that fear must, I think, be  relevant
    to the paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) evaluation.  Her fears  and  her  mental
    health problems are such as to present  obstacles  to  her  integration
    into Jamaica, bearing in mind that she told Dr Whittaker-Howe that  she
    would not access mental health facilities in  Jamaica  because  of  the
    stigma attached to that.  Hopefully that is a viewpoint that she can be
    persuaded to move away from, given  the  benefits  that  would  clearly
    accrue to her from ongoing mental health treatment, albeit  to  a  more
    limited extent in Jamaica than that available in  the  United  Kingdom.
    But the test set out in the subparagraph is a high one.  It is not just
    a matter of obstacles or indeed of significant  obstacles.   There  are
    required to be very significant obstacles to integration in  order  for
    the test to be met.  In my judgment that high threshold is not  crossed
    in this case even bearing in mind the problems  for  the  appellant  on
    return to which I have referred above.  She will have  the  support  of
    her children, now adults,  and  her  mother.   She  will  return  to  a
    community with which she is familiar, and a society with which  she  is
    also familiar.  These are all matters that have to be  factored  in  to
    the points on the negative side of the balance from her point  of  view
    and I consider, as I say, that these matters brought  together  do  not
    show that the high threshold in this case under the  Immigration  Rules
    is crossed.

24.  Nor do I consider that the claim can succeed under  Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  I bear in mind the points Mr Chirico  referred  to  in  his
    skeleton and submissions as to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  the  delay  in
    processing the appellant's asylum claim, the length  of  time  she  has
    been in the United Kingdom, her potential to  make  a  strong  positive
    contribution in the United  Kingdom,  the  extremely  serious  violence
    which she has suffered in the United Kingdom and  the  failure  of  the
    United Kingdom to protect her from domestic violence and the need for a
    cooling off period in those circumstances.  These do not  in  my  view,
    however, amount to compelling factors in this case which are such as to
    render her removal disproportionate, and  therefore  I  find  that  the
    appeal cannot succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules either.

25.  For all these reasons and on all these bases the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 20  December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
