
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00733/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2017                          |On 25th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           MISS MOUNIKA KISTAMGARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Polpitiya and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 10th May  2016  to
    refuse her application for asylum and humanitarian protection.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  and  the
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the UK with
    entry clearance as a student issued in January 2010.  She  returned  to
    India in February 2011 and came back to the UK on 14th April 2011.  She
    made a further application for leave to remain as a student on 20th May
    2011 but that was rejected as was an application made on 24th May  2011
    which was refused on 12th April 2012  on  the  basis  that  false  bank
    statements had been submitted. On 17th May 2012 the Appellant  made  an
    application for asylum.  The basis of  her  application  was  that  she
    could not return to India because she had  converted  to  Christianity.
    She also claims that her mother is a strong believer in Hinduism and is
    a Hindu Goddess. The Appellant claims that when she returned  to  India
    in February 2011 she resisted her mother's  wishes  to  follow  in  her
    footsteps and be a Goddess. She says  that  her  parents  slapped  her,
    pulled her hair and locked her in a room  for  three  days.   Following
    that the Appellant co-operated with her parents until she was  able  to
    escape from the family home and returned to the UK.

 3.  In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  Respondent  accepted  the
    Appellant's identity and nationality and accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had converted to Christianity from Hinduism.   However  the  Respondent
    did not accept that the Appellant's mother  is  a  prominent  religious
    figure in the local community.  The Respondent did not accept that  the
    Appellant is likely to be at risk of persecution upon return  to  India
    on account of her Christian faith.  The Respondent considered that,  in
    any event, there was a sufficiency of protection in India and  that  it
    would be open to the Appellant to internally relocate within India.

 4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge was shown a DVD
    showing a Hindu ritual involving the Appellant  and  her  mother.   The
    judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and her aunt.   The  judge
    concluded on the basis of this evidence that the Appellant's mother;

         "...probably is revered in her local community and that she  has  a
         following of perhaps as  many  as  500  people.   In  addition  the
         appellant has submitted a  report  from  Shantanu  Mohan  Puri  who
         concluded that the appellant's mother  might  be  considered  as  a
         goddess/god-woman in her community." [39]

 5. The judge accepted that it is possible that the Appellant was chastised
    when she returned in 2011 by being slapped and confined in her own room
    for three days [41].  However the judge went on to identify the crux of
    the case as being whether the Appellant's fear  is  well-founded  [42].
    The judge did not accept that the Appellant was at risk of becoming the
    victim of an honour killing because, although it might be thought  that
    to disobey her mother's wishes might be regarded as an insult there  is
    no evidence of any of the Appellant's mother's  followers  ever  having
    harmed anybody and the only evidence of violence by the  mother  is  "a
    single slap inflicted on her daughter in  2011  when  she  returned  to
    India and a single blow when she hit  out  against  her  sister".   The
    judge concluded "such treatment does not amount to persecution and does
    not indicate that the Appellant's mother would go  to  the  lengths  of
    actually taking her life" [42].

 6. The judge considered the expert's report at paragraph 43 and noted that
    the expert concluded that the Appellant's mother's followers "may" harm
    the Appellant in vengeance and that the Appellant's mother may not harm
    her directly but in the guise of Hindu extremist groups "may" persecute
    the Appellant. However the judge concluded that this is not  sufficient
    to show that a real risk exists to the Appellant in this case and  that
    there is no reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant would be
    harmed for disobeying her mother or for changing her religious  beliefs
    [43].  The judge accepted that the Appellant may face  opprobrium  from
    her family because of their disapproval of her defiance of her mother's
    wishes and because of her conversion to Christianity but did not accept
    that there is any real risk of serious harm  sufficient  to  amount  to
    persecution or that there is a real risk of serious harm so as to be in
    need of humanitarian protection [46].  The judge went  on  to  conclude
    that it would be possible for the Appellant to relocate if  she  wishes
    to another part of India.

Error of Law

 7. There are five Grounds of Appeal as set out in the application  and  by
    Mr Slatter at the hearing.  The first ground contends  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account all of the evidence in relation to the ill-
    treatment suffered by the Appellant when she returned to India in 2011.
     Mr Slatter pointed out that in her witness statement (paragraphs 23 to
    24 and 30) the Appellant said that her mother slapped her face multiple
    times, that her father beat her with his sandal and his elbow,  dragged
    her by the hair and locked her in a room, that she had bruises all over
    her body and hurt terribly and was sore for days.   He  submitted  that
    this amounted to evidence of persecution  and  that  this  is  material
    because of paragraph 339K which indicates that evidence of  persecution
    in the past is relevant to the assessment of future risk.

 8. On the other hand Mr Kotas submitted that it is clear  that  the  judge
    accepted that the Appellant was subjected to domestic mistreatment  but
    the judge concluded that this  falls  short  of  persecutory  treatment
    ([41] with reference to [7]). He submitted that this was viewed through
    the prism of paragraph 38 of the Appellant's  witness  statement  where
    she said that after she was released  from  the  room  she  obeyed  her
    parents in order to gain their trust.  He submitted that it was open to
    the judge to find that the  Appellant  may  face  opprobrium  from  her
    family but that this did not amount  to  persecution  or  serious  harm
    sufficient to engage the Convention.

 9. I accept Mr Kotas' submissions on this issue. I agree that it is  clear
    from paragraphs 7,  20,  and  41  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's evidence as to what her parents had done. The conclusion at
    paragraph 46 was therefore open to the  judge  on  the  basis  of  this
    evidence.

10. The second Ground of Appeal contends that the Appellant expressed  fear
    of return to India on two bases and Mr Slatter submitted that the judge
    had muddled these  two  aspects  of  the  case  in  his  decision.   He
    submitted that the primary fear expressed by the Appellant is  that  of
    persecution at the hands of her family and/or her mother's followers in
    her home area as a result of her refusal to follow her mother's calling
    and of disobeying her mother's wishes.  He submitted that the judge did
    not grapple with the Appellant's failure to obey  her  mother's  orders
    and failed to engage with the expert report on this issue.

11. However Mr Kotas submitted that the judge did engage  with  the  expert
    report but that the expert report was equivocal in terms of the risk to
    the Appellant on this ground.  Mr Kotas pointed  out  that  the  expert
    said that the Appellant may face resentment from  her  mother  and  her
    mother's followers and submitted that resentment  does  not  amount  to
    persecution  and  although  the  expert  said  that  she   might   face
    persecution at the hands of her family this is not particularised.

12. I do not accept Mr Slatter's submission that the judge confused the two
    aspects of the Appellant's claim.  It is clear, for example at the  end
    of paragraph 43 and at paragraph 46, that the judge was aware that  the
    Appellant was claiming to be at risk because of disobeying  her  mother
    and  because  of  her  conversion.   I  consider  that  the  judge  was
    sufficiently aware of this and that he separated these two issues.

13. The judge clearly considered the risk to the Appellant as a  result  of
    not following in her mother's footsteps. This issue  is  considered  at
    paragraph 42. the conclusions are consistent with the  expert's  report
    at paragraph 14 where she said:

         "Therefore, in light of this, if the Appellant's mother has ordered
         that the Appellant should follow her footsteps  to  be  a  Goddess,
         then in the eyes of her mother's followers, the Appellant is  bound
         to obey this decision of her mother.  In case the Appellant refuses
         or  fails  to  obey  her  mother's  orders,  then  she  would  face
         resentment from not only her mother but also from the  devotees  of
         her mother.  The Appellant has claimed that her mother  and  father
         have already been physically violent, on her refusal to follow  her
         mother's legacy.  If this is  true  then  the  Appellant's  dissent
         would be regarded as disrespect towards the family honour since  as
         per Indian traditions, children  have  a  morality  to  follow  the
         directions of their parents.  Also the fact  that  the  Appellant's
         family's financial position and status  will  be  affected  by  her
         refusal  to  become  a  Goddess,  but  add  to   their   fury   and
         discontentment towards the Appellant.   The  Appellant  might  face
         persecution at the hands of her family, since she would bring shame
         to the family by not being able to become a Goddess."

14. I accept Mr Kotas' submission that the judge's conclusion, on the basis
    of this and all of the evidence, that the treatment experienced by  the
    Appellant and the possibility that she would face 'resentment' does not
    amount to persecution was open  to  the  judge  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.

15. The third ground relied upon by Mr Slatter relates to  the  Appellant's
    conversion  to  Christianity.   He  submitted  that  this  places   the
    Appellant at further risk on return.  He referred to  page  18  of  the
    expert's report which dealt with the third question put  to  her  which
    asks about the consequences if the Appellant's mother and the community
    or  followers  get  to  know  that  she  has   already   converted   to
    Christianity.  At page 18 the expert said, "the Appellant's  conversion
    of religion might further  put  her  at  risk  of  persecution  if  the
    Appellant's mother and the community/followers get to know  about  it".
    The expert went on to say that a person who renounces his religion  and
    severs his identity from the group is thus "shunned from the community"
    and that the followers may harm the Appellant in vengeance.  The expert
    concludes that section by saying that the Appellant's  mother  may  not
    harm the Appellant directly but in the guise of these  Hindu  extremist
    groups may persecute the Appellant.  Mr Slatter submitted  that  it  is
    unclear from paragraph 43 why the judge concluded that what the  expert
    says on this issue is not sufficient and had given no  explanation  for
    why the expert's evidence should not be accepted.

16. Mr Kotas submitted that shunning does not  amount  to  persecution  and
    that the expert's conclusion that Hindu extremist groups may  persecute
    the Appellant is equivocal and  speculative.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge referred to the correct standard of proof at the end of paragraph
    43 when in concluding that there is no reasonable degree of  likelihood
    that the Appellant would be harmed for disobeying  her  mother  or  for
    changing her religious beliefs.

17. I accept that it may appear appears in paragraph 43 that the judge  may
    have applied too high a standard of proof in not accepting the expert's
    assessment that the mother's followers may harm the Appellant or  Hindu
    extremist groups may persecute the  Appellant.  However,  on  a  proper
    reading of the expert's report and the conclusions reached  therein  as
    well as the judge's decision, I accept Mr Kotas's submission  that  the
    conclusions by the expert are in fact speculative. There is nothing  to
    link the Hindu extremist groups to the Appellant's mother  and,  whilst
    the expert refers to the risk of the Appellant  being  shunned  by  the
    community, again the assessment that followers may harm  the  Appellant
    appears speculative in that it is not based on any evidence of violence
    by her mother's followers or any similar followers. Further, the  judge
    properly stated the standard of proof  at  the  end  of  paragraph  43.
    Therefore in my view it is clear that the judge's conclusions as to the
    use of the words "may" and "might" refer to the speculative  nature  of
    the opinions expressed rather than revealing a  misapplication  of  the
    standard of proof.

18. In these circumstances it is clear that the judge has  found  that  the
    Appellant is not at risk of persecution in her home area.  This finding
    was open to the judge on the basis of the evidence before him. In these
    circumstances there was no need for the judge to go on to consider  the
    issues of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

19. It is contended in the fourth  Ground  that  the  judge  did  not  make
    adequate findings in relation to sufficiency of  protection.  I  accept
    that the judge did not explicitly consider sufficiency  of  protection.
    However this is not material in light of my conclusion above  that  the
    judge's findings as to risk of persecution were open  to  him.  In  any
    event there is no material error as to  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    light of the evidence before the judge in relation to this  issue.   Mr
    Slatter relied on 3.13.19 of the Home Office India Operational Guidance
    Note of May 2013 which states:

         "Given the lack of law enforcement safeguards including the refusal
         to register domestic violence complaints, discriminatory  attitudes
         held by the police, failures in conducting effective investigations
         and corruption, each case should be considered  on  its  individual
         merits to assess whether effective protection will be provided."

20. The judge considered that there was no risk to  the  Appellant  in  her
    home area but, given that  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  internal
    relocation, I consider that there is no material error in  the  failure
    to consider sufficiency of  protection  in  this  case.   Even  if  the
    Appellant is at risk of persecution in her home area and there is not a
    sufficiency of protection then the  judge  went  on  in  any  event  to
    consider internal relocation.

21. In terms of internal relocation Mr Slatter  submitted  that  the  judge
    materially erred in this aspect also.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the evidence of the expert in  relation  to
    this issue.  He referred to page 24 of the expert's  report  where  she
    said:

         "In the Appellant's case the situation is more complex, as India is
         predominantly a Hindu populated country.  The Appellant would  face
         difficulty in internal  relocation  because  of  the  fact  of  her
         conversion.  Every community has its members  living  in  different
         parts of India and thus have their own community centres or  places
         where they could gather and meet and practise their  culture.   The
         Appellant, however, would not be allowed to participate  given  her
         status of a 'convert'.  Thus, wherever she would go her identity of
         a  Hindu  convert  would  follow  her.   Hindu  radicals  are  very
         sentimental when it comes to the dignity of their religion which is
         often disrespected due to  conversion  of  a  fellow  Hindu.   This
         causes anger and resentment amongst the  people  of  the  community
         which is often witnessed with them resorting to violence."

22. At page 25 the expert also concluded that  if  the  Appellant's  mother
    actually enjoys the level of status and power claimed by the  Appellant
    it would not be difficult for the Appellant's mother and her  followers
    to track the Appellant down with the help of political contacts.  It is
    clear that the judge took  this  into  account  as  it  is  recited  at
    paragraph 49.  However the judge  concluded  that  the  number  of  the
    Appellant's mother's followers is relatively small, being put at  about
    500, and mostly local, and the political connections are mostly  local.
    It is therefore clear that the judge did not accept that the  reach  of
    the Appellant's mother and her followers would  enable  them  to  track
    down the Appellant elsewhere in India.

23. Mr Slatter submitted that the judge did not address whether it would be
    unduly harsh for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  in  India.   The  judge
    considered internal relocation at paragraphs 47, 48 and 49.  The  judge
    considered  there  the  risk  to  converts   from   Hindu   nationalist
    organisations but concluded that there are some  risks  from  non-state
    actors but the risk cannot be regarded as real and is not  condoned  by
    the state.  The judge concluded that the evidence does not justify  the
    view that Christian converts are generally at risk  in  India.   It  is
    clear  that  the  judge  was  aware   of   the   Appellant's   personal
    circumstances.

24. Mr Slatter said that the evidence before the judge in relation  to  the
    unduly harsh issue was at paragraph 44 of her witness  statement  where
    the said:

         "It is very dangerous for a woman to move out of  the  family  unit
         and not be under the  supervision  and  protection  of  her  family
         without her family's support.  She said that she would  be  a  lone
         woman upon return and that no one would want to have anything to do
         with her as she would be seen as a woman of bad character and  that
         her life would be in danger."

25. She said that a woman on her own in India is never safe, she needs  the
    protection of her father, her grandfather, uncle,  her  husband  to  be
    safe and that she could not live as a lone woman in India and she would
    be at risk of being raped or killed.  Mr Slatter relied on page  45  of
    the   Appellant's   bundle   which    contains    an    extract    from
    barnabasfund.org/news  and  states  that  India's   Christians   suffer
    discrimination and at page 47 of the Appellant's bundle which  contains
    an extract from an  article  in  Crux  which  talks  about  attacks  on
    Christians.   However,  none  of   this   evidence   corroborates   the
    Appellant's assertion that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for
    her to relocate as a lone woman. In my view the  judge's  consideration
    of the issue of internal relocation took into account  of  all  of  the
    evidence before him and was sufficient.

26. Having considered all of the Grounds of Appeal I am satisfied  for  the
    reasons given above that the judge  made  no  material  errors  in  the
    assessment of the risk of persecution upon return  to  the  Appellant's
    home area, sufficiency of protection in the Appellant's  home  area  or
    the assessment of the option of internal relocation within India.   For
    these reasons I am satisfied that there is no  material  error  in  the
    judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any  material
    error of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction is made.

29. No fee is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
