
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/00392/2013
                                                               AA/00574/2013
                                                               AA/00575/2013
                                                               AA/00576/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination sent           |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 13th August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                               MJW and others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Chirico of counsel instructed by Dean Manson
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Deller a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellants are Sinhalese citizens of Sri Lanka. The first and second
   appellants are respectively husband and wife and the third and fourth
   appellants are their children. They have been given permission to appeal
   the determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Higgins who dismissed
   their appeals against the respondent's decisions of 7 December 2012 to
   give directions for their removal from the UK following the refusal of
   asylum.


2. The wife claimed that she and her husband had been persecuted and feared
   future persecution in Sri Lanka because of his involvement with one of
   the major political parties compounded by the fact that they were of
   different religions, having married across the religious divide.


3. The husband and wife first came to the UK on 1 March 2007 with entry
   clearance as visitors. Their leave expired in August 2007 and they
   overstayed. Both their children have been born here. The wife claimed
   asylum in 2009. The respondent did not believe her account of events or
   that she would be at risk on return. Her claim was rejected in November
   2009. Her attempted appeal was rejected as out of time. In June 2011 the
   wife's solicitors submitted witness statements and new documentary
   evidence and asked that these be treated as a fresh claim by her with her
   husband and the children as her dependents. The respondent declined to do
   this and the wife applied for judicial review. The judicial review
   proceedings were compromised and the respondent agreed to reconsider the
   claim. The decision to reject it was maintained on 7 December 2012 and
   the appellants appealed.


4. The judge heard the appeal on 12 February 2013. The appellants were
   represented but the respondent was not. In a lengthy, careful and
   detailed determination the judge accepted a number of aspects of the
   claim which had been rejected by the respondent. He found that they were
   of the nationality and ethnicity they claimed and of different religions.
   He accepted that they had lived in Sri Lanka and Korea, came to the UK in
   March 2007 and have lived here since in the circumstances they claimed.
   However, whilst he accepted that the husband and his father were
   supporters of the major political party and that the husband suffered
   bruising as a result of an assault in or about July 1999, he rejected the
   claims that the husband was any more than a normal supporter or that his
   involvement with the party led to the consequences alleged. He did not
   accept that the husband had been arrested or detained by the authorities
   or that the appellants would be at risk on return. He dismissed the
   appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was rejected by a judge
   in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, on renewal to the Upper Tribunal,
   permission was granted.


6. I am persuaded that the appellants and those now representing them have
   been labouring under considerable difficulties. It is widely known and I
   accept that their former solicitors, Blakemore's, have gone out of
   business. I accept that the appellants have had great difficulty in
   finding new representation, their new representatives have been unable to
   obtain all the papers from those managing the affairs of Blakemore's and
   that a request made by the new representatives to the respondent for
   information and documents is, as yet, unanswered.


7. I viewed Mr Chirico's request to amend the grounds of appeal, at the
   last minute and without prior notification in the light of these
   difficulties. Prior to the hearing before me there had been an
   application for an adjournment on the basis that the new representatives
   were still trying to obtain relevant documents. This application was
   rejected but it is understandable that it was only at the last minute
   that Mr Chirico was able to obtain instructions from the appellants on
   some of the matters which were still unclear. Mr Deller did not oppose
   the application to amend the grounds of appeal and I agreed that they
   could be amended.


8. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred in law and acted
   unfairly and in breach of the Surendran guidelines by rejecting elements
   of the appellants' claims without putting them on notice that these
   points would be relied and by failing to have regard to the positive
   contribution to the UK made by the husband and wife.


9. Mr Chirico relied on the authorities of Haile v IAT [2001] EWCA Civ 663
   and ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844.


10. The original grounds relied on two of the reasons given by the judge
   for making a partial adverse credibility findings, namely the absence of
   any reference in the husband's mother's affidavit to risk from the Sri
   Lankan authorities and a lack of medical reports relating to the husband
   claimed torture by the authorities in 2006. The amended grounds refer to
   paragraph 101 of the determination and what is claimed to be the judge's
   failure to give the appellants the opportunity to explain why the wife
   did not give further details of her husband's activities and position in
   the political party. Had he done so she would have said that she was not
   only very upset at her interview, as the record shows, but also unwell.


11. During the course of the hearing it became apparent that the
   appellants' new representative and Mr Chirico were not in possession of
   the respondent's bundle. This is a substantial bundle containing a great
   deal of documentary evidence submitted by the appellant's previous
   representatives at an earlier stage. The claim in the grounds of appeal
   that the judge should not have relied on what he concluded was a lack of
   medical reports relating to what happened to the husband in 2006 was made
   on instructions because the new representatives had been told by the
   appellants that relevant medical evidence was in the possession of the
   respondent. However, at that stage they did not have it so that the
   grounds could not be more specific. The prehearing request made to the
   respondent for these and other documents had been made in order to
   rectify this.


12. Mr Deller provided Mr Chirico with a duplicate of the respondent's
   bundle and I adjourned for all of us to examine this and in particular
   the relevant pages. Having done so it became apparent that the respondent
   had been given and the bundle contained a number of medical and
   laboratory reports notes and documents between pages V1 and V22. I find
   that this respondent's bundle was before the judge. He made a number of
   references to documents in it (for example in paragraphs 79, 80 and 81).
   In some areas the reports between pages V1 and V22 are not easy to
   decipher but on close examination it soon became common ground that there
   was written medical evidence from December 2006 relating to injuries
   suffered by the husband. In paragraph 104 of the determination the judge
   said that the fact that the appellant had obtained a medical report about
   injuries he suffered in 1999 but not one for the injuries he suffered in
   2006 undermined his credibility.


13. In his witness statement dated 9 June 2011 the husband said that when
   he was arrested detained and tortured in about September 2006 one of the
   injuries he suffered was to his nose and that this caused long-term
   injury. He also claimed that as a result he had to have an operation on
   his nose at the end of 2006 just before he came to the UK. At V7 of the
   respondent's bundle there is a report from the General Hospital in Chilaw
   which shows that the husband was admitted on 5 December 2006 and
   discharged on 8 December 2006, he had an operation to the septum in his
   nose under anaesthetic, pieces of cartilage were removed and the nose was
   repaired. It also shows that the appellant suffered a cardiac arrest
   during recovery.


14. Mr Deller accepted that the respondent had in her possession the report
   from the hospital in Chilaw but, as appears from paragraph 31 of the
   reasons for refusal letter dated 6 December 2012, had not taken this into
   account. He also accepted that this evidence was before the judge and,
   although there was no indication that his attention had been directed to
   it, it was clearly important evidence in relation to the husband's claim
   as to the injuries he suffered under torture in 2006. The judge had not
   found the appellants to be entirely incredible. On the contrary, he had
   accepted much of their evidence. In an asylum case great care had to be
   exercised and he concluded that he was in no position to argue that,
   whilst there were factors which militated against aspects of the
   appellant's credibility, it could be said that the judge would inevitably
   have reached the same conclusion had he given proper consideration to the
   medical evidence before him. He could not ask me to uphold the
   determination and accepted that it needed to be reheard by a judge in the
   First-Tier Tribunal.


15. I agree with Mr Deller's submissions and reach conclusions in line with
   them, as set out in the last paragraph. I also find that, had the judge
   applied Surendran principles in a case where the respondent was not
   represented, he should have drawn the appellant's representatives'
   attention and given the appellants the opportunity to provide
   explanations for the points on which he subsequently relied in finding
   them partially not credible, namely the absence of any reference in the
   husband's mother's affidavit to risk from the Sri Lankan authorities and
   the wife's failure, in interview, to give further details of her
   husband's and his father's activities in the political party. These
   reinforce my view that the determination cannot stand. I find no merit in
   the second ground of appeal; that in relation to the human rights grounds
   the judge failed to take into account the first two appellants' positive
   contribution to society in this country. I find that the reference to
   this in paragraph 129 of the determination when read with what the judge
   said in paragraph 89, provides sufficient indication that these elements
   were taken into account.


16. I make an anonymity direction to protect the interests of the
   appellants and in particular the children.


17.  I set aside the judge's decision. As there has not been a full and
   effective hearing in the First-Tier Tribunal I agree with the
   representatives that the redetermination of this appeal should take place
   before a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal at Taylor House. None of the
   judge's findings of credibility or fact are preserved. The hearing is to
   be with all issues at large.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

a) Arrangements have already been made for the case to be listed at Taylor
   House on the 12th December 2013.

b) Time estimate three hours.

c) Sinhala speaking interpreter required.

d) To be heard by any First-Tier Tribunal judge other than Judge Higgins.







Signed:........................................
    Date: 9 August 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


