
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00508/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated On|
|On 31 August 2016                  |13 September 2016                  |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                               SONAIMA KHADIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown for Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chambers promulgated on 6 November 2015 which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove
    the Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum


Background


 4. The Appellant was born on 9 May 1983 and is a national of Pakistan. She
    came to the UK on 22 March 2013 on a visit visa.


 5. On 5 September 2013 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her
    human rights. Her application was refused. She appealed  that  decision
    and her appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Herwald on 13  May
    2014. The Judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant  and  her  aunt  in
    relation to her claim that she was at risk on return from her family of
    an 'honour killing' because she had given birth to a  daughter  outside
    of marriage while in the UK. He dismissed  her  appeal  in  a  decision
    dated 29 May 2014 both under the Rules but also found that she did  not
    have well-founded fear of persecution for a reason  recognised  by  the
    Geneva Convention. He did not find that the Appellant or her aunt  were
    credible witnesses as they had given contradictory accounts in  respect
    of a number of key aspects  of  her  claim  which  he  noted  had  been
    conceded by counsel who  represented  the  Appellant.  He  rejected  at
    paragraph 21(o) the claim that there had been threats to the Appellants
    life or well being. He found that she was a resourceful woman  who  had
    previously run a business in Pakistan and had her own bank account  and
    savings rejecting her claim that her account had been closed  down.  He
    found as a fact that the Appellant did not face a risk from her  family
    on return but considered that in the alternative on the  basis  of  his
    findings that she was a financially sound professional woman she  could
    relocate and that would not be unduly harsh.


 6. An application was made to appeal the decision on the basis  only  that
    the Judge had failed to adequately address the best  interests  of  the
    children. The application for permission to appeal was  refused  on  20
    June 2014.


 7. On 15 July 2014 the Appellant claimed asylum. On  23  December  2014  a
    decision was made to refuse that application and remove  the  Appellant
    from the UK.


The Judge's Decision


 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Chambers  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found:


      a) The starting point of  his  decision  was  the  guidance  given  in
         Devaseelan 2002 UKIAT 00702


      b) He summarized that the Appellants fear had been that on her  return
         she would be the subject of an honour killing which  was  the  same
         factual matrix as that which was placed before Judge Herwald on  20
         June 2014.


      c) He found that the Judges conclusion after hearing evidence from the
         Appellant and her aunt was that he did not find them to be credible
         witnesses and made a finding that she was  not  at  risk  from  her
         family on return. He did  consider  the  alternative  scenario  and
         concluded that it was not unduly harsh for her to relocate.


      d) He noted that permission to appeal the decision was refused and the
         application was not renewed.


      e) He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider the fact  that  the  Appellant  would  be  persecuted  by  her
    immediate family and by society in general as having  a  child  outside
    marriage was a serious deviation from the cultural norm.


10. On 6 January 2016 an Upper Tribunal Judge gave permission to appeal.


11. On 27 January 2016 a Rule 24 Notice was filed arguing  that  the  Judge
    had directed himself appropriately given  that  the  same  issues  were
    raised before him as before Judge Herwald.


12. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:


      a) The Judge failed to refer to the Country Guidance case at the  time
         of his decision which was KA and Others (domestic violence  -  risk
         on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC)


      b) Judge Chambers essentially adopted the findings  of  Judge  Herwald
         and failed to take account of the more recent decision in SM  (lone
         women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067


      c) The grant of permission identified that there was no assessment  of
         the risk to a mother and child where the  child  was  born  out  of
         wedlock by reference to SM


      d) The risk to a single woman  with  an  illegitimate  child  was  not
         looked at in the CG cases and while there was a  reference  in  the
         headnotes 5 and 6 of SM it was not clear if they were referring  to
         a child out of wedlock.


13. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that:


      a) He relied on the Rule 24 Notice.


14. In reply Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant submitted:


      a) That as an assessment of the background material in relation to the
         position of woman in Pakistan and the risk to them of  gender-based
         persecution paragraph 14 was not enough.


      b) He relied on the guidance set out at paragraph 73 of SM.


Finding on Material Error


15. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.


16. It is argued in the extremely brief grounds that the  Judge  failed  to
    assess the risk to the Appellant not simply on the basis of  risk  from
    her family but from society in general as the mother of  a  child  born
    out of wedlock.


17. I note that the Judge identified in paragraph 15 of his  decision  that
    the starting point in his  determination  was  the  guidance  given  in
    Devaseelan noting that 'the factual  issues  were  the  same  as  those
    raised again in the recent application and in this appeal.'


18. Judge Herwald heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her  aunt  in
    relation to her claim that she had been made the subject of threats  by
    her family and in a detailed and well reasoned analysis  at  paragraphs
    21 (a)-(p) set out why he came to the conclusion that the Appellant and
    her aunt had not given truthful evidence about her risk from her family
    and concluded at 21 (q) ' I do not find that this woman faces any  fear
    from her family on return ..'  .


19. His primary finding therefore was that the Appellant was not at risk of
    an honour crime from her family and I am satisfied that  there  was  no
    reason or argument placed before the Judge to go behind that  principal
    conclusion in relation to the risk from her family.


20. While I note that both Judge Herwald and Judge Chambers did  not  refer
    to any country guidance cases I remind myself that In HH  (Afghanistan)
    v SSHD  [2014] EWCA Civ 569, it was held that where the Upper  Tribunal
    had considered the risks that an asylum seeker said he  would  face  on
    return to Afghanistan, its failure to refer specifically to the country
    guidance case enumerating those risks was not an error, or  a  material
    error, of law. I am satisfied that Judge Herwald had considered all  of
    the factors that were  relevant  to  the  risk  on  return  whether  he
    specifically referred to KA or  not.  While  it  suggested  that  Judge
    Chambers did not refer to SM the relevant facts which  were  summarised
    in the headnotes (iv)-(vi) as relevant to the issue of the risk for the
    Appellant as a lone female with a child born out of wedlock.


         "iv. It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
         or older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps  if
         a woman has qualifications enabling her to get well-paid employment
         and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.


         v.   Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
         by family members and other  sources  of  possible  social  support
         because she is in an irregular situation, internal relocation  will
         be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a question
         of fact in each case. (my bold)


         vi.  A single woman or female head of household  who  has  no  male
         protector or social network may be able to use the  state  domestic
         violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of such  shelters
         is on reconciling people with their family networks, and places are
         in short supply and time limited. Privately  run  shelters  may  be
         more flexible,  providing  longer  term  support  while  the  woman
         regularises her social situation, but again, places are limited.'


21. It cannot be argued that  Judge  Herwald  ignored  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant would be returning to Pakistan as the mother of a child  born
    out of wedlock as he specifically referred to that fact in paragraph 21
    (o) of his decision. He concluded however as I indicated above that the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return to her family.  He  considered
    the alternative position and therefore I am satisfied took into account
    the risk from the wider community but recognised and indeed anticipated
    what would be  said  in  SM  that  much  depended  on  the  social  and
    particularly the financial circumstances of the  Appellant.  While  not
    minimizing the challenges to her returning as a woman with a  child  he
    accepted was born out of wedlock he noted that she was a well  educated
    woman who had a majority share in  a  successful  business  (paragraphs
    16,21(o)-(q)) and such it would not be unreasonably harsh to expect her
    to relocate if she chose to.


22. I do not accept Mr Browns argument that  SM  does  not  deal  with  the
    position of single women who are mothers of illegitimate children  from
    society in general as this is specifically referred  to  in  paragraphs
    67,79-80,82 and 98 and I am satisfied  that  there  is  nothing  I  the
    decision to suggest that a woman in the Appellants position  could  not
    return. I note that the Tribunal had before them a report from Dr Roger
    Ballard, a Consultant Anthropologist and Director  of  the  Centre  for
    Applied South Asian Studies. His report was entitled "Risk on return to
    Pakistan in the case of a single mother and her illegitimate children.'




23. In relation to that report their finding was at paragraphs 67 and 69:


         67.  In general, we accept Dr Ballard's  written  evidence  that  a
         female head of household in Pakistan  with  no  husband  or  family
         backing, would be treated as kinless and a demimondaine, because of
         her inability  to  explain  her  circumstances  truthfully  to  new
         friends and neighbours. His opinion was that such  a  person  would
         have little difficulty in finding a room in a five star  hotel  but
         that without a respectable male guardian, she would  be  unable  to
         find cheaper accommodation, and thus would be at risk of  accepting
         an accommodation offer which she realised too late came with sexual
         strings attached.  That observation was not  sourced,  and  is  not
         differentiated by age,  social  position,  education  or  financial
         resources, as is the case in other generic reports before  us.   We
         treat that part of Dr Ballard's evidence with a degree of  caution.
         We accept that accommodation is more readily available to women who
         are in a strong  financial  or  social  position,  but  we  do  not
         consider that the other country evidence, particularly the evidence
         of the Canadian IRB or the US State Department Report  supports  Dr
         Ballard's assertion that nothing short of a 5star  hotel  will  do.
         ...


         69.  In so far as the risk in a woman's home area is concerned,  we
         also accept his assertion that where her family will not  accept  a
         woman's return to them, she runs a higher risk of ostracism on  the
         basis that her sin would be perceived as having been  exceptionally
         serious; however, we treat that assertion with a degree of  caution
         in relation to women who are able  to  make  their  way  in  larger
         cities because they are older, or educated,  in  a  good  financial
         position, or have a male guardian."


24. I note that SM is not a CG case  but  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is
    nothing in that case that would have made a  material  outcome  to  the
    decision made by Judge  Chambers  as  all  of  the  factors  that  were
    accepted as being of relevance to the issue of relocation and the  risk
    from the wider community as set out above had been considered by  Judge
    Herwald: his starting point was that she could return without  risk  to
    her family but is she chose to she would because of her business acumen
    and savings be in a position to relocate to a larger city even  as  the
    lone mother of a child born out of wedlock.


25. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's  determination  while  brief
    when read as a whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  based
    on cogent reasoning.


CONCLUSION


26. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.


DECISION


27. The appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                                                  Date
12.9.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell



