

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 August 2017                      |On 22 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MD
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Mason, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim and immigration history

       2. The appellant is a citizen of the Tanzania and claims that  he  is
          at risk of persecution because he is gay.

       3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in  1999  as  a  student.
          The appellant therefore has a lengthy immigration  history,  which
          it is only necessary to summarise in this decision.


       4. The appellant's leave to remain as a student came  to  an  end  in
          2001 and he  remained  without  leave.   In  2008  he  entered  an
          Islamic marriage and lived with his wife  and  her  son,  J.   J's
          father died in Burundi and it is claimed viewed the  appellant  as
          his father.  By 2012 the appellant separated from his  wife,  when
          he claims she found out  that  he  was  also  involved  in  a  gay
          relationship.

       5. The appellant then unsuccessfully applied to remain on  the  basis
          of  family  life  with  a  girlfriend  in  2013.   The  First-tier
          Tribunal dismissed an appeal on this basis on  Article  8  grounds
          in a decision dated 10 November 2013.

       6. On 9 May 2014, the appellant made an unsuccessful  application  to
          remain based on his relationship with J.

       7. Whilst in detention on  11  October  2014  the  appellant  made  a
          further asylum claim  based  upon  his  claim  to  be  gay.   That
          application was refused in a decision dated 19 December 2014.   At
          the appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on  10  February
          2017, that is the subject of challenge in these  proceedings,  the
          appellant relied upon a very detailed witness  statement  dated  9
          February 2017 ('the 2017 statement').  This  includes  a  detailed
          account of the  history  of  his  claimed  relationships  and  the
          struggles along his journey to eventually 'coming out'  as  a  gay
          man.  It is only necessary to summarise that account below.




              i) He was very slow to admit to himself that he  was  gay  and
                 struggled with his sexual identity partly  because  of  his
                 upbringing in Tanzania where homosexuality is  illegal  and
                 pressure from his family.

             ii)  Notwithstanding  this  he  traced  a   long   history   of
                 clandestine gay relationships starting from when he  was  a
                 teenager in Tanzania.

            iii) Although the appellant continued having  gay  relationships
                 in the UK he did not admit this to his sister  and  mother,
                 for fear of being disowned.

             iv) The appellant got together with his  ex-wife  in  2006  and
                 married her in 2008 partly to please his mother who  wanted
                 him to get married and start a family.  When they separated
                 in 2012 his sister and mother once again placed pressure on
                 him to start a new relationship and he  got  together  with
                 the girlfriend referred to above. The  appellant  continued
                 having gay  relationships  during  his  relationships  with
                 these two women.

              v) The appellant then began a relationship  with  one  of  his
                 sister's gay friends called Paul in 2012 but  she  did  not
                 know about the  relationship  although  she  may  have  had
                 suspicions about the appellant's sexuality.

             vi) The appellant was detained in 2014  but  released  in  2015
                 when he was dispersed to Liverpool.  In 2016 he met a group
                 that helped LGBTI asylum seekers in  Manchester  and  'came
                 out' on Facebook  in  April  2016.   He  was  referred  for
                 counselling with the LGBT Foundation  by  Mr  Braunston  in
                 November 2016 and receives support from a  Church  that  is
                 supportive of his sexual identity.

            vii) His family refused to have contact with him after  he  came
                 out.


Procedural history

       8. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated  19
          December 2014 refusing his asylum claim.  That appeal  took  place
          at an oral hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on  10  February
          2017.  After a period of some 3 months less a day, the  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge signed the decision,  which  was  then  promulgated
          the same day.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,
          having found the appellant's claim to be gay to not be credible.


       9. In a decision dated 5 June  2017  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Campbell granted permission to appeal observing that  it  is
          arguable that the First-tier Tribunal was mistaken  regarding  the
          basis of a previous application  made  by  the  appellant.   Judge
          Campbell observed that the materiality of any  error  "will  be  a
          matter for the UTJ deciding the issue.  The decision  is  thorough
          and  has  the  characteristic  forensic  precision  of  the   very
          experienced judge who prepared it."

      10. The respondent relied upon a rule 24 notice dated 3 April 2017  in
          which it was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
          were open to it.  This argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
          cogent reasons for disbelieving the appellant  which  went  beyond
          any claimed misunderstanding of the factual background.

Hearing

      11. Ms Mason relied upon and amplified the  grounds  of  appeal.   She
          submitted that the First-tier Tribunal made  two  factual  errors,
          which played a material role in the factual  findings,  such  that
          there had been unfairness.  Ms Mason also argued that  the  First-
          tier Tribunal failed to take into account  relevant  evidence  and
          failed to assess the appellant's claim to be gay in light  of  the
          evidence rehearsing the cultural, familial and religious  barriers
          he faced before 'coming out'.


      12. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 notice  and  submitted  that  any
          factual errors are not  material  because  of  the  other  adverse
          credibility findings.  I refer to the submissions in  more  detail
          below.


      13. At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

      14. Ms Mason accepted that the period of nearly three months delay  in
          signing the decision does not in itself give rise  to  a  material
          error of law but that it must be considered as a  relevant  factor
          alongside  the  other  grounds  of  appeal,  which  she  submitted
          supported the proposition that the  necessary  degree  of  anxious
          scrutiny to all the evidence was missing.

   1) Mistakes of fact

      15. The appellant has drawn my attention to two mistakes of fact.   Mr
          Bates did not dispute these factual mistakes per se.


      16. First, the First-tier Tribunal recorded on two  occasions  [8  and
          72] that the appellant submitted an application dated 9  May  2014
          to remain on the basis of a marriage, that  had  ceased  to  be  a
          marriage, and commented that there  was  no  adequate  explanation
          for this.  There was no need for such an  explanation  because  it
          is clear from the papers  in  the  respondent's  bundle  that  the
          application was not based upon the partnership route  but  on  his
          parental relationship  with  J.   That  the  relevant  application
          (which  was  not  in  the  papers  before  me  or  the  First-tier
          Tribunal) was based upon his  claimed  parental  relationship,  is
          clear from the following evidence before the First-tier Tribunal:


              i) The application was accompanied  by  a  parental  agreement
                 dated 26 March 2014 between the appellant and  his  ex-wife
                 (who were living at separate addresses).

             ii) The notice of decision refusing  the  application  dated  4
                 July 2014 only addresses the  claim  to  remain  under  the
                 'parent route' and on the basis of private life.

            iii) Further representations dated 23  September  2014  detailed
                 the continuing relationship between  the  appellant  and  J
                 notwithstanding the separation two years previously.

             iv) The appellant's 2017 statement at [22] and [23].


      17.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was   therefore   clearly   wrong   in
          predicating part of the credibility  assessment  on  the  mistaken
          belief that the 2014 application  was  made  on  the  basis  of  a
          relationship that no longer existed at the time.  This mistake  of
          fact played a material albeit not determinative role in the First-
          tier Tribunal's credibility assessment of not just  the  appellant
          but his ex-wife.  She  gave  important  evidence  at  the  hearing
          confirming that their relationship broke down when she  discovered
          that the appellant was involved in a gay relationship in 2012.


      18. Second, the First-tier Tribunal has provided a  single  reason  at
          [78] for concluding that the appellant  has  not  told  the  truth
          about his family's knowledge and reaction to him being gay in  the
          following terms:

                 "His  sister  was  aware   of   the   appellant's   alleged
                 relationship with Paul but attended the  previous  Tribunal
                 case to give evidence on behalf of the appellant.  I do not
                 find that the appellant has told the truth with  regard  to
                 his family."


      19. The difficulty with this is that it is  clear  from  the  evidence
          before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  2017  statement  and  the
          responses to questions 124 and 127 of the asylum  interview)  that
          the sister  was  not  aware  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  gay
          relationship with Paul or that he was gay when she  gave  evidence
          before the 2013 First-tier Tribunal.  There was evidence that  she
          disapproved of their friendship and may have  had  suspicions  but
          nevertheless encouraged him to have relationships with women.


      20.  The  attitude  of  the  appellant's  family  in  the  UK  to  the
          appellant's   relationships   and   sexual   orientation   was   a
          significant part of his evidence.  The mistake of  fact  regarding
          the sister's knowledge played a material albeit not  determinative
          part in the First-tier Tribunal's overall credibility  assessment.



      21. Mr Bates acknowledged that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  mistaken
          about two important aspects of the appellant's account as set  out
          above.  I entirely accept that several other reasons are  provided
          to support the First-tier Tribunal's adverse  credibility  finding
          but I am satisfied that the accepted mistakes  of  fact  played  a
          material part in the reasoning of the decision-maker  and  it  has
          therefore erred in law - see E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

   2)  Approach to  appellant's  evidence  describing  the  history  of  his
      claimed relationships and sexual orientation

      22. At [73]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  there  were  three
          strands of the appellant's life which were incompatible with  each
          other: (i) his commitment to Christianity; (ii) his  relationships
          with women and Islamic marriage; (iii) his gay relationships.   In
          the 2017 statement the appellant  sought  to  provide  a  detailed
          explanation as to how confused and unhappy he  was  and  the  very
          slow painful journey towards living  as  an  openly  gay  man  who
          remained  committed  to  Christianity.   These  explanations   are
          summarised but no clear findings of fact are  made  regarding  the
          plausibility  of  the  explanation  provided  for   the   apparent
          incompatible strands in  the  appellant's  life,  particularly  in
          light of the Asylum Policy Instruction on  Sexual  Orientation  in
          Asylum Claims, 3 August 2016, which states:


                 "A recognition that the claimant's  sexual  orientation  or
                 conduct is  disapproved  of,  either  by  their  family  or
                 because of legal, cultural or  religious  mores,  may  lead
                 some LBG claimants to have  developed  beliefs  that  their
                 sexual orientation is in fact 'wrong' and which needs to be
                 either changed  and  more  probably,  hidden.  In  avoiding
                 hostility, discrimination and possibly criminal  sanctions,
                 many claimants may have  kept  aspects  of  and  sometimes,
                 large parts of their lives secret. Many will  have  engaged
                 in avoidance strategies,  such  as,  only  revealing  their
                 orientation to a very limited circle of people  (or  to  no
                 one at all), or abstaining from  any  sexual  or  emotional
                 relationships or living  extremely  discreetly.  Some  will
                 have, in  addition  to  hiding  their  sexual  orientation,
                 evaded detection by engaging in lifestyles that conform  to
                 normative cultural heterosexual stereotypes".


      23. In a similar vein the First-tier Tribunal has  concluded  at  [75]
          that the appellant provided "false evidence" to  the  2013  First-
          tier Tribunal in relying upon a relationship with  his  girlfriend
          that was not genuine.  The First-tier Tribunal has  misinterpreted
          the appellant's evidence.  He did not say  that  the  relationship
          was not genuine: he accepted he was in  a  relationship  with  his
          girlfriend but that the relationship was entered mainly to  please
          his  mother  and  sister,  and  to  conform  to  the  heterosexual
          lifestyle demanded by his family and  culture.   When  making  its
          findings the First-tier Tribunal has not  considered  whether  the
          appellant was engaged in "avoidance strategies" as  distinct  from
          providing deliberately false evidence.

Conclusion

      24. This is an appeal that turned entirely on the credibility  of  the
          appellant's claim to be gay.  When  the  errors  identified  above
          are  considered  together  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal's credibility assessment contains material errors of  law
          and must be set aside.  That would be  my  decision  whatever  the
          timing of the signature on the decision.

Disposal

      25. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.  This is because completely fresh findings  of  fact  in
          relation to detailed evidence are necessary.

Decision

      26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      27. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 August 2017

