
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00519/2012
                                                               AA/00520/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Date Sent                    |
|on 9th August 2013                            |On 27th September 2013       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            CHAUDHARY NAEEM AHMAD
                                 HINA NAEEM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms McEwan of Thompson & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Sacks, promulgated following hearing at North Shields on  5th
        April 2013, in which he dismissed the Appellants appeals against  a
        direction for their  removal  to  Pakistan  which  accompanied  the
        refusal  of  their  claims  for  asylum  or  any  other   form   of
        international protection.


     2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton  on
        17th May 2013 on the basis that when assessing  if  the  Appellants
        would engage in paragraph 2 (i) behaviour, according to para  6  of
        the head note to MN [2012] UKUT 00389, it was necessary to consider
        behaviour since arriving UK which may be relevant. It was found the
        Appellants had  been  active  in  the  UK  and  such  evidence  was
        supported by letters from the Ahmaddiya Muslim Association UK.  The
        Judge erred in not explaining why he rejected this evidence and  it
        was not sufficient for the Judge to speculate that  the  Appellants
        had duped a  highly  reputable  and  organised  body  such  as  the
        Ahmaddiya Association.


     3. Judge Sacks accepted the Appellants are Pakistani nationals of  the
        Ahmadi faith. He stated in paragraph 16 (4)  of  his  determination
        that the letter from the Ahmaddiya Muslim Association  (hereinafter
        referred to as 'the Association') dated  4th  March  2012  did  not
        satisfy him that the Appellants practiced their  religious  beliefs
        openly in defiance of the Pakistan Penal Code on the  evidence  and
        that, in fact, they were very careful and secretive about  the  way
        in which they approached third parties  and  only  within  intimate
        social gatherings within their  own  home  would  they  turn  to  a
        discussion of their faith.   Judge  Sacks  also  found  there  were
        significant discrepancies and contradictions  in  the  evidence  as
        outlined in the determination.


     4. Having considered the determination in detail I find it is infected
        by legal errors such that it must be set  aside  and  the  decision
        remade. Three particular errors of concern are:

     i.  Structural failure in the determination. At paragraph  16  (9)  the
      Judge  states  that  he  viewed  the  letter  from   the   Association
against adverse credibility findings made whereas the content      of  those
letter should have been considered as part of the               evidence  as
a whole before any adverse credibility findings       were  arrived  at.  To
find the Appellant not credible and  then          compare  such  a  finding
against the letters, which are rejected as       a result,  is  contrary  to
the guidance from the Court of Appeal in         relation  to  how  evidence
of this nature should be evaluated.

     ii. In paragraph 16 (9) the Judge also  found  there  was  no  evidence
      of  the  sur  place  claim  whereas  a  letter  from  the  Association
dated   January   2013    clearly    confirmed    he    had    engaged    in
activities in the United Kingdom. Not only  is  the  statement         there
was no evidence of such activities not  correct,  the             structural
failure referred to above may  have  led  the  Judge           to  disregard
evidence which should have properly been taken        into account by him.

     iii.     Even if the Judge was correct in finding that  the  Appellants
     would not practice their faith  openly  in  Pakistan  as  they  had  in
the United Kingdom the case law establishes that the motive for         such
behaviour needs to be considered. It is often referred to  as        the  HJ
(Iran) point in cases of this nature. The  Judge  failed  to           carry
out the necessary analysis.


     5. I set the determination aside. The findings  regarding  nationality
        and religion are not challenged and shall  be  preserved  findings.
        The determination shall stand as a  record  of  the  oral  evidence
        given at that hearing. I was invited by Miss McEwen to  remake  the
        decision based upon the evidence available to the Tribunal  without
        the need for any further oral evidence.  Mrs  Rackstraw  raised  no
        objection and submissions were invited from the advocates  on  this
        basis.



Discussion



     6. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of  State  notes  a
        number of contradictions and  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  but
        accepted that the Appellants passports are genuine and, in light of
        the information contained therein and especially that  relating  to
        their religion [12], it was accepted the Appellants are members  of
        the Ahmadi faith, although the First Appellant's knowledge  of  the
        faith  is  stated  not  to  be  of  a  'high  level'  [15].   First
        Information Report (FIR) documents submitted  were  not  originals,
        stated to be inconsistent  with  the  account  given,  and  readily
        available in Pakistan, as a result which it was not  accepted  that
        the three FIR were lodged against the First Appellant in  September
        2009 [21].  In the alternative, if the FIR are  genuine,  he  would
        not be at risk on return as the police had  already  dismissed  the
        claims as unfounded [22].   In  relation  to  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, it was accepted the  First
        Appellant made a  genuine  effort  to  substantiate  his  claim  by
        attending interview, providing a full response to questions  asked,
        and submitting all material factors and documents at his  disposal,
        as a result the first two of the five requirements of the rule were
        accepted as being met [38].  The Secretary of State did not accept,
        however, that all the First Appellants statements were  consistent,
        coherent, or plausible and ran contrary  to  specific  and  general
        information relevant to the Appellants case  [339L  (iii)].  It  is
        also said the Appellants failed to make their claim at the earliest
        possible opportunity without  demonstrating  good  reason  for  not
        having done so [339L (iv)] and that the general credibility of  the
        Appellants has not been established [339L (v)].  In addition, it is
        stated that no sur place activities in the United Kingdom had  been
        established.


     7. The assessment of risk on return for Ahmadi from Pakistan has to be
        considered in light of the current country guidance case of MN and
        others (Ahmadis - country conditions -  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2012]
        UKUT 00389(IAC). The head note summarises the relevant guidance  as
        follows:


          (ii) (a)     The background  to  the  risk  faced  by  Ahmadis  is
   legislation that                      restricts the way in which they are
   able openly to practise their faith.                The  legislation  not
   only      prohibits      preaching      and      other      forms      of
   proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts   other   elements   of
     manifesting one's religious beliefs, such  as  holding  open  discourse
           about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not  amounting  to
          proselytising. The prohibitions include openly referring to  one's
              place of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader  as
   an                  Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted to refer
   to the call to                   prayer as azan nor  to  call  themselves
   Muslims or refer to their faith               as Islam. Sanctions include
   a fine and imprisonment and if                      blasphemy  is  found,
   there is a risk of the death penalty which to date                    has
   not  been  carried  out   although   there   is   a   risk   of   lengthy
   incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is clear  evidence  that
          this legislation is used  by  non-state  actors  to  threaten  and
   harass                   Ahmadis.  This  includes  the  filing  of  First
   Information Reports (FIRs)                (the first step in any criminal
   proceedings) which can result in                       detentions  whilst
   prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are  also                 subject
   to  attacks  by  non-state  actors   from   sectors   of   the   majority
   Sunni Muslim population;


          (ii) (b)     It is, and has long been,  possible  in  general  for
   Ahmadis to practise                   their faith on a  restricted  basis
   either in private or in  community  with                  other  Ahmadis,
   without infringing domestic Pakistan law;


          (iii) (a)    If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate  that  it  is  of
   particular  importance                  to  his  religious  identity   to
   practise and manifest his faith openly in                    Pakistan  in
   defiance   of   the   restrictions   in   the   Pakistan    Penal    Code
   (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and   298C,   by   engaging   in   behavior
     described in paragraph (ii)(a) above, he or she is likely to be in need
                  of protection, in the light of the serious nature  of  the
   sanctions that                   potentially apply as well as the risk of
   prosecution under section                 295C for blasphemy;


          (iii)(b)     It is no answer to expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
   description just                 given to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour
   described in paragraph (ii)(a)                above  ("paragraph  (ii)(a)
   behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution;


          (iv)         The need for protection applies equally  to  men  and
   women. There is                  no basis  for  considering  that  Ahmadi
   women as a whole are at a                 particular or additional  risk;
   the  decision  that  they   should   not   attend                 mosques
   in Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi Community                    following
   attacks   on   the   mosques   in Lahore in   2010.   There   is   no
   evidence that women in particular were the target of those attacks;


          (v)          In  light  of  the  above,  the  first  question  the
   decision-maker must ask                   is  (1)  whether  the  claimant
   genuinely is an Ahmadi. As  with  all                     judicial  fact-
   finding   the   judge   will   need   to   reach   conclusions   on   all
   the  evidence  as  a  whole  giving  such  weight  to  aspects  of   that
      evidence  as  appropriate  in  accordance  with  Article  4   of   the
     Qualification Directive.  This is likely to include an enquiry whether
               the  claimant  was  registered  with  an   Ahmadi   community
              in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there  on  a  regular
   basis.                     Post-arrival    activity    will    also    be
   relevant. Evidence likely  to  be                     relevant  includes
   confirmation from the UK Ahmadi headquarters                regarding the
   activities   relied   on    in Pakistan and    confirmation    from
   the local community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping;


          (vi)         The next  step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the
   claimant's intentions or                  wishes as to his or her  faith,
   if returned to Pakistan.  This is relevant                  because  of
   the  need  to  establish  whether  it   is   of   particular   importance
   to  the  religious  identity  of  the  Ahmadi  concerned  to  engage   in
      paragraph  (ii)(a)  behaviour.  The  burden  is  on  the  claimant  to
          demonstrate that any intention or wish to  practise  and  manifest
              aspects of the faith openly that  are  not  permitted  by  the
   Pakistan                 Penal  Code  (PPC)  is  genuinely  held  and  of
   particular importance to                  the claimant to preserve his or
   her religious identity.  The decision                   maker  needs  to
   evaluate   all    the    evidence.    Behaviour    since    arrival    in
   the UK may also be relevant. If the  claimant  discharges  this  burden
     he is likely to be in need of protection;


           (vii)         The  option  of  internal  relocation,   previously
   considered to be                      available  in  Rabwah,  is  not  in
   general reasonably open  to  a  claimant                   who  genuinely
   wishes   to   engage   n   paragraph   (ii)(a)    behaviour,    in    the
   light  of  the  nationwide  effect  in Pakistan of  the   anti-Ahmadi
     legislation;


          (viii)       Ahmadis who are not able to show that they  practised
   their faith at                   all in Pakistan or that they did  so  on
   anything other than the                       restricted basis  described
   in paragraph 2(ii) above are in  general                 unlikely  to  be
   able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes                  are
   to practise and manifest their  faith  openly  on  return,  as  described
     in paragraph 2(a) above;


          (ix)         A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on  post-arrival
   conversion or                revival in belief and practice will  require
   careful evidential analysis.                  This will probably  include
   consideration of evidence of the  head  of                the  claimant's
   local United     Kingdom Ahmadi     Community     and      from
   the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases where  there  has
          been a conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's  account
   as                  a whole may be relevant to the assessment  of  likely
   behaviour on                 return;


          (x)          Whilst  an  Ahmadi  who  has  been  found  to  be not
   reasonably  likely  to                   engage  or  wish  to  engage  in
   paragraph 2(a) behaviour is, in general,               not at  real  risk
   on    return    to    Pakistan,    judicial    fact-finders    may     in
   certain   cases   need   to   consider   whether   that   person    would
     nevertheless be reasonably likely to be targeted  by  non-state  actors
          on return for religious persecution by reason of his/her prominent
                  social and/or business profile.


     8. The case identified two critical questions the first  of  which  is
        that the decision-maker must ask whether the claimant genuinely  is
        an Ahmadi. In this appeal this is  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of
        State  in  the  refusal  letter  and  supported  by  the  available
        evidence.


     9. The next step involves an enquiry into the Appellants intentions or
        wishes as to their faith  if  returned  to Pakistan.    As  stated
        above, the burden is on the  Appellants  to  demonstrate  that  any
        intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  their  faith
        openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  is
        genuinely held and of particular importance  to  them  to  preserve
        their religious identity.


    10. In relation to the First Appellant's  activities  in  Pakistan  the
        letter from the Association dated 4th March  2012  states  that  he
        served voluntarily in their Sabzazar Branch in Lahore as:


              i.  The guide of males under the age of 40 years from 2002  to
   2005;


              ii. The organiser of the financial donations of the youngsters
   from 2005               2006 and


              iii.     The general organiser of the youngsters of the branch
   from 2007 to                 2011.


    11. In  his  witness  statement  dated  26th  January  2012  the  First
        Appellant confirmed he is from an Ahmadiyya family  and  claims  to
        have had several positions of responsibility and posts.  He  claims
        his father was targeted as a result of being a preacher  and  their
        house entered and burned as a result [6]. The family were forced to
        relocate [7].  The First Appellant claims  to  have  been  involved
        with the following activities:


              i.  Zaeem Khudam-Ulahmadiyya (local  youth)  from  2002  -2005
   [8].


              ii. Nazim Maal (Financial Secretary) in 2006 [9].


              iii.     Nazim Ammumi (Head of Security) from 2007 to  present
   [10].


    12. The first thing to  note  therefore  is  an  inconsistency  between
        activities the  First  Appellant  claims  he  was  involved  in  in
        Pakistan and the activities mentioned in  the  Association  letter.
        These discrepancies are on the face of  it  material  although  the
        evidence does not assist in assessing  whether  a  youth  group  is
        likely to be composed of those under forty or whether the  post  of
        organiser of financial donations and financial  Secretary  are  the
        same.  The claim the post was held from 2005 to 2006  differs  from
        the claim it was only held in 2006. Of more relevance is the  claim
        to have been head of security from  2007  whereas  the  Association
        letter states he was general organiser of  the  youngsters  in  the
        branch from 2007 to 2011.


    13. There is no reference in the letter to either appellant  converting
        individuals  to  the  faith  in  Pakistan  or   undertaking   other
        activities as an outward expression of their faith  or  which  were
        restricted due to a fear of persecution.


    14.  The  First  Appellant  claimed  he  collected  subscriptions   and
        distributed religious journals [12] but did not  preach  his  faith
        openly in  public  and  did  so  discreetly  as  a  result  of  the
        restrictions imposed by the blasphemy laws.  He  claims  he  has  a
        religious obligation to preach [13].


    15. It is noted in the refusal letter that the First Appellant had some
        knowledge of the Ahmadi faith but not at a high-level which is said
        to be indicative of a follower of the faith but not of somebody who
        had studied  it  to  any  depth  or  degree.   Drawing  an  adverse
        conclusion from such a finding is something that  requires  caution
        for if similar questions were asked of members of the population of
        the United Kingdom, who declare themselves  to  be  Christian,  one
        wonders how much actual knowledge of the details of the faith  they
        would have, even though their belief in Christianity could  not  be
        challenged.


    16. In relation to  difficulties  that  he  personally  experienced  in
        Pakistan, the First Appellant refers to the  three  FIRs  allegedly
        taken out against him in 2009 which were dismissed  by  the  police
        [16] indicating that the authorities accepted  any  allegations  in
        them were false and without merit.  He also  claims  that  on  13th
        November 2009 whilst riding to the market on his motorbike  he  was
        stopped by five or six individuals who he claims  had  long  beards
        and wore the traditional dress of the Mullah who warned him to stop
        his preaching and then attacked him.  He  claims  he  was  able  to
        escape but suffered a broken tooth, bruises to his body  and  other
        minor injuries [18 -19].  The First Appellant felt able to approach
        the authorities as he  reported  the  matter  to  the  police  [20]
        although claims no action was taken.


    17. The First Appellant also claims to have been attacked on  5th  July
        2011. He  was  working  at  the  family  petrol  station  and  when
        returning from a storeroom a jeep passed by and shots were fired at
        him. The jeep drove off [26] and the First Appellant claims to have
        returned to his friend's house and  stayed  there.  He  claims  the
        police came to his home on the 11th July 2011 claiming that  a  FIR
        had been lodged against him as result of  which  it  was  suggested
        that he should move abroad. The Second Appellant  applied  for  and
        was granted a  student  visa  with  the  First  Appellants  as  her
        dependant, after which they left Pakistan and  entered  the  United
        Kingdom.


    18. In her initial witness statement, to be found at pages 14 and 15 of
        the appeal bundle, the Second Appellant  claims  she  taught  girls
        under  the  age  of  15  about  the  Koran  in  their   house   for
        approximately two years [4].  She claims that on 5th July 2011  her
        husband telephoned her and told  her  that  he  had  been  shot  at
        although had managed to escape. She states that on  the  11th  July
        the police came to the property looking for her husband as a result
        of an FIR lodged against him alleging blasphemy of which she saw  a
        copy [6].  There is however a possible further contradiction in the
        evidence as the First Appellant alleges  in  paragraph  30  of  his
        witness statement that they obtained the  student  visas  with  the
        help of a consultant whereas his wife claims that  the  visas  were
        obtained with the help of a friend. Judge Sacks had  the  advantage
        of observing the Appellants give oral evidence and the following is
        recorded in paragraph 16 (6) and (7) based upon that evidence:


          16 (6)  So far as the first Appellant's actions post 5th July 2011
   are concerned                there  are  significant  inconsistencies  as
   between the first and second                  Appellant's evidence and in
   particular as to how they obtain their                 visa for the UK.


                  If the first Appellant is to be believed  then  he  is  in
   hiding from 5th                  July 2011 until the point  in  which  he
   leaves Pakistan with the second               Appellant for the UK.   The
   visas are obtained with the help of an                 agent  and  it  is
   the      agent      that      provides      all      the      appropriate
   documentation  and  in  particular  the  bank   statement   referred   to
     earlier in this determination.  The first Appellant  if  he  is  to  be
              believed carries out the obtaining of the visa with  the  help
   of an               agent whilst he remains in hiding.


               (7)     However, if the second Appellant is  to  be  believed
   then she and the                 first Appellant openly take a taxi  from
   the place in which they are               staying and  go  to  the  FedEx
   office where they freely obtain the visa               and return to  the
   place where they are staying in a taxi.  Clearly they                have
   no fear for their safety if they  so  openly  go  to  the  FedEx  office.
     Further the second Appellant states that she personally attends at  the
              bank and obtains a statement.


    19. Even though the determination of Judge Sacks has been sat aside  it
        stands as a record of what was said at that hearing by way of  oral
        evidence. The evidence in relation to this element of the  case  is
        unreliable, which casts doubt upon the claim to have been  shot  at
        and the alleged reason why it was necessary to leave Pakistan.  The
        failure of the Appellants to attend to give oral evidence and  face
        cross examination means that the discrepancies in the evidence must
        stand at face value. In relation to the claim to have been attacked
        in the manner alleged in Pakistan, this is dependent upon the First
        Appellant's claim being accepted as being true. Although  there  is
        some  support  in  the  county  material  for  what  he  says   the
        contradictions  in  the  evidence  caste  doubt  upon  whether  the
        Tribunal has been told the truth or not in relation  to  events  in
        Pakistan.


    20. Both Appellants may  have  been  involved  in  the  Association  in
        Pakistan which, if the letter from the Association is  accepted  as
        reliable, is at a limited level within the community and  there  is
        little evidence that their activities are conducted other than in a
        discrete manner within the privacy of their homes,  bar  their  own
        claims to this effect.  I do not find that the evidence establishes
        that the Appellants are credible  in  relation  to  the  events  in
        Pakistan prior to coming to the United Kingdom or that it has  been
        established that their faith is so  important  to  them  that  they
        wanted to take on a more proactive role  by  preaching  openly  but
        failed to do so as a result of a fear of persecution.


    21. The statement in the evidence that to get out of the  country  they
        decided to apply for student visas at short  notice  is  not  fully
        supported by the fact that to get a visa for  the  United  Kingdom,
        and in particular to persuade an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) that
        it is a genuine  application,  a  lot  of  information  has  to  be
        provided. The application for a Tier 4 (General) Student  visa  was
        considered by an ECO based in Abu Dhabi but the  information  would
        have had to have been lodged with the nominated agent in  Pakistan,
        FedEx.  If biometric date was required, as it tends to be  for  all
        visa applicants they must have attended in person, which shows  the
        First Appellants claim to have remaining in hiding and to have been
        reliant upon a third party, doubtful. The information  provided  in
        the bundle includes a copy of their  UK  Pre-Departure  TB  medical
        certificate issued on 27th July 2011, University of Ulster  English
        Assessment Certificate completed on 19th July  2011  together  with
        evidence of substantial funds being available to the family  and  a
        CAS assigned on 4th August 2011. To obtain the medical  certificate
        the Appellants must have attended a clinic or  appropriate  medical
        facility.  I accept that the documents were obtained shortly  after
        the alleged shooting, which  fits  within  the  stated  chronology,
        although they  also  appear  to  be  genuine  student  and  student
        dependent applications which were accepted as such by the ECO.


    22. Using the visas the Appellants entered the United Kingdom  on  10th
        October 2011 at Heathrow Airport,  but  did  not  claim  asylum  on
        arrival despite claiming to have fled in  fear  of  their  personal
        safety and to claim asylum.  They actually claimed asylum four days
        later on 14th October 2011.  Whilst a period of four  days  is  not
        significant in itself the explanation given by the  Appellants  is.
        When asked at the interview why they did not claim  asylum  at  the
        airport their reply was that they did not do so as a  result  of  a
        fear of being deported.  It appears contradictory for a  person  to
        come to the United Kingdom to claim asylum yet  fail  to  make  the
        application when there was a clear opportunity  for  them  to  have
        done so.


    23. There is also an additional element relevant to the credibility  of
        the Appellants. The applications made to the ECO was to permit  the
        Appellants to come to the United Kingdom as a student  and  student
        dependent. Despite this it is claimed by them that the true  reason
        they came to the United Kingdom is to claim  asylum.  As  noted  in
        paragraph 41 of the reasons for refusal letter, on arrival  in  the
        United Kingdom they were questioned by an Immigration  Officer  and
        the First Appellant is stated to have  provided  false  information
        that  his  wife  will  be  attending  college  to   study   for   a
        qualification in London which, if this was not their intention,  is
        indicative of a further  and  deliberate  act  of  deceit  both  in
        relation to a misrepresentation in the  visa  application  form  in
        which it is claimed this  is  a  genuine  application  made  by  an
        individual wishing to study in the United Kingdom who on completion
        of the course will leave, and in oral representations  made  to  an
        Immigration Officer, when their real intention was otherwise.


    24. Notwithstanding the lack of credibly in relation to the  claims  of
        persecution  or  of  suffering  attacks  in  Pakistan,  it  remains
        necessary to asses any risk of return as it will be viewed  through
        the eyes of any potential persecutor. The First Appellant states he
        has involved himself in activities in the United Kingdom. He relies
        upon a claim, in his witness statement dated 21st March 2013, to be
        able to be more open regarding his religion in the  United  Kingdom
        [12] and has provided photographs of him at a  temporary  stand  in
        Newcastle town centre and undertaking other activities [A's bundle,
        pages 54-58].  He also  relies  upon  a  further  letter  from  the
        Association dated 8th January 2013  [A's bundle pages 48-49]  which
        at paragraph 3, on the second page, states the following :


              3.  In the United Kingdom the above named participates in  the
   activities                   of his local branch (at  present  Newcastle)
   and that of the Association.                  He has


                   (a)   attended  congregational  prayers,  Eid  festivals,
   annual                            convention  of  the  community,  annual
   gatherings of Khuddam                     (males  under  the  age  of  40
   years ) and branch's meetings;


                  (b)  participated  in  the  preaching  programmes  of  the
   branch                           including door-to-door  distribution  of
   our leaflets that create  an                    awareness  of  Islam  and
   invites members of the public to  the                    message  of  the
   Ahmadiyya Muslim community.


                  (c)  helped in holding the Quar'an exhibitions;


                  (d)  performed the duties assigned to him by the community
                           officials.


    25. This is evidence of sur place activities. In Danian v  SSHD  [2002]
        IMM AR 96 the Court  of  Appeal  said  that  there  is  no  express
        limitation in the Convention in relation to persons acting  in  bad
        faith, despite Counsel's attempt in Danian to have one implied.  In
        the court's opinion the answer to the 'riddle' lay in the  judgment
        of Millet J in Mbanza [1996] Imm AR 136.  In  that  case  Millet  J
        said "The solution does not lie in propounding some broad principle
        of abuse of the system....but  in  bearing  in  mind  the  cardinal
        principle that it is for the applicant to satisfy the SSHD that  he
        has a well founded fear of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason.
        Whether he can do so  will  largely  turn  on  credibility  and  an
        applicant who has put forward a fraudulent and baseless  claim  for
        asylum is unlikely to  have  much  credibility  left."   The  Court
        referred to a letter from the UNHCR which stated that regard should
        be had to whether the person's actions had  actually  come  to  the
        notice of the authorities in his home country and  how  they  would
        view such actions.  It does not matter  whether  an  appellant  has
        cynically sought to enhance his asylum prospects  by  creating  the
        very risk he then seeks to rely on, although bad faith is  relevant
        when evaluating the merits/credibility of the claim,  as  explained
        in Danian.  However, as Bingham J also said in Danian - the  actual
        fear  has  to  be  shown  to  be  genuine  and  not  one  that  was
        manufactured by conduct designed to give plausibility.


    26. In YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  360  the  Court  of  Appeal
        sounded a note of caution in relation to the argument that,  if  an
        appellant was found to have been opportunistic  in  his  sur  place
        activities, his credibility was in  consequence  low.   Credibility
        about what, said the Court of  Appeal.   If  he  had  already  been
        believed ex hypothesi about his sur  place  activity,  his  motives
        might be disbelieved, but the consequent risk on  return  from  his
        activity sur place was essentially an objective question.


    27. Ahmadi cases rarely, if ever, involve the need to find  whether  an
        individuals UK based activities will have come to the attention  of
        alleged third party persecutors or the State and this is not argued
        before me.  Such evidence is adduced  to  support  a  claim  to  be
        active within the faith and in a way in which they are unable to be
        in  Pakistan.   Whilst  I  accept  that  the  evidence   from   the
        Association  and  elsewhere  corroborates  the  claim   the   First
        Appellant has been involved in activities in  Newcastle  this  does
        not, on its own, provide the answer to the second question set  out
        above. The burden is on the  Appellants  to  demonstrate  that  any
        intention or wish to practise and manifest  aspects  of  the  faith
        openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  is
        genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the  claimant  to
        preserve his or her religious  identity.  I  do  not  accept  that
        either Appellant is a credible  witness.  As  their  representative
        asked for the appeal to be considered on the basis of the available
        evidence and that is all I have to  consider.  There  are  material
        discrepancies referred  to  above  and  when  considering  all  the
        available evidence with the degree of care required in an appeal of
        this nature, that of anxious scrutiny,  I  do  not  find  that  the
        Appellants have discharged the burden of proof  upon  them  to  the
        required standard to show that it is of  particular  importance  to
        their religious identity to engage in  the  type  of  behaviour  in
        Pakistan referred to in paragraph (ii) (a) of the head note of  MN.
        I do not find they have demonstrated an intention to  practice  and
        manifest aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted by  the
        Pakistan penal code or that  their  wish  to  do  so  represents  a
        genuinely held belief of particular importance to  enable  them  to
        preserve their religious identity. I find the sur place aspects are
        opportunistic and designed to bolster what is otherwise a very weak
        claim riddled with inconsistencies and  elements  that  damage  the
        overall credibility.


    28. The country guidance case makes it clear that not all Ahmadi are at
        risk in Pakistan and I find it has not been shown that the  profile
        of these Appellants, in Pakistan or since they entered  the  United
        Kingdom, is such that they face a real risk sufficient to warrant a
        grant of international protection based upon their  own  individual
        profile,  religious  identity,  manifestations  of  that  religious
        identity in Pakistan in the past, how such religious identity would
        be manifested on return to Pakistan, or any family or other related
        profiles.


Decision

    29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application was made for anonymity  and
   such an        order is not warranted on the facts.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 26th September 2013












