


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00528/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 22 January 2015                 |On : 23 January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     B S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Maka, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  BS's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision to remove her from the United  Kingdom  following  the
refusal of her asylum claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and BS as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born in March 1987. She  entered  the
United Kingdom on 24 September 2013 and claimed asylum  the  same  day.  She
was interviewed about her claim on 19 November  2013.  Her  application  was
refused on 8 January 2014. She appellant  appealed  against  that  decision.
Her appeal was initially heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  25  February
2014 and was dismissed in a determination issued on 5 March 2014,  but  that
decision was set aside for error of law in the Upper  Tribunal  on  12  June
2014. The appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  decision
to be re-made.

The appeal was heard again by the First-tier Tribunal on 2 October 2014  and
allowed. The Secretary of State appealed that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to  Albania  as  a  result  of
having been trafficked into  prostitution.  She  was  from  a  village  near
Elbasan in Albania. She attended  school  until  the  age  of  fourteen  and
thereafter remained at home until February 2008 when she moved out to  marry
her husband. Her family did not approve of her  marriage  and  she  had  not
spoken to them since leaving home. She later  divorced  and  knew  that  her
family would not accept her back. In May 2009 she moved to Greece  for  work
purposes and found work as a waitress. In June 2010, in Greece,  she  met  B
and began a relationship with him. However B sold  her  to  another  man,  E
who, together with his wife, forced her into prostitution.  She  managed  to
escape from E in September 2013 and, with the help of her  former  employer,
she travelled to the  United  Kingdom.  She  could  not  return  to  Albania
because B was well-known and she believed that he  had  connections  to  the
police. She also feared being stigmatised in Albania and could be traced  by
B or E. She had had psychological problems since 2008 and  had  been  taking
medication for depression.

The respondent accepted the appellant's account in full but considered  that
she would be  at  no  risk  on  return.  Although  she  stated  that  B  had
connections to the authorities in Albania it was  noted  that  she  had  not
been in contact with him for two and a half years  and  that  there  was  no
information to indicate that he continued to maintain an  interest  in  her.
The respondent  considered  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
available to the appellant in Albania through the Albanian  authorities  and
NGO's and that her removal would therefore not breach the  United  Kingdom's
obligations under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Lobo, in his decision issued on 24 November  2014,
found that there would not be a sufficiency of protection available  to  the
appellant in Albania and that she was at risk of being re-trafficked if  she
were returned there. He allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and  found,  in
the alternative, that she was entitled to humanitarian protection.

The Secretary of State's appeal

The respondent sought permission to appeal  Judge  Lobo's  decision  on  the
grounds that he had failed to complete a proper rounded  assessment  of  the
appellant's circumstances in order to be able to conclude that she  was  not
part of the group of trafficked women who were able  to  receive  protection
from the state;  and  that  he  had  dealt  with  the  Home  Office  Country
Information and Guidance in a wholly inadequate way.

Permission was granted on 12 December  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
White on the grounds raised.

At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Nath  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,
submitting that the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the  question  of
sufficiency of protection by failing to undertake a proper analysis  of  the
appellant's individual circumstances in the context of the country  guidance
in AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  [2010]  UKUT  80  and  the  Home
Office Operational Guidance Notes (OGN) for Albania dated 12  December  2013
and 19 September 2014. Mr Maka submitted that, on the  contrary,  the  judge
had considered all relevant matters and had reached a conclusion  reasonably
open to him.

Consideration and findings.

It seems to me that the Secretary of State's grounds amount to  little  more
than a disagreement with Judge Lobo's decision  and  an  attempt  simply  to
present an alternative view on the question  of  sufficiency  of  protection
and risk on return. I do not agree with Mr Nath that there was any error  of
law in the judge's approach to the background information, but find  on  the
contrary that he plainly took all the relevant materials into  account,  and
that he did so in the context of the  appellant's  own  specific  individual
circumstances.

At paragraph 20 of his decision the judge referred to  all  the  documentary
evidence and background material  he  had  before  him,  together  with  the
relevant  country  guidance  in  AM  and  BM,  and  confirmed  that  he  had
considered that evidence. It is plain from the findings  that  followed  and
his references to those materials that that was precisely what he did.

The grounds assert that the judge made generalised findings on the  question
of sufficiency of protection for trafficked women in Albania, but  that  was
clearly  not  the  case.  At  paragraph  25  he  set  out  the   appellant's
circumstances on the basis of the facts accepted by the  respondent,  noting
that there were no credibility issues arising in the  case.  He  noted  that
the appellant had, since the respondent's decision, become pregnant and  was
expecting a child that would be regarded as illegitimate, which  accordingly
to the country guidance was a matter relevant to the question of  access  to
protection (although properly noting that the child was not  yet  born).  At
paragraph 28  he  applied  the  country  guidance  in  the  context  of  the
appellant's particular  circumstances  and  profile.  He  then  went  on  to
consider the position as regards sufficiency  of  protection  subsequent  to
the date of the country guidance on the basis of  the  background  materials
including the OGN, at paragraphs 29 and 30.  At  paragraph  32  he  made  it
clear that he was applying  the  facts  of  the  appellant's  case  to  that
background information and, having done so,  concluded  that  the  appellant
was at risk of being re-trafficked. It seems to me,  therefore,  that  there
is simply no merit in the assertion that  there  was  a  failure  to  assess
sufficiency of  protection  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  individual
circumstances or that  his  approach  to  the  question  of  sufficiency  of
protection was in any way unlawful.

Accordingly I find that the judge did not err in law as the grounds  assert.
He undertook a detailed and careful assessment  of  the  evidence  and  took
into account all relevant matters, reaching a conclusion that  was  entirely
and reasonably open to him  on  the  basis  of  that  evidence.  As  regards
paragraph 2c of the grant of permission, it seems to  me  that  the  judge's
decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian grounds was an  alternative  to
the decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds and that in any event  no
material error arises from his findings in that respect.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.

    Anonymity


    The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.  That  order  is
    continued, pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2014.






                                Signed  22 January 2015
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
