

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00874/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 20th December 2016         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                            V C M (Sierra Leone)

                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP,
solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal  of
   refugee protection, humanitarian protection or leave to remain  on  human
   rights grounds.

2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sierra  Leone  who  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom with a drama group in June 2010, when he was 16 years old.  He is
   now 23 years old.  It is not  in  dispute  that  he  is  a  former  child
   soldier,  who  has  both  seen  and  committed  multiple   killings   and
   atrocities, and that his body and mind bear the scars  of  serious  abuse
   and torture of the appellant himself.  He  has  had  depression,  and  he
   still has post-traumatic stress disorder.  It is accepted that there is a
   risk of suicide if he were to be returned to Sierra Leone  without  there
   being any medical support for him. The appellant appealed to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision.

Background

3. The following facts and matters were accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal
   and have not been challenged by the respondent.  He was born in 1993, and
   in 1998, when he would have been 5 years old, three of  his  sisters  and
   one of his brothers died in a fire.  The appellant and his mother went to
   live in Freetown, but in January 1999, the rebel group, the AFRC,  seized
   and forcibly conscripted him.  His mother  died  trying  to  protect  the
   appellant.

4. The appellant was held by the AFRC for about 2 years, against  his  will,
   one of many thousands of children who were abducted  and  used  as  child
   soldier by the AFRC  during  the  conflict.   The  appellant  was  beaten
   regularly, and sexually abused by  his  captors.   On  one  occasion,  he
   overslept and was branded with a hot iron as a punishment.

5. The appellant was taught how to use a gun and how  to  kill  people.   He
   was required to kill a very large number of people during this period: if
   he had refused, he  would  have  been  killed  himself.   He,  and  other
   children who were also held by the rebels, received daily injections of a
   substance which made them drowsy and compliant.

6. The AFRC kept the children in the bush  in  a  sort  of  barracks:   they
   would seize people in the street and bring them to the children,  telling
   them to shoot the person.  The only people there when the  killings  were
   executed were the children and the AFRC rebels. The appellant learned  to
   regard the people he was required to kill and  maim  as  'chickens',  not
   humans.

7. In 2001, when he was about 8 years old, some of the children  were  shown
   how to use a machete to cut off people's hands and feet.   The  appellant
   realised that this could also happen to him: he and some  other  children
   made an unsuccessful escape attempt.   When  they  were  recaptured,  the
   other boys were shot dead.  The appellant escaped again,  though  he  was
   shot in the foot while escaping; he hid in the bush, where someone  found
   him and helped him reach Freetown, where he was able to rejoin his father
   and his step-brothers who lived there. He lived with his father  and  his
   step-brothers until 2010, when his father  died  in  a  tragic  accident,
   choking on his false teeth. The appellant was still only 16 years old.

8. The appellant found it hard to adjust  to  life  in  Freetown  after  his
   experiences as a child soldier.  He was violent to his step-brothers  and
   at school, and the only emotion he could feel was anger.   The  appellant
   found it hard to concentrate on  his  schoolwork.   The  judge  found  it
   likely that during this period he was stabbed with a screwdriver,  adding
   an additional scar  to  his  body.   No  relatives  of  those  he  killed
   attempted to harm him during that 8-year period.

9. The appellant did enjoy drama at school, and  he  joined  a  drama  club.
   Through that, he was selected to come to the United Kingdom by a charity,
   Arrow, which works with former combatants, involving them  in  peace  and
   reconciliation work.  Once in the United Kingdom, he ran  away  from  the
   Arrow group and did not claim asylum until about 3 years later.

First-tier Tribunal decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal rejected  the  appellant's  assertion  that  the
   families of those he killed would be aware that he was  the  killer:  his
   account was that individuals were brought to the children  in  the  camps
   for killing, away from their families.  The judge was not satisfied, even
   to the lower standard of proof  applicable  to  international  protection
   claims, that the family members of those killed would  know  which  child
   was responsible for killing their relatives, and  therefore  he  did  not
   accept that the appellant's subjective fear of  revenge  exacted  by  the
   family members of those who were killed was objectively well founded.

11. There was no evidence to show that there was a general risk   in  Sierra
   Leone now for any of the thousands of  former  child  soldiers,  and  the
   judge considered that even if there were a risk to the appellant  in  his
   home area of Freetown (Sierra  Leone's  principal  city),  the  appellant
   could relocate to another area, where he and his family were  not  known.
   He therefore rejected the asylum and humanitarian protection claims.

12. The appeal turned on the appellant's health problems  and  their  impact
   under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.   The  medical  evidence,  which  the  judge
   accepted, was that the appellant  had  suicidal  thoughts  and  had  made
   suicide attempts, both in Sierra Leone and the United  Kingdom;  that  he
   had severe post-traumatic stress disorder and  moderate  depression;  and
   that he heard voices, telling him to kill people,  which  were  memories,
   rather than psychotic episodes.

13. The appellant had a British citizen partner in the  United  Kingdom  and
   engaged in a wide variety of activities and voluntary work. He was coping
   reasonably well, but with a great deal of support from  individuals  with
   whom he had formed close attachments in the United Kingdom.    The  judge
   accepted that there was a real risk that the  appellant's  mental  health
   would deteriorate rapidly if he were to be returned to Sierra Leone, that
   psychiatric services and medication were  almost  non-existent  and  only
   available to those who could pay.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found it
   'likely' that the appellant would be unable to access any  medication  or
   mental health support in Sierra Leone.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had  post-
   traumatic  stress  disorder  and  related  symptoms,  for  which  he  was
   receiving drug treatment and  intensive  multi-agency  support.   He  was
   satisfied that the appellant presented a significant  risk  of  self-harm
   and suicide, albeit that neither would be 'the inevitable result' of  his
   return to Sierra Leone.  He  noted  that  the  appellant,  despite  post-
   traumatic stress disorder dating back to his years as a child soldier  up
   to the age of 8, had survived without treatment in Freetown until he  was
   16, and in the United Kingdom for 3 years, before claiming asylum here.

15. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant had shown that  he  would
   be at substantial risk of inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment,
   contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 ECHR, if  he
   were returned to Sierra Leone.

16. He then considered Article 8 ECHR, concluding that this was  a  'foreign
   case' and that the high threshold of flagrant breach of Article 8 was not
   met.  Applying part 5A of the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002, little weight could be given to the appellant's private  life,  all
   of which had been established while he was here  either  precariously  or
   unlawfully.

17. The judge reminded himself that the  appellant  was  familiar  with  the
   language, customs and culture of his country of origin, that he  had  two
   step-brothers there with whom  he  remained  in  contact  and  who  could
   support him while  he  settled  in.   The  appellant  was  a  bright  and
   resourceful young man who could  use  in  Sierra  Leone  the  skills  and
   experiences gained in the United Kingdom.

18. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

Upper Tribunal appeal

19. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. Permission to  appeal  was
   refused by the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  by  Mr
   Justice Davis in the Administrative Court on a Cart  judicial  review  of
   the Upper Tribunal's decision to refuse permission.

20. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal, which quashed  the  Upper
   Tribunal's refusal to grant permission to appeal.  The reasons  given  by
   Lord Justice Lindblom for quashing the  refusal  of  permission  were  as
   follows:

         "I accept  that,  on  both  grounds,  this  claim  is  sufficiently
         strongly arguable for permission to be granted (CPR 54.7(7)(a)).

         I have had some hesitation in reaching that conclusion on the first
         ground.  As Davis J observed [when refusing permission to appeal to
         the  Court  of  Appeal  on  the  papers],  the  argument  that  the
         applicant's status as a  former  child  soldier  gives  rise  to  a
         specific duty on the state to provide him  with  medical  services,
         including psychiatric care, was not explicitly  part  of  the  case
         advanced on his behalf  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   But  I
         accept it is possible to argue that this was a  matter  the  First-
         tier Tribunal ought to have taken into account in  any  event,  and
         that, if it had done so, its decision might have been different.

         The second ground - the Article 3 ground - is,  I  think,  properly
         arguable on the basis of the contention that, on a fair reading  of
         its decision, the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself as to  the
         correct approach in law to the risk  of  the  applicant  committing
         suicide if returned to Sierra Leone.

         I also accept the submission  in  para  33(d)  of  the  applicant's
         skeleton argument, that in the circumstances there is a  compelling
         reason for the claim to be heard (CPR 53.7A(7)(b)(ii))."

21. Vice  President  Ockelton  formally  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
   receipt of the quashing order from the Court of Appeal.

Rule 24 Reply

22. There was no rule 24 Reply from the respondent, since the basis  of  the
   Court of Appeal's quashing of the refusal of permission was not available
   either to the respondent or the Upper Tribunal until the morning  of  the
   hearing.

23. That is the basis on which this appeal came before  the  Upper  Tribunal
   for the remaking of the decision.

Upper Tribunal hearing

24. The appellant did not give evidence at the Upper Tribunal  hearing.   Mr
   Symes relied on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and  on  his
   skeleton argument in the Court of Appeal.   Mr Symes  confirmed  that  in
   the light of the finding in the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellant
   would not be known to family members of the individuals  he  had  killed,
   the appellant no longer sought to challenge the decisions to  refuse  him
   refugee protection and humanitarian  protection:  his  appeal  sounds  in
   human rights only, and is argued under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

Appellant's submissions

Article 8 ECHR

25. The appellant's Article 8 argument  is  a  novel  one,  relying  on  the
   United Kingdom's international human rights obligations to children,  and
   in  particular  child  soldiers,  set  out   in   various   international
   Conventions, and on the appellant's age on entry to  the  United  Kingdom
   (16). Mr Symes accepted that the Conventions on which he relied were  not
   incorporated into United  Kingdom  law.   His  contention  was  that  the
   international Conventions upon which he relied should have been used as a
   tool in the interpretation of the United Kingdom's ECHR obligations under
   Article 8 ECHR, having regard  to  the  'best  interests  of  the  child'
   obligation in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
   2009.

26. Mr Symes' skeleton argument makes it clear that this  argument  was  not
   advanced before the First-tier Tribunal, but he contended that the  legal
   obligations flowing from the appellant's status as a former child soldier
   ought to have been Robinson obvious to the Tribunal and that it erred  in
   law in failing to appreciate and apply them.

27. The first provision relied  upon  in  support  of  the  Article  8  ECHR
   argument was the Rome Statute of  the  International  Criminal  Court  at
   which at Article 8(2)(b)(xxvi) prohibits the enlisting of child soldiers.
     Similar provisions are found in Article 3a of the International  Labour
   Organisation's Convention C182 (Convention concerning the Prohibition and
   Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour),
   and in General Comment No.6 and Article 39 of the UN  Convention  on  the
   Rights of the Child.

28. Mr Symes also relied upon paragraph 7.6  of  the  Paris  Principles  and
   Guidelines on Children Associated with  Armed  Forces  or  Armed  Groups,
   endorsed by representatives of the United Kingdom in February 2007:

         "Protection of children who have been associated with armed  forces
         or armed groups

         7.6 Children who leave armed forces or armed groups by  any  means,
         including those who escape, are abandoned or  are  captured  by  an
         opposing armed force or armed  group  or  by  multinational  forces
         retain their human rights as children, and  relevant  international
         law and standards must be applied, inter alia: ...

         7.6  4  All  appropriate   measures   to   promote   physical   and
         psychological recovery and social reintegration must be taken;

         7.6.5 All appropriate action  must  be  taken  to  ensure  and  re-
         establish family unity;

         7.6.6 Unless contrary to the  best  interests  of  the  child,  all
         allegations of violence, including sexual and gender-based violence
         must be promptly, thoroughly, and  independently  investigated  and
         prosecuted and adequate and effective follow-up care offered to the
         child and her/ his family."

29. Mr Symes contended that the First-tier Tribunal should have  had  regard
   to those international standards, applying the approach of  the  European
   Court of Human Rights in SHH v United Kingdom  60367/10  -  HEJUD  [2013]
   ECHR 102 at [94] that Article 3 (an therefore, by implication, Article 8)
   does not apply in a vacuum but must be interpreted in accordance with the
   general principles of international law.  He also cited  the  observation
   of Mr Justice Munby in R on the application  of  The  Howard  League  for
   Penal Reform v Secretary of State for the Home Department &  Anor  [2002]
   EWHC 2497 (Admin) at [51] to the effect  that  international  instruments
   which are not legally binding, and therefore not sources of  law  in  the
   United Kingdom, may nevertheless 'properly be consulted insofar  as  they
   proclaim, reaffirm or elucidate the content of those  human  rights  that
   are generally recognised throughout the European family of nations'.

30. On the basis of the provisions  and  decisions  referred  to  above,  Mr
   Symes contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought,  when  considering
   Article 8 ECHR, to have had specific regard to the appellant's status  as
   a victim, and the obligation on the state to provide the appellant  while
   a  child  with  all  necessary  medical  services  for  the  purposes  of
   reintegration and rehabilitation. Mr Symes  argued,  further,  that  even
   though the appellant was now an adult, that  obligation  was  not  wholly
   removed and 'the obligation to rehabilitate would be rendered lame if  it
   expired the moment the person became an adult'.

31. Mr Symes argued that the late onset of  the  appellant's  post-traumatic
   stress disorder is neither surprising nor should it be  determinative  of
   the appeal.  The United Kingdom should be regarded as having,  at  least,
   an arguable international  obligation  to  provide  the  medical  support
   necessary for the appellant to secure rehabilitation and that this  might
   well have been material to the outcome of the Article 8 assessment.

Article 3 ECHR

32. In relation to Article 3, Mr Symes argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   applied an incorrect test in relation to the risk of  suicide  and  self-
   harm, that of inevitability.  He observed, applying the  Immigration  and
   Appeal Tribunal's decision in Kacaj (Article 3, Standard of  Proof,  Non-
   State Actors) Albania [2001] UKIAT 00018 at [14], that the  correct  test
   is whether substantial grounds have  been  established  to  believe  that
   there is a real risk of treatment infringing Article 3 ECHR,  well  short
   of providing proof beyond reasonable doubt, as 'inevitability' suggests.

33. The First-tier Tribunal had in terms accepted at [37] that there  was  a
   real risk of the appellant's mental health deteriorating in Sierra Leone;
   that he would be unable to access any medication or mental health support
   there; and at [38] that he presented a significant risk of self-harm  and
   suicide.  Mr Symes argued that on that basis the appellant is entitled to
   succeed under Article 3.

34. In the alternative, Mr Symes argued that there was a  finding  that  the
   appellant's fear of harm from the relatives  of  those  he  killed  after
   return to Sierra Leone was genuine, even if not objectively well-founded,
   and that in consequence, there was an objectively  well-founded  fear  of
   suicide or serious self-harm, which,  applying  GS  (India)  and  Y  (Sri
   Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  362,
   arose not from a naturally occurring illness but was directly  linked  to
   the ill-treatment the appellant suffered at the hands of the AFRC.    N v
   United Kingdom (application no 26565/08) [2008]  ECHR  453,  47  EHRR  39
   should be distinguished on that basis, since  it  dealt  with  naturally-
   occurring illnesses, not the consequences of trauma and torture.

Respondent's submissions

35. Mr Avery made oral submissions for  the  respondent.    In  relation  to
   Article 8 ECHR,  Mr  Avery  noted  that  the  appellant  was  functioning
   reasonably well in the United Kingdom, and had also apparently managed to
   do so in Sierra Leone, when he was younger, between 2001  and  2009.   He
   still had two step-brothers there, with whom  he  was  in  contact.   The
   appellant was no longer a child: he was older now, and  the  significance
   of the Article 3  child  soldier  argument  was  weakened  by  that;  the
   argument being advanced on his behalf was neither  Robinson  obvious  nor
   material to the outcome of the appeal.

36. With regard to the challenge under Article 3 ECHR,  Mr  Avery  contended
   that it had been open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  that  a
   'significant risk' was not the same as a 'real risk', that  the  decision
   was well-reasoned, and that the Judge had regard  to  the  correct  legal
   principles, resulting in a decision which it had  been  open  to  him  to
   make.

Discussion

37. I deal first with the Article 3 argument  advanced  on  the  appellant's
   behalf.  The standard of proof for Article 3 is  that  there  is  a  real
   risk, not that the outcome is inevitable.  It is clear,  therefore,  that
   the First-tier Tribunal applied an incorrect  standard  of  proof  and  I
   remake the Article 3 decision on the basis of the findings  at  [37]  and
   [38] of the decision:

         "37. ...I accept that there is a real  risk  that  the  appellant's
         mental health would  deteriorate  rapidly  if  returned  to  Sierra
         Leone.  It is clear from the background  evidence  before  me  that
         psychiatric services in Sierra Leone are  almost  non-existent  and
         the availability of drugs to treat psychiatric conditions  is  very
         limited.   Even  where  psychiatric  services  and  medication  are
         available, this is often only to those who can afford  to  pay  for
         them.  In her reasons for refusal letter, the  respondent  referred
         to a number of rehabilitation programmes which were put in place by
         the government in Sierra Leone for the  purpose  of  rehabilitating
         former child soldiers.  However, I have not been provided with  any
         confirmation that these programmes continue to  run,  or  that  the
         appellant would be offered a place on such  a  programme,  even  if
         they are still in existence. ...I find it likely that the appellant
         would be unable to access any medication or mental  health  support
         if returned to Sierra Leone.

         38.   I  accept  the  evidence  that  the  appellant   presents   a
         significant risk of  self-harm  and  suicide.  ...  I  find  it  of
         significance that the appellant was able to survive for three years
         without any medical treatment at all following his arrival  in  the
         United Kingdom.  I  also  note  that  the  appellant  said  in  his
         screening interview that he was suffering from PTSD from the age of
         6, although it had not been diagnosed at that time.   Yet,  despite
         this, he was able to survive in Sierra Leone without any  treatment
         between 2001 and 2009 without coming to  any  substantial  physical
         harm.  In terms of his mental health, he appears to have functioned
         in Sierra Leone to a level that was sufficient  to  enable  him  to
         attend school for a period and to get involved with a  drama  group
         and to  get  selected  by  the  Arrow  organisation  to  travel  to
         England."

38. The first thing to be said about those findings is that the  appellant's
   mental health on arrival in the United Kingdom and  before  his  father's
   death in Sierra Leone are not determinative of his mental  health  today.
   The Judge has accepted that there is a significant risk of self-harm  and
   suicide today, if the appellant were to be returned to Sierra Leone,  and
   that he would be unable to access treatment or  support  for  his  mental
   health problems in  Sierra  Leone.    The  child  soldier  rehabilitation
   programmes in Sierra Leone, if they still exist,  were  not  relied  upon
   before me.

39. I find that a 'significant' risk is at least as great as a  'real'  risk
   of such events occurring.  I have regard to the analysis of the situation
   where a risk has ceased objectively to exist, but mental health  problems
   caused by a genuine subjective risk create a risk  of  suicide  or  self-
   harm, as set out by Lord Justice Sedley in Y (Sri Lanka) at [61]-[64]:

         "61. The upshot of the material findings and of the expert evidence
         which (for reasons I have given) stood unshaken, is that,  although
         some  psychiatric  care  is  available  in  Sri  Lanka,  these  two
         appellants  are  so  traumatised  by  their  experiences,  and   so
         subjectively terrified at the prospect of return to  the  scene  of
         their torment, that  they  will  not  be  capable  of  seeking  the
         treatment they need. Assuming (what cannot be  certain)  that  they
         come unscathed through interrogation at the airport, with no  known
         family left in Sri Lanka and no home to travel to, the  chances  of
         their finding a secure base from which to seek the  palliative  and
         therapeutic care that will keep them from taking  their  own  lives
         are on any admissible view of the evidence remote.

         62.  None of this reasoning  represents  a  licence  for  emotional
         blackmail by asylum-seekers. Officials and immigration judges  will
         be right to continue to scrutinise the authenticity of such  claims
         as these with care. In some cases, the Home Office may want to seek
         its own or a joint report. But there comes  a  point  at  which  an
         undisturbed finding that an appellant has been tortured  and  raped
         in captivity has to be  conscientiously  related  to  credible  and
         uncontradicted expert  evidence  that  the  likely  effect  of  the
         psychological trauma  (aggravated  in  the  present  cases  by  the
         devastation of home and  family  by  the  tsunami),  if  return  is
         enforced, will be suicide.

         63.  On the present evidence, including where  material  the  AIT's
         evaluation of it, the clear likelihood is that the appellants' only
         perceived means of escape from the  isolation  and  fear  in  which
         return would place them would be  to  take  their  own  lives.  For
         reasons I have given, the concomitant findings that their  fear  is
         no longer objectively well-founded and that there  exists  a  local
         health service capable of affording  treatment  do  not  materially
         attenuate this risk, which is subjective, immediate and acute.

         64.  In this situation, return would in my judgment reach the  high
         threshold of inhuman treatment unconditionally prohibited by art. 3
         of the ECHR."

40. That analysis is on  all  fours  with  the  risk  here:  the  First-tier
   Tribunal found as a fact that this appellant had been ill-treated and was
   mentally damaged to such an extent that self-harm and/or suicide  were  a
   significant risk if he were to return to Sierra Leone, and also, that  in
   practice there would be no  medication  or  support  available  there  to
   prevent that harm occurring.  There  have  been  past  suicide  attempts.
   There is no evidence that his step-brothers are either willing, or  in  a
   position to assist him on  return.   Return  to  Sierra  Leone  for  this
   appellant would reach the Article 3 threshold, and the  appeal  therefore
   succeeds under Article 3 ECHR.

41. I turn now to the Article 8 ECHR issues.  I accept  that  the  appellant
   has a relationship with a qualifying  partner,  but  that  can  be  given
   little weight, since the relationship developed while he  was  unlawfully
   in the United Kingdom.

42. As regards the argument that the applicant's status as  a  former  child
   soldier gives rise to a specific duty on the United  Kingdom  authorities
   to provide him with medical treatment, including  psychiatric  treatment,
   based on the United Kingdom's international obligations under the  UNCRC,
   the Rome Statute, and the ILO  Convention  182,  that  argument  was  not
   advanced before the First-tier Tribunal and is novel.  It was not, on any
   view, Robinson obvious and I do not find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge erred in law in  failing  to  deal  with  this  potential  line  of
   reasoning.

43. Nor do I consider that the argument can succeed now.  I do not  consider
   that the United Kingdom has any current international obligations to  the
   appellant as a former child soldier, or as a child.  It is right that  he
   arrived in the United Kingdom age 16, but he reached the age of  majority
   2 years later and to the extent that the United Kingdom had an obligation
   to take 'all appropriate measures to promote physical  and  psychological
   recovery and social integration' during his minority, or in the years  of
   his early adulthood, the evidence is that such obligation was  discharged
   properly.  The appellant is no longer a child: he is 23 years old now and
   has been an adult for 5 of the  7  years  he  has  spent  in  the  United
   Kingdom.   Had this been the only argument  in  his  favour,  the  appeal
   would fail.

44. However, I have found that there exists a  real  risk  of  harm  at  the
   Article 3 level, if this appellant is returned to Sierra Leone now.  That
   trumps the Article 8 arguments and there is no need to examine Article  8
   and the international Conventions in more detail.

DECISION

45. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal on human rights grounds.



Date:         19 December 2016               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


