
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00605/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2013                               |On 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                            amirthanathar meldin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 8 January 1985.

2.   The appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2009,  on  a
    student  visa,  obtained  by  the  use  of   false   English   language
    certificates.  He had leave to remain until April 2012.  Shortly before
    the expiry of that leave he claimed asylum.

3.   The respondent's decision of 10 January 2013 refused  to  grant  asylum
    and gave directions for his removal.  Such a decision was  the  subject
    of an appeal which was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lucas  on  1
    March 2013.

4.   The appeal was dismissed in all respects.

5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted  against  that  decision.   Initially,
    permission to appeal was refused but  on  21  May  2013  permission  to
    appeal was granted.

6.   Thus, the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant of leave.

7.   In essence, the appellant is a  Tamil  who  lived  and  worked  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Initially, he worked as a computer operator in  the  Department
    of Labour from 2 February 2006 and, thereafter,  with  the  German  Red
    Cross in the capacity of  a  technical  supervisor  in  the  Mullaitivu
    district.  He worked seemingly until 22 September 2006 when he resigned
    due to personal reasons.

8.   It was his claim that in 2006 he was  detained  although  not  at  that
    time physically ill-treated.

9.   He secured further  employment  with  the  Socio  Economic  Development
    Organisation of Trincomalee (SEDOT).  This was in 2008.

10.  It was his claim that on  8  December  2008  he  was  arrested  by  the
    authorities and tortured.  Seemingly released by way  of  a  bribe,  he
    made his way to the United Kingdom.  He claims that the authorities are
    still seeking him, so much so that his brother was arrested in 2013  in
    the course of a search for him.

11.  The judge did not find the appellant to be credible as to his claim.

12.  The judge placed considerable weight upon two  factors  in  particular.
    The first was that, although the appellant claimed to have been  sought
    by the authorities, he nevertheless managed to leave Sri Lanka upon his
    own passport. The second factor being the delay in his claiming  asylum
    and, indeed, his  immigration  history,  having  deliberately  obtained
    false documentation to support his visa application.  It  is  far  from
    clear that, having  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student,  the
    appellant thereafter studied.

13.  Ms Tobin, who represents the appellant, invited  my  attention  to  the
    grounds of appeal and submitted that the judge placed undue weight upon
    those two factors.

14.  She indeed invited my attention to the recent decision of the  Tribunal
    in GJ and other (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319(IAC) which set out in  some  detail  the  current  situation  and
    circumstances facing Tamils in Sri Lanka.

15.  She submitted that it was  clear  from  the  background  material  that
    corruption was very prevalent, particularly at the airport,  and  there
    was no reason to suspect that the appellant, through the services of an
    agent, could not have left in the way that he had done.  She invited me
    to find that the determination has many paragraphs specifically devoted
    to this issue so as to obscure other points that could be made  in  the
    appellant's favour.

16.  Mr Wilding, on behalf of the respondent, invites me to  find  that  the
    comments were properly open to be made.

17   It is right to note, however, that  the  judge  observed  a  number  of
    matters in the course of the determination.

18.  In particular, the appellant claimed that in 2006 he was stopped  at  a
    checkpoint whilst in the course of his employment.  The judge notes  at
    paragraph 65 however the appellant's employment  with  the  German  Red
    Cross is stated by them to have finished on 22 September  2006,  before
    the detention.  The appellant claimed that he had in fact continued  to
    work for the Red Cross but did not have any documents  to  substantiate
    that.

19.  The appellant stated that certain  matters  caused  him  to  leave  his
    employment in 2008 and he went into hiding.  He  claimed  that  he  was
    arrested by the authorities, detained for a month and  frequently  ill-
    treated.  He said that he was forced to  sign  a  confession,  that  he
    supported or assisted the LTTE.  When they obtained that confession  he
    was released back to his parents on the payment of a bribe,  such  that
    he came to the United Kingdom.

20.  The judge at paragraph 100 finds that account to be  neither  plausible
    nor credible.

21.   Ms  Tobin  submits  that  inadequate  reasons  are  given   for   that
    conclusion.

22.  Mr Wilding invites me to find that it is  entirely  understandable  why
    the judge would have come to that conclusion, particularly so given the
    contents of paragraphs 19 to 32 of the  determination.   The  appellant
    seemingly was arrested from his sister's  house  in  Palaiyuttu  on  27
    October 2008.  No satisfactory explanation was offered as to how it was
    that the authorities would have traced the appellant to  that  address.
    He was taken into the jungle where he was pushed into a pit and beaten.
     The authorities said that he was helping the LTTE to  supply  material
    for their constructions.  The appellant was  held  for  more  than  one
    month in an old building.  He was repeatedly beaten and told to confirm
    that he was an LTTE member.  The torture got worse.  They were  burning
    his body and other ill-treatment including the insertion of barbed wire
    into his anus through  a  plastic  pipe.   He  was  forced  to  make  a
    confession but he was unclear whether that  had  occurred  one  or  two
    weeks after his arrest.  Notwithstanding his confession,  seemingly  he
    was then released to an agent arranged by his parents and  sister.   He
    did not undergo medical treatment, he claims  that  thereafter  he  was
    wanted by the authorities.

23.  Mr Wilding submits if the authorities had gone to  so  much  effort  to
    beat him over a period of time in order to extract a confession, it was
    more likely than not that they would have further detained  him  rather
    than releasing him to his family.  If released by way of a bribe,  such
    calls into question why  the  authorities  are  seeking  the  appellant
    thereafter and why it was that it was some four years or so,  following
    his release, that his brother seemingly was arrested.  He invited me to
    find that the conclusions of the judge were understandable  within  the
    context of the factual  matrix  as  set  out  in  some  detail  in  the
    determination.

24.  Mr Wilding submits that there were a number of discreet factors  which,
    taken together, pointed to a picture of someone who lacked credibility.
     He  invited  me  to  find  that  the  comments  made  particularly  in
    paragraphs 102 to 105 were open to be made in the circumstances.

25.  Perhaps central to the appeal is the  criticism  made  of  the  judge's
    approach to the medical evidence.

26.  The appellant was examined by Professor Lingam  on  13  February  2013.
    Essentially, from the diagram, some six scars were noted to the back of
    the appellant consistent, in the view of the doctor, to the application
    of heated rods.  There were also some five  burns  to  the  upper  arms
    consistent with cigarette burns.  Thus there was evidence supportive of
    the appellant's account of his torture.  There was no  comment  by  the
    doctor as to the damage to the anus which was  claimed.   The  scarring
    was commented upon by the judge at paragraph 56 of the determination.

27.  The judge returns to the medical evidence at paragraph  102  and  finds
    that, in the  context  of  the  claim  that  is  otherwise  lacking  in
    credibility, the report takes the appellant's  claim  no  further.   It
    depends upon the truth of the account as given to  the  expert  by  the
    appellant.

28.  Ms Tobin submits that that was fairly inadequate as  an  assessment  of
    the medical evidence and greater weight ought to have been placed  upon
    that  report.   There  was  independent  evidence   corroborating   the
    causation and consistency of the appellant's account.

29.  Mr Wilding submits  that  this  was  not  strictly  a  case  where  the
    principles in Mbanga apply.  It was not a case of the judge coming to a
    conclusion as to credibility ahead of any consideration of the  medical
    evidence and thereafter, because of that finding of credibility, coming
    to a conclusion or as to the medical evidence.  He accepts that on  the
    authorities that approach would be entirely incorrect.

30.  He submits, however, that is  not  the  way  in  which  the  judge  has
    approached the matter.  The findings  of  the  judge  are  set  out  in
    paragraphs 87 to 106.  A number of matters are taken  for  and  against
    the appellant.  He asked me to find that, as with all findings of fact,
    there is an assessment of the contextual nature of  the  evidence.   He
    asked me to find that in reality the medical evidence, although perhaps
    the only significant feature supportive  of  the  appellant's  account,
    nevertheless must stand as a factor within the overall  matrix  of  the
    case.  He asked me to find that the judge has, for very clear  reasons,
    found that the account of the appellant as to his arrest and subsequent
    release, to be wholly lacking in credibility.  In  those  circumstances
    it is difficult to consider that the injuries which  are  relied  upon,
    were occasioned at that time and  in  that  circumstance.   Mr  Wilding
    submits that in paragraph 102 the judge was doing no more  than  saying
    that the medical evidence did not fit with all the rest of the evidence
    as identified.  It may be that  the  appellant  obtained  the  injuries
    through design or through other circumstances but, submits Mr  Wilding,
    it was properly open to the judge to conclude,  having  regard  to  the
    totality of the evidence, that the injuries were not  occasioned  when,
    and in the circumstances as set out by the appellant.  He invites me to
    find that that is an approach properly open to the judge.

31.  So far as the risk factors on return, Ms Tobin submits that those  were
    not analysed with any great detail by the judge.   Mr  Wilding  submits
    that the judge approached the case on the basis that the appellant  had
    no profile with the LTTE or with the government and that  he  would  be
    returning simply as a student whose leave to remain had expired.   Such
    would not create any significant profile for the appellant.  He invited
    me to find that the approach of the judge, albeit  brief  to  the  risk
    factors, was nevertheless sustainable.

32.  In any event he submits that the more recent  case  of  GJ  as  country
    guidance  has  further  diluted  the  risk  factors  that  need  to  be
    considered.   The Risk factors  were  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 290, particularly those persons suspected  of  certain  links
    with the LTTE.  The Tribunal stressed that the categories remain  fact-
    specific.  Mr Wilding submitted that it was the finding  of  the  judge
    that the appellant had not come to the attention of the authorities  in
    Sri Lanka and therefore that many of the risk factors, which  otherwise
    might  arise,  did  not  in  fact  arise  and  do  not  arise  in   the
    circumstances of the case.  Mr Wilding further submits that even if the
    judge had gone on to consider in some greater detail LP and TK that has
    now been superseded to some extent by GJ.  He said that  that  omission
    is not a material irregularity in all the proceedings.

33.  A further factor which was relied upon by the judge in the  conclusions
    which were made was the claimed involvement with the LTTE prior to 2006
    and  the  lack  of  activity  with  that  organisation  for  two  years
    thereafter.  It was considered  that  if  the  appellant  had  been  so
    involved with the LTTE as he has claimed,  he would not  have  obtained
    the employment within the sectors which he did.

34.  That perhaps is more  speculative  in  reasoning,  nevertheless  it  is
    perhaps difficult to understand how  someone  who  was  so  steeped  in
    support for  the  LTTE  such  as  to  smuggle  petrol  across  to  LTTE
    territory, somehow desists from activity for some two years without any
    clarification as to why that  was.   The  explanation  offered  by  the
    appellant to such a concern was  that  he  was  studying   during  that
    period.

35.  It seems to me, when viewed as  a  whole,  a  fair  assessment  of  the
    appellant's account had been made.

36.  It is undoubtedly right to comment  that  perhaps  some  aspects  could
    have been given a more detailed consideration but it is  clear  to  me,
    when reading the determination as a whole and I so find, that the judge
    has made  an  assessment  of  the  overall  account  and  has  come  to
    sustainable reasons for the conclusions which were made.

37.  Clearly the strongest  element  of  the  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellant's account was the  medical  evidence  but  that,  as  I  have
    indicated, cannot be viewed in isolation from the totality  of  matters
    that were considered.  Another judge might have given greater weight to
    that  aspect  and  less  weight  to  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant. Such falls, however, within the ambit of assessment.

38.  I do not find that the conclusions of the judge are either perverse  or
    Wednesbury unreasonable.

39.  Essentially, the case depended upon the  testimony  of  the  appellant.
    Such documentation that was considered by the judge was  generally  not
    to be supportive of the appellant's case.

40.  In those circumstances I do not find there to be a  material  error  of
    law.  The findings of the First-tier Judge will therefore stand, namely
    that the appeal in respect of asylum is dismissed, that in  respect  of
    humanitarian protection is dismissed  and  that  in  respect  of  human
    rights is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

