
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00645/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     R B
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Capel, Counsel, instructed by Tower Hamlets
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  brought  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pears promulgated on 12 May 2015, pursuant to a grant of
    leave by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer dated 5 June 2015.

2.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who had appealed the  refusal
    of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  her  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.  The appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that she was the victim of gang rape following which she and her family
    were  ill-treated  by  members  of  her  community  and  that  she  was
    ostracised and rejected by her family. The case for  the  Secretary  of
    State, to put it simply, was that her story was fabricated.

3.   The judgment of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears  runs  to  some  86
    paragraphs and the challenge is narrowly focused. Somewhat confusingly,
    in granting permission to appeal, Judge Saffer said this:

         "This was plainly a difficult case.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
         arguable that, if as claimed, the appellant was  gang  raped,  this
         may have had an adverse impact on her ability to give evidence  and
         may have led  to  discrepancies  which  she  should  have  had  the
         opportunity to deal with in evidence. All the grounds may be argued
         although the others may have less merit."

4.   Miss  Capel,  who  represents  the  appellant  before  me  today,  also
    appeared on her behalf before the First-tier Tribunal and  settled  the
    grounds of appeal.  In opening the appeal to me, she candidly  accepted
    that the basis on which permission was granted was not that pursued  by
    her in the grounds of appeal. She very fairly accepted that  there  was
    something circular in the way in which the permission  was  articulated
    in that it presupposes that the appellant was indeed  gang  raped  when
    the very point in issue was whether that had taken place or not.

5.   Rather than pursue to confine herself to the grant of permission,  Miss
    Capel  with  my   leave,   developed   the   three   discrete   matters
    particularised in her grounds of appeal.  She fairly acknowledged  that
    the judge in granting permission had stated  that  these  matters  "may
    have less merit", she pursued them robustly and with tenacity.

6.   The three grounds individually and collectively deal  with  the  manner
    in  which the First-tier Tribunal Judge assessed  the  evidence  before
    him  and  in  particular  came  to  conclusions  in  relation  to   the
    credibility of the appellant, specifically in relation to  the  account
    which was given of the circumstances of the gang rape.

7.   Miss Capel took me to paragraph 71 of the determination which lists  in
    a  series  of  bullet  points  what  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    categorises  as  contradictions  in   the   appellant's   account   and
    implausibilities. Those enumerated under this  paragraph  are,  in  the
    judge's terminology, "the more important ones".   Eight  bullet  points
    appear at paragraph 71 and the grounds of appeal in  paragraph  5(i)  -
    (v) challenge various elements of those bullet points. It was  properly
    pointed out by Mr Kandola who acts for  the  Secretary  of  State  that
    paragraph 71 is  no more than a summary of the judge's findings and  in
    the  substantial  discussion  of  the  evidence  which   lies   between
    paragraphs 31 and paragraph 67 there is substantial comment   upon  the
    evidence dealing with individual matters as and when they arise.

8.   The first ground of criticism relates to an alleged failure to  put  to
    the appellant matters relied on by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  as
    important  inconsistencies  and  implausibilities  in  the  appellant's
    evidence.  Miss Capel took me to the decision  of  RR  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKUT 00375 (IAC). The only part of
    that judgment to which  she  made  express  reference  was  the  fourth
    paragraph of the headnote which says as follows:

         "If the respondent does not put his case clearly  it  may  be  very
         difficult for the Tribunal to decide against an appellant  who  has
         not been given  an  opportunity  to  deals  with  the  respondent's
         concerns."

9.   That statement of law and principle is uncontroversial and anodyne  and
    I note that in the  particular  circumstances  of  RR  the  failure  or
    oversight was not to put an allegation that injuries  might  have  been
    self-inflicted. That, on any account, is a factual issue which  was  at
    the core of the case being put forward by the Secretary of State.

10.  Miss Capel first makes reference  to  an  alleged  discrepancy  between
    question 54 in the asylum interview and the question was "Did  you  get
    on with your in-laws?" to which the appellant  replied  "Yes"  and  her
    evidence later  in  the  interview  that  her  relatives  rejected  her
    following the rape.  This was a matter which  appears  in  the  further
    bullet point of paragraph 71 where the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated



         "She says at one stage her was on good terms with her  in-laws  and
         lived with them until she left Bangladesh but her current  case  is
         she was in hiding for over a year at her parents after her  in-laws
         had in  effect  kicked  her  out  and  believed  that  she  had  an
         adulterous affair."

11.  I cannot see any justification  for  the  criticism  of  the  judge  in
    recording what he did. The issues were clearly in play. It is  accepted
    by Miss Capel that this was a reserved determination and not one  given
    ex tempore. The purpose of reserved determinations  is  for  judges  to
    reflect upon the totality of  the  evidence.  Clearly  credibility  was
    central to the case being advanced by the appellant. The  Secretary  of
    State's case was that the appellant's narrative was not credible. I  do
    not consider that there was any requirement for the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge to invite specific submissions on each and every inconsistency.

12.  A similar analysis applies in relation to the four  further  challenges
    which Miss Capel makes under paragraph  5  of  ground  1.   The  second
    matter is a discrepancy between an answer  to  question  129  regarding
    where the appellant was living. The third matter relates to an  alleged
    discrepancy regarding the number of children who were in the  property.
    The fourth deals with the failure on the part of  appellant  to  adduce
    evidence from her parents, although I put this to one side because,  as
    Miss Capel has very fairly and very properly conceded, this was  raised
    by the judge  during  closing  submissions  and  Miss  Capel  took  the
    decision not to make any application to reopen her  case.  She  accepts
    that whatever may be the merit of her other points, this is not amongst
    the stronger. The fifth  issue  is  that  in  the  sixth  bullet  point
    reference was made to the fact that there was no mention of receiving a
    vaginal  examination  until  the  hearing  and  no  mention  of   being
    unconscious was made when the earlier interview had taken place.

13.  These grounds are fully argued in  the  written  application  and  they
    have been  supplemented  by  oral  submissions  with  great  skill  and
    tenacity by Miss Capel. Nonetheless for the reasons I have given, I  am
    not persuaded that in relation to ground 1 there is any  error  of  law
    because these matters were amongst  a  constellation  of  other  points
    which  the  judge  took  into  account  in  making  his   findings   of
    contradiction and implausibility and all of those matters  (not  merely
    those highlighted by Miss Capel) were considered  to  be  amongst  "the
    more important ones".

14.  In any event, issues  of  credibility  are  matters  entirely  for  the
    assessment of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The weight to be given  to
    various aspects of both the oral and documentary evidence is  similarly
    entirely within the province  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    notwithstanding the elegant argument of counsel, I can see no fault  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the way in which he dealt  with  these
    matters.

15.  I turn then to ground 2 which is a refinement of ground 1 addressing  a
    more  particular  matter  and  again  it  is  argued  in  the   written
    submissions with skill and with thoroughness. The basis of ground 2  is
    that the judge failed to have regard to relevant matters when assessing
    the  appellant's  credibility,  when  coming  to  his  conclusions   in
    paragraph 71 and elsewhere. In particular the first point  argues  that
    the judge formed an adverse view of the fact that a gang  rape  lasting
    at least one hour was apparently inaudible from other buildings  within
    the compound.

16.  Miss Capel makes the point that the judge does not deal expressly  with
    the appellant's evidence that her attackers were said to be holding her
    mouth and were uttering threats to her life were she to have  screamed.
    I note that in paragraph 38 of the determination, when  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is summarising the evidence, he makes reference  to  the
    appellant's screaming when the door was broken down. I do not  consider
    that the conclusion the judge came to in this regard can  be  inpugned.
    He heard al the evidence. He came to a balanced conclusion on what  was
    before him and I do not consider  it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  go
    further than he did in explaining why he had come to that conclusion by
    specifically dealing with every matter individually.

17.  The same applies to the three other points under  ground  2  which  are
    pursued by Miss Capel in this regard. Put shortly,  her  contention  is
    that it is incumbent upon a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  when  an
    explanation is tendered by an appellant for matters which are in  issue
    the determination needs to deal expressly with why that explanation has
    been rejected. In the particular circumstances of this case, I  do  not
    consider that that criticism  is  fairly  made.  It  is  a  counsel  of
    perfection for First-tier Tribunal Judges to deal with each  and  every
    point which may or may not be raised on the  papers  and  elsewhere.  I
    consider  that  in  the  course  of  this  full,  clear  and   detailed
    determination the judge properly discharged his judicial  function  and
    gave anxious scrutiny to the entirety of the  evidence  including  such
    explanations as had been tendered. That he did  not  expressly  mention
    each and every point  is  not  in  my  assessment  a  valid  source  of
    criticism. This determination, considered in  the  round,  is  not  one
    where he needed to go further on any specific matter. It is  abundantly
    plain what he  decided  and  the  basis  upon  which  he  came  to  his
    conclusions.

18.  The third ground of appeal is headed by a typographical error  but  the
    ground pursued relates to implausibility. The  criticism  made  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is that he rejected  wholesale  the  evidence
    given by three witnesses in relation to what they may or may  not  have
    heard about the applicant's circumstances. The particular part  of  the
    judgment where this arises is at  paragraph  73  where  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge says this:

         "I am afraid I reject entirely the evidence of the witnesses. There
         is implausibility in their account of being sufficiently interested
         in a person they did not know and happening to have connections  in
         or near the same village  (Bangladesh  is  hardly  under  populated
         country (160 million people according to Wikipedia).  However  they
         claim that not only did they hear passively about an  incident  but
         made enquiries and then coincidentally met her sometime after  they
         were in Bangladesh. The interesting thing is that  the  appellant's
         case is that not only she was raped but her reputation was  sullied
         but not one of the witnesses  seem  to  have  been  told  that  and
         certainly did not relay it in their evidence."

19.  The Judge had dealt with the evidence of these witnesses  substantively
    earlier in his determination, at paragraphs 52, 53 and 54.  It is clear
    to me from those particular paragraphs, and from the determination as a
    whole, that the judge afforded proper weight to that evidence and  that
    his conclusion on implausibility was one that was properly open to  him
    in all the circumstances. Miss Capel did not take me to the passages in
    any of the authorities  on  implausibility  mentioned  in  the  written
    grounds. This is a matter which was properly determined on  the  facts.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard from these three witnesses and came
    to the conclusion which he did. That was a  legitimate  conclusion.  It
    was properly open to him on the evidence  and  not  indicative  of  any
    error of law.

20.  It follows that  notwithstanding  the  attractive  way  in  which  this
    appeal has been advanced before me, it does not disclose any of law  in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  must  therefore
    be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Mark Hill         Date  4 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
