
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00533/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (Upper Tribunal)   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ABASS AHMADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Lei Dat & Baig, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The appellant was born on 25 April 1975 and is a male citizen of  Iraq.
    He is of Kurdish ethnicity.  After his asylum  appeal  was  refused  in
    2002, he was given exceptional leave to remain until 2006. He  made  an
    in-time application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  upon  which  no
    decision was made by the respondent until 19  December  2014  when  his
    application was refused.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Myers) which, in a decision promulgated on 6  March  2015  allowed  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection and  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The
    respondent now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The first ground of appeal is that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant, who is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,
    originates from outside the Kurdish region of Iraq  and  who  would  be
    returned to Baghdad, would be unable to  relocate  within  the  Kurdish
    area of Iraq because he did not have a  sponsor.   The  grounds  assert
    that,

         "Such persons [as the appellant] would either not require a sponsor
         because they would not be perceived as a  security  risk  or  would
         likely know someone who could act as a sponsor based on  family  or
         tribal links.  The appellant has provided no evidence that he would
         be unable to follow this process."

 4. At [23] the judge concluded that it would be,

         "... extremely difficult for the appellant who has been out of  the
         country since 2001 and unable to return to his home area to  obtain
         the transfer of his civil documentation or to obtain copies of  his
         civil status records and there would therefore be a real risk  that
         he would be unable to replace his documentation."

    She also found that,

         "... the [appellant] would be unable to relocate within the Kurdish
         area because he does not have a sponsor and as an Iraqi Kurd  there
         is a danger he may be targeted in the Arab dominated areas of  Iraq
         and accused of being involved with ISIS."

    It was on that basis that  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

 5. It appears that the respondent's Country Information Guidance  on  Iraq
    (Internal Relocation and Technical Obstacles) dated  24  December  2014
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Guidance notes  that  "persons
    from contested areas will be able to re-acquire their civil  status  ID
    card, national certificate and other civil documentation by approaching
    relevant agencies found in Baghdad  and  Najar."   It  should  also  be
    possible to obtain the necessary documentation from the  Iraqi  Embassy
    in London.  I find that I agree with the respondent that the judge  has
    placed too heavy an emphasis in this instance upon the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence in the United Kingdom (and his consequent absence
    from Iraq) and  has  placed  insufficient  evidence  upon  the  various
    procedures which the appellant might follow while still in  the  United
    Kingdom to obtain  documentation  for  which  he  could  reasonably  be
    expected to pursue  upon  return  to  Baghdad.   The  appellant's  long
    absence from Iraq might be a factor determining the speed at  which  he
    may be able to obtain the necessary documents but the judge's  findings
    are too generalised and her failure to consider the various  procedures
    available to the appellant renders  her  reasoning  on  this  important
    point inadequate.

 6. The other ground of appeal concerns the judge's allowing of the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.  It is asserted that this part of the decision is
    also inadequately reasoned; there was no  reason  why  the  appellant's
    private life could not be conducted in Iraq and the judge has failed to
    have proper regard to Section 117 of the 2002  Act,  despite  the  fact
    that she did mention that provision in her decision.

 7. It was clear from reading the decision of Judge Myers that she believed
    that the appellant had a strong ground  for  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his Article 8 private life rights.   She  quite
    properly records [32] those factors weighing against the  appellant  in
    the proportionality assessment (that he used a false  identity  in  his
    claim for asylum; that he was subsequently granted ELR on the basis  of
    a false identity and therefore has not had valid leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom throughout his time here; that  he  was  found  to  lack
    credibility in his asylum claim).  She appears to excuse the  appellant
    [33] for having used a false identity whilst in the United  Kingdom  on
    account of "the dire situation in  Iraq."   However,  foremost  in  the
    judge's analysis is  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in 2006 but had to initiate judicial  review
    proceedings in order to compel the respondent to make a decision  which
    was eventually issued eight years later.  The judge found [34],

         "... in my judgement there is unreasonable delay on the part of the
         respondent which has  a  bearing  on  the  proportionality  of  the
         decision (EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41).  Taking all these factors into
         consideration I find the decision disproportionate and a breach  of
         Article 8."

 8. Where necessary, the Tribunal should be able to attach  weight  to  the
    respondent's  delay  in  making  a  decision  and  the  delay  in  this
    particular instance (eight years) in respect of an application properly
    made in time by the appellant is severe by  any  standards.   It  is  a
    factor which clearly counted heavily in favour of the appellant in  the
    assessment although the judge also  correctly  detailed  those  factors
    which weighed against the appellant.  Judge Myers reached a decision on
    Article 8 which, whilst another judge may have made a wholly  different
    decision on the same facts, was available to her.  It is  not  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to tinker with decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    including those in relation to Article 8 ECHR,  where  a  decision  has
    been reached by a proper evaluation of the  evidence,  the  even-handed
    weighing up of factors for  and  against  an  appellant  and  a  proper
    consideration of the public  interest  concerned  with  an  appellant's
    removal.  As I say, another judicial decision-maker may have reached  a
    different  decision  but  that  is  not  the  point.    After   careful
    consideration, I am satisfied that the judge's decision should  not  be
    the subject of interference by the Upper Tribunal.  Therefore, whilst I
    find that the judge did err in law in her  assessment  of  humanitarian
    protection the judge's decision on Article 8 should not be reversed.  I
    therefore exercise my discretion not to set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed accordingly.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

