
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00447/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2018                             |On 23rd March 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     FR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Norman of Counsel instructed by Harbans Singh
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Perry of the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (the  FtT)  promulgated  on  29th  December  2016.   The
    Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan and she has a dependent  son,
    MR, born [ ] 2000.

 2. The Appellant and her son and her daughter who  was  born  in  February
    1995 arrived in the UK as visitors on 16th June  2012.   The  Appellant
    made an asylum and human rights claim on 8th January 2013.  She claimed
    to be the member of a particular social group, on the  basis  that  she
    would be a lone vulnerable female if returned to Pakistan.  She claimed
    to be at risk from her husband who had been violent and abusive to her,
    and had fired gunshots at her.  After her arrival in the UK her husband
    had contacted her brothers, who are British citizens, and made  threats
    to kill her.

 3. The asylum and human rights claim was refused on 16th  March  2016  and
    the Appellant appealed to the  FtT.   Her  appeal  was  heard  on  15th
    December 2016 and dismissed on all grounds.  The FtT did not find  that
    the Appellant was a credible witness and found that she would not be at
    risk if returned to Pakistan.  The FtT found that the  Appellant  would
    not have family in Pakistan to provide support, but she  could  receive
    financial support from her family in  the  UK  and  she  would  not  be
    returning alone, as her son who was 16 years of age at the date of  the
    FtT hearing, would accompany her.   Having  found  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk if returned to Pakistan,  the  FtT  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf.   Although  the  grounds
    seeking  permission  to  appeal  had  not  expressly  referred  to  the
    Appellant's son, Judge Shaerf found it a 'Robinson obvious' point  that
    the FtT had failed to consider the best interests  of  the  Appellant's
    son which was an arguable error of law.



Error of Law

 5. On 21st July 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law.  On behalf of  the  Appellant  it  was  argued  that  the
    failure by the FtT to consider the best interests of the Appellant's 16
    year old son amounted to a material error  of  law  and  therefore  the
    decision of the FtT should be set aside on that basis.   On  behalf  of
    the Respondent it was accepted that the FtT should have considered  the
    best interests of the Appellant's son, but it was  contended  that  the
    error was not material, as it was open to the FtT to conclude,  in  the
    circumstances of this case, that the Appellant and her son could return
    to Pakistan.

 6. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, and the submissions made by both parties are  contained  in
    my error of law decision promulgated on 2nd August 2017.  I  set  aside
    the decision of the FtT, and  set  out  below  paragraphs  11-18  which
    contain my conclusions and reasons for so doing;

         "11. It was common ground between the parties that the FtT had  not
             considered the best interests of the Appellant's son who is  a
             minor.  He was 16 years of age at the date of the FtT hearing.
              He was a dependant in the Appellant's appeal.  The Respondent
             considered his best interests at some length at paragraphs 78-
             87 of the refusal decision dated 16th March 2016.   There  was
             evidence relevant to the son submitted to the  Respondent  and
             contained within the Respondent's bundle, and pages 146-161 of
             the Appellant's bundle related only to evidence about the son.



         12.  I find that failure to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's son is a material error of law.  I find that where
             it is proposed to remove a child from the UK, and it is  clear
             that there is opposition to such action, it is  necessary  for
             the FtT to consider the best interests of the child.

         13.  Permission to appeal was not granted on any other  point,  and
             therefore the findings of the FtT in relation  to  credibility
             and risk on return are preserved.

         14.  It is necessary to have a further hearing.   This  is  not  an
             appropriate case to remit to the FtT.

         15.  Article 8 was raised as a ground  of  appeal,  and  there  was
             specific  reference  to  Article  8  in   letters   from   the
             Appellant's solicitors dated 3rd and  4th  October  2016,  and
             reference to Article 8 in the Appellant's  skeleton  argument.
             The FtT recorded at paragraph 1 that Article 8 was relied upon
             in the appeal, but recorded at paragraph 7 that Article 8  was
             not pursued.  No findings were made by the FtT in relation  to
             Article 8.

         16.  Both representatives indicated that  Article  8  was  in  fact
             pursued before the FtT, not in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
             adult daughter, but in relation to her 16 year old son.   Both
             representatives  contended  that  their  colleagues  who   had
             appeared before the FtT had in fact made  submissions  to  the
             FtT on Article 8.

         17.  I find it appropriate therefore to consider Article 8  at  the
             next Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   That  hearing  will  consider
             Article 8 and the best interests of the Appellant's son.   For
             the avoidance of doubt  there  will  be  no  consideration  of
             asylum, humanitarian protection, or Articles 2 and  3  of  the
             1950 Convention.

         18.  Mr Sidhu was somewhat unsure as to  the  number  of  witnesses
             that might be called in relation to Article 8.   He  indicated
             that there would be three  witnesses  although  the  Appellant
             would not be called and therefore there was  no  need  for  an
             interpreter."

 7. The hearing was adjourned to enable evidence to be called so  that  the
    best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  son  and  Article  8  could   be
    considered.



Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 9th March 2018

Preliminary Issues

 8. The Appellant attended the hearing.  It was confirmed that she would be
    giving oral evidence as would her son and two of her brothers.

 9. I ascertained that the Tribunal had  received  all  documentation  upon
    which the parties intended to rely, and that each party had served  the
    other with any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  The
    documents in question are the Home Office bundle with Annexes A-J,  the
    Appellant's  bundle  comprising  219  pages,  the  Appellant's   bundle
    comprising 67 pages, a letter from Harbans Singh dated 5th October 2017
    together with enclosures, and  the  Appellant's  bundle  comprising  22
    pages.

10. The representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there
    was no application for an adjournment.



The Oral Evidence

11. Prior to oral evidence being given I advised the parties that  in  view
    of the age of the Appellant's son, and the diagnosis of post  traumatic
    stress disorder in the  Appellant's  psychiatric  report,  I  would  be
    conducting the hearing by following  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 2 of 2010 in relation to child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive
    appellant guidance.

12. The Appellant gave evidence with the assistance of  an  interpreter  in
    Urdu.  There were no difficulties in communication.   She  relied  upon
    her witness statements dated 3rd October 2016 and 7th December 2017.

13. The Appellant's son, MR, gave  evidence  in  English  and  adopted  his
    witness statement dated 3rd October 2017.  There were  no  difficulties
    in communication.  In the course of his evidence he handed in his  year
    13 school report.

14. The Appellant's brother, JS, then gave evidence.  He did not require an
    interpreter and adopted his witness  statements  dated  23rd  September
    2016 and 3rd November 2017.

15. The Appellant's brother, MS, then gave oral evidence  in  English.   He
    adopted his undated witness statement contained at pages 52-53  of  the
    Appellant's bundle, and his witness statement dated 3rd October 2017.

16. The Appellant and witnesses were questioned by the representatives.   I
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.  If  relevant  I  will
    refer to the oral evidence when I set out my conclusions and reasons.



The Oral Submissions

17. I heard oral submissions from both representatives which are set out in
    full in my Record of Proceedings and summarised in brief below.

18. On behalf of the Respondent reliance was placed on the refusal decision
    dated 16th March 2016.  It was submitted that the Appellant  would  not
    be returning alone but would be accompanied by her son who is nearly 18
    years of age.  He could provide some emotional support.  The  Appellant
    would be able to access treatment  for  her  mental  health  issues  in
    Pakistan.  Her brothers in the UK provide financial support  and  could
    continue to do so.

19. I was asked to note that the Appellant's son is not a qualifying child,
    in that he does not have settled status in  the  UK,  and  he  has  not
    resided in this country for seven years.  He had given evidence that he
    was due to take his A levels, but it was submitted  that  by  the  time
    this decision was in force, he would have completed his  A  levels.   I
    was reminded that education is not a protected right under Article 8.

20. I was also reminded of the considerations contained in section 117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and I  was  asked  to
    find that there were no exceptional or compelling circumstances in this
    case that outweighed the public  interest.   The  Appellant  could  not
    speak English and is not financially  independent.   It  was  submitted
    that her appeal with reference to Article 8 should be dismissed.

21. On behalf of the Appellant I was asked to note that a feature  of  this
    case was the delay caused by the Respondent.  The Appellant had claimed
    asylum on 8th January 2013 but did not have her  substantive  interview
    until January 2016, and the refusal decision was  made  on  16th  March
    2016, over three years after the asylum claim had  been  made.   During
    that time the Appellant and her son had integrated into the UK.

22. With reference to the Appellant's son I was asked to note that he spoke
    excellent English, letters  of  support  for  him  had  been  provided,
    together with good school reports, and  confirmation  from  the  school
    that he had been made deputy head boy.  He had given evidence  that  he
    intended to study architecture, although he had been unable to obtain a
    student loan to go to university because of his  uncertain  immigration
    status.  It had been accepted by the FtT  that  the  Appellant  has  no
    family support in Pakistan, and clear evidence had  been  submitted  to
    prove that she is a vulnerable person with mental health  problems.   I
    was asked to find that it would not be  proportionate  for  her  to  be
    removed to Pakistan.

23. It was submitted that the Appellant's son had fully integrated into the
    UK, and that he would be of positive benefit to this  country,  and  it
    would be disproportionate to expect  him  to  give  everything  up,  to
    become his mother's carer in Pakistan.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved by decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

25. The issue to be decided by the Upper Tribunal relates to Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.  The conclusions  reached
    by the FtT in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection, and Articles
    2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention were not successfully challenged and are
    preserved.

26. The Appellant argues that the Respondent's decision  fails  to  respect
    her private and family life rights that are protected under Article  8.
    In considering Article 8 I adopt the balance sheet approach recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and
    in so doing have regard to the guidance as to  the  functions  of  this
    Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

27. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  her  personal
    circumstances and why the decision to refuse her Article 8 human rights
    claim interferes disproportionately in  her  private  and  family  life
    rights in the UK.  It is for the Respondent  to  establish  the  public
    interest factors weighing against the Appellant.  The standard of proof
    is a balance of probabilities throughout.

28. I begin by making some findings of fact.  I find as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant and her children arrived in the UK in June  2012  with  visit
    visas and have subsequently remained in this country.  The  Appellant's
    daughter has married a British citizen and now has a child.  She  lives
    separately from the Appellant but nearby.  The Appellant  and  her  son
    live together.

29. The Appellant has three adult brothers and three adult  sisters  living
    in the UK.  They  are  all  British  citizens.   They  have  their  own
    families.  Five of them live in Birmingham as does the Appellant,  with
    one sister living in Manchester.

30. I find that Article 8 is engaged  on  private  life  grounds  and  also
    family life in relation to the Appellant and her son.  I  do  not  find
    that the Appellant  has  established  family  life  that  would  engage
    Article 8, in relation to her adult daughter and her adult siblings.  I
    accept that the  family  are  close  and  visit  each  other,  but  the
    Appellant does not live with her  siblings,  who  all  have  their  own
    families, neither does she live with  her  daughter  who  has  her  own
    family.

31. In considering the Appellant's private life that she has established in
    the UK, I find it is appropriate to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)  which
    sets out the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
    on the grounds of private life.  The only subsection that could  assist
    the Appellant is (vi) which requires that she proves that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles to her integration into Pakistan.

32. I have followed the guidance in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013  (IAC)  in
    which it was found that mere hardship, mere difficulty,  mere  hurdles,
    mere upheaval  and  mere  inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  are
    unlikely to satisfy the test of very significant obstacles.

33. I have also followed the guidance in Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  in
    relation to integration.   At  paragraph  14,  Sales  LJ  explains  the
    concept of integration which calls for a broad evaluative judgment.  It
    must be considered whether an individual is enough  of  an  insider  in
    terms of understanding how life in the society in the country to  which
    she is to be removed is carried  on.   The  individual  must  have  the
    capacity to participate in life in  that  country,  so  as  to  have  a
    reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, and to be able to  operate
    on a day-to-day  basis.   She  must  be  able  to  build  up  within  a
    reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance  to
    her private or family life.

34. I am satisfied  that  I  have  received  an  accurate  picture  of  the
    Appellant's current circumstances, from the evidence  of  her  brothers
    and her son, and also her own evidence.  I regard the evidence  that  I
    have heard and read from those witnesses to be credible.  It  is  clear
    that the Appellant has spent the majority of her life in  Pakistan.   I
    accept that she was only educated up to the age of 16 years.  She  then
    married, and it was an unhappy marriage which ended  in  divorce.   Her
    second marriage also ended in divorce.  She  has  divorced  her  second
    husband, while in the UK and has had no further contact from him.

35. I take into account that the Appellant has only been resident in the UK
    since June 2012, and that she arrived with a visit visa indicating that
    she intended to return to Pakistan.  I find that the Appellant  has  no
    close family members in Pakistan.  Her family are in the UK.  She would
    not  however  encounter  language  difficulties  if  she  returned   to
    Pakistan.  If she returned to Pakistan I find that she  would  find  it
    difficult  to  obtain  employment.   She  has  no  relevant  employment
    experience.  She does not have  accommodation  available  in  Pakistan,
    having previously lived with her in-laws.

36. The Appellant would however receive financial help from her brothers in
    the UK.  They are supporting her at  present  and  indicated  in  their
    evidence that they would continue to do so.

37. I attach weight to the medical evidence.  There are letters within  the
    Appellant's first bundle from her GP dated 19th February 2015 and  23rd
    September 2016 which confirm that she has been suffering  from  anxiety
    symptoms since 2013 and has been taking anti-depressant medication on a
    long term basis.  There is a further letter  from  her  GP  dated  28th
    September 2017, confirming a history of depression for which she  takes
    medication.  Her symptoms are described as still regularly causing  her
    distress.  She had a pulmonary embolism in  2012  and  is  on  Warfarin
    medication for the rest of  her  life.   The  most  up-to-date  medical
    evidence is a psychiatric report prepared by Dr  Jethwa,  a  consultant
    psychiatrist, and which  is  dated  7th  December  2017.   It  was  not
    suggested that I should not attach weight to this report.  At paragraph
    68 it is confirmed that the Appellant suffers from recurrent depression
    which involves low mood, poor sleep and  poor  concentration,  together
    with poor self-esteem and reduced  energy  levels.   She  also  suffers
    significant anxiety symptoms.  It is confirmed that she receives  anti-
    depression medication.

38. At paragraph 71 the opinion is given that the  Appellant  suffers  from
    post traumatic stress disorder.  At paragraph 73 the opinion  is  given
    that the Appellant suffers from recurrent depressive disorder currently
    of moderate severity,  and  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  also  of
    moderate severity.  Dr Jethwa  describes  these  as  being  significant
    mental health problems "clearly having a significant detrimental impact
    upon her current mental health and  significantly  adversely  affecting
    her level of functioning and causing a significant amount  of  personal
    distress".

39. Dr Jethwa's opinion is that the Appellant displays poor self-care and a
    reduced ability to attend to household activities such as cooking meals
    for herself.  Her son confirmed in evidence  that  the  Appellant  very
    rarely cooks and that cooking and cleaning the house falls to him.

40. Dr Jethwa suggests that the Appellant's  medication  is  reviewed,  and
    that she be referred for psychological therapy.  In Dr Jethwa's opinion
    stability of accommodation and support from her family,  together  with
    the appropriate treatment for depression and PTSD would mean  that  the
    Appellant has a good prognosis.

41. The opinion is given that the ongoing support of her family in  the  UK
    is vital to the treatment of  the  Appellant's  ongoing  mental  health
    problems.   This  is  required  to  provide  practical  assistance  and
    emotional support.

42. At paragraph 80 the opinion is given that if the Appellant was returned
    to Pakistan without the support of her family, she is likely to  suffer
    from a substantial deterioration in mental health and her depression is
    likely to worsen to a severe episode, as is her PTSD.  Dr Jethwa states
    that without support from her family, there would  be  serious  concern
    about her ability to self-care and manage her daily  living  activities
    to the extent that she  would  be  at  high  risk  of  physical  health
    problems due to poor self-care which is often  associated  with  severe
    depression and anxiety.  Dr Jethwa also indicated concern that she  may
    develop thoughts about self-harm or suicide.

43. At paragraph 82 Dr Jethwa does not believe that the Appellant would  be
    capable of looking after her son without the physical  support  of  her
    family, and would be likely to have significant problems being able  to
    prioritise and attend to her son's basic physical and emotional  needs.



44. I find that the opinion of Dr  Jethwa  is  in  fact  supported  by  the
    description of the Appellant  given  by  both  her  brothers  who  gave
    evidence to the Tribunal, and her son.  Although her  brothers  do  not
    live with her, they visit frequently, and the Appellant and her son are
    invited to visit them.  Her son confirmed that he does his best to help
    his mother, and takes responsibility  for  cooking  and  cleaning,  but
    there are occasions when he cannot cope, and he then  telephones  other
    family members, either his uncles or his  sister,  who  can  attend  at
    short notice.

45. Both the brothers said in evidence that if the Appellant had to  return
    to Pakistan they would send financial support, but both expressed  deep
    concern at her vulnerability and ability to look after herself,  taking
    into account the lack of any family in Pakistan.  Cross-examination  of
    the witnesses at the hearing,  did  not  in  any  way  undermine  their
    evidence, and I am satisfied that they are  extremely  concerned  about
    the mental health of the Appellant.  There are facilities  in  Pakistan
    for the treatment of mental health issues.  What in my view proves that
    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration,  is  the
    combination of the Appellant's mental health problems, linked with  the
    lack of any family support, save that of her son who is not yet 18, and
    I accept the opinion of Dr Jethwa, that without the family support that
    the Appellant receives from her family members in the UK, her  symptoms
    would worsen, so that there  is  a  substantial  deterioration  in  her
    mental health.  I have considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in the  light
    of the guidance given in Treebhawon and Kamara, and I conclude  because
    of the Appellant's mental health issues and vulnerability, and the lack
    of  family  support  in  Pakistan,  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her  re-integration  into  that  country.   She  therefore
    satisfies the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

46. That does not however mean that the appeal must automatically  succeed.



47. In considering family life, no reliance is  placed  upon  Appendix  FM.
    The Appellant has established family life with  her  son,  but  I  must
    consider whether the Respondent's decision would  interfere  with  that
    family life.  I find that it would not, as if the Appellant was removed
    from the UK, her son would accompany her.

48. In considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, I must consider
    the public interest, and I have to carry out a  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to proportionality.  The best interests of the Appellant's son
    are  considered  as  a  primary  consideration   but   not   the   only
    consideration.  I find without doubt that his best interests  would  be
    served by remaining with his mother.   The  Appellant's  son  has  very
    successfully integrated in the UK.  He has performed so well at  school
    that he was interviewed for the head  boy  position,  and  subsequently
    became deputy head boy.  His  school  reports  are  good.   His  spoken
    English is excellent.  I accept his evidence that he regards the UK  as
    his home.  He has family and friends in this country.  He does not have
    family in Pakistan.  He has  no  contact  with  his  father,  whom  the
    Appellant divorced while she was in the UK.

49. The Appellant's son is due to take his A levels in May and June, and my
    conclusion is that his best interests would be served by  remaining  in
    the UK, and being allowed to undertake his A levels  and  continue  his
    education in the UK.

50. Although I have made that finding in relation to the best interests  of
    the Appellant's son, that does not automatically mean that  the  appeal
    must succeed.  There are other considerations which must be taken  into
    account.

51. I have had  regard  to  the  considerations  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Subsection (1)  confirms
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.  Subsection (2) confirms that it is in  the  public  interest
    that a person seeking to remain in  the  UK  can  speak  English.   The
    Appellant has not satisfactorily  demonstrated  her  ability  to  speak
    English.  Subsection (3) confirms that it is  in  the  public  interest
    that a person seeking leave to remain is financially independent.   The
    Appellant is not financially independent.

52. Subsection (4) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person when the person is in the  UK  unlawfully,
    and subsection (5) confirms that little weight should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a person when in the UK with  a  precarious
    immigration status.  This applies to the  Appellant  because  initially
    she had a precarious immigration status in that she had a  visit  visa.
    She overstayed when  that  expired  and  has  remained  without  leave.
    Therefore little weight must be attached to her private life.

53. Subsection (6) is not applicable  because  that  relates  to  a  person
    having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
    child.  The Appellant certainly has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with her son, but he is not a qualifying child as  defined
    in section 117D because he is not a British citizen,  and  he  has  not
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years.

54. I have not found this an easy decision.  I have conducted  a  balancing
    exercise.  There are points for and against the Appellant.  The finding
    of the FtT means that if returned to Pakistan she would not be at  risk
    from her former husband.  I find that it does not assist her  case  for
    remaining in the UK that she is a citizen of Pakistan, and has lived by
    far the greater part of her life in that country.  There  would  be  no
    language difficulties if she returned.  If she remains in the UK I find
    that she would be a burden on public funds, including the NHS.  She has
    not demonstrated the appropriate level of  English  that  would  assist
    with her integration.

55. On the other side of the scales, I take into account the wishes of  the
    Appellant and her son to stay in the  UK,  although  I  do  not  attach
    substantial weight to that, and it is clear that her family wish her to
    remain in the UK and are concerned about her  vulnerability.   Also  on
    this side of the scales is the fact  that  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interests of her son to stay in the UK.

56. What persuades me to find in favour of the  Appellant,  is  my  finding
    that she satisfies the Immigration Rules which set out the requirements
    to be satisfied in order to be granted leave to remain in the  UK,  and
    in her case it is paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  As previously found, I have
    placed very significant weight upon the  Appellant's  vulnerability  as
    described by her family, and in the psychiatric report.

57. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I  am  persuaded  that  because
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is  satisfied,  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    remove the Appellant  is  disproportionate,  and  breaches  Article  8.
    Therefore, her appeal is allowed with reference to  Article  8  of  the
    1950 Convention.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision as follows.

The  appeal  is  dismissed  with  reference  to  asylum,  and   humanitarian
protection.

The appeal is dismissed with reference to Articles  2  and  3  of  the  1950
Convention.

The appeal is allowed with reference to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction.   This  is  continued
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any  member  of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to  a  contempt  of  court.   This  direction  is  made
because this appeal has involved considering the best interests of a child.


Signed                              Date         14th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.  No fee has been paid or is payable.  The  appeal  was
allowed because of evidence considered by the Tribunal that was  not  before
the original decision-maker.


Signed                              Date         14th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall






