
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00214/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 28 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                                 XIUHUA LIN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:   Elizabeth Norman (of Counsel), instructed by Howe and
Company.

 Respondent:  Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      DECISION, REMITTAL AND DIRECTIONS

 1. By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  (the "Secretary of State"), dated  16  December  2013,  the
    application of the Appellant, a Chinese national  aged  24  years,  for
    asylum was refused.  The ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the
    "FtT") was dismissed.


 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum rested on  her  assertion  of  a  well
    founded fear of persecution, on account of her Roman Catholic faith, in
    the event of having to return to China.  In a nutshell, her  claim  was
    rejected as it was considered inconsistent, implausible and unworthy of
    belief.  Consistent with the grant of permission  to  appeal,  the  two
    grounds on which the appeal was argued centred on the adequacy  of  the
    FtT's reasons for certain  findings  and  the  fairness  of  the  FtT's
    decision making process.

 3. In the key passages of a  detailed  determination,  the  Judge,  having
    correctly directed herself on the burden and standard of proof,  begins
    with the following omnibus conclusion:

         "...   I  find  the  core  of  the  Appellant's  account  to  be  a
         fabrication designed to assist her to make a claim to remain in the
         United Kingdom.  I find for  the  reasons  below  that  she  is  an
         economic migrant and not at risk or entitled to protection  as  she
         claims."

    In the ensuing paragraphs, the Judge elaborates on this conclusion. She
    finds specifically  that  the  Appellant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum
    damaged her credibility.  This  is  followed  by  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant is not an adherent of the Roman Catholic  faith.   Next,  the
    Judge acknowledges that while the Appellant's claim has been internally
    consistent, this does not strengthen it.  This discrete  assessment  is
    unreasoned.  In the ensuing two paragraphs, there  are  three  specific
    findings, namely that the Appellant was not a member of an unauthorised
    church, her father did  not  organise  unauthorised  meetings  and  the
    Appellant did not do so.  The importance of these  findings  is  beyond
    plausible dispute.   However,  they  are  unexplained  and  unreasoned.
    Next, the Judge states:


         "The evidence of the Appellant was not,  I  find,  consistent  with
         membership of an unauthorised church or meetings."

     This statement is unaccompanied by any elaboration.

 4. In the next paragraph, the Judge rehearses the Appellant's  account  in
    her asylum interview of her practice of the Roman Catholic faith  since
    her childhood.  This included details of attending religious ceremonies
    and the number of churches in her area.  There is no expression of  the
    Judge's findings in respect of these important factual issues.  In  the
    same passage, the Judge adverts to  a  submission  by  the  Appellant's
    Counsel which sought to contrast attendance   at  church  (on  the  one
    hand) and unauthorised meetings (on the other).  There is no indication
    of the Judge's assessment of this submission. In  later  passages,  the
    Judge finds  specifically  that  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account is damaged by her claim that she has had no  contact  with  her
    family since leaving China  and  her  failure  to  seek  some  form  of
    religious support in the United Kingdom at an earlier stage.


 5. The duty on Courts and Tribunals  to  provide  reasoned  decisions  was
    considered in extenso by the Upper Tribunal in MK Pakistan [2014]  UKUT
    641 (IAC), where it was said at [6]:

         "There is a related duty to explain the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
         the more important pieces of evidence and to  provide  reasons  for
         choosing to give (as the case  may  be)  no,  little,  moderate  or
         substantial weight thereto."

     The judgment continues, at [11]:

         "The depth and extent of the duty to give reasons  will  inevitably
         vary  from  one  case  to  another.   The  duty   is   contextually
         sensitive."


     [my emphasis]

    I conclude that the decision of the FtT fails to measure  up  to  these
    standards.  It contains critical findings of fact which are unreasoned.
     I acknowledge, of course, the omnibus finding in the decision that the
    Appellant's case was not credible  and  I  have  noted  above  the  two
    specific reasons which the FtT articulated in support thereof. However,
    it is clear that certain aspects of the  Appellant's  account  were  of
    particular importance.   While  the  FtT,  commendably,  made  specific
    findings relating thereto, these are couched in bare, unreasoned terms.
     Reasons can, of course,  be  inferred  in  certain  contexts  and  the
    importance of reading a decision or judgment as a whole cannot be  over
    - emphasised. However, in this  particular  case,  I  do  not  find  it
    possible to infer the Judge's reasons for the  key  findings  addressed
    above.  Furthermore, as noted, the Judge made no  findings  at  all  in
    respect of certain discrete issues.  Thus the first  ground  of  appeal
    succeeds.

 6. The focus of the second ground of appeal was the following  passage  in
    the FtT's decision:

         "The Appellant gave no evidence of the background,  the  fact  rich
         circumstances, which I find would have been present  in  a  genuine
         account.  By way of example I note that there was no evidence about
         the number of those meetings,  the  nature  of  the  meetings,  the
         frequency, the method of arranging the same, the numbers  of  those
         attending  and  the  venue.   The  absence  of  such  details   was
         striking."

         [Emphasis added.]

    This discrete finding would probably be unassailable if it were related
    to the structure, sequence and content of  the  questions  and  answers
    constituting the asylum interview and/or the  Appellant's  evidence  to
    the FtT.  However, there is no analysis or elaboration  of  this  kind.
    More fundamentally, perhaps, this passage rehearses a series of factors
    considered  adverse  to  the  Appellant's  case  which  had  not   been
    ventilated either in cross examination or in questioning by  the  Judge
    at the hearing.  As a result, the Appellant was not put on notice  that
    these factors could be adverse to her case and had  no  opportunity  to
    address them.  I consider  that  the  hearing  at  first  instance  was
    rendered unfair in  consequence.   The  governing  principles  in  this
    respect were rehearsed recently by the Upper Tribunal in  its  decision
    in MM Sudan [2014] UKUT 105.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 7. Thus the appeal succeeds on both grounds.  I set aside the decision  of
    the FtT.  Since one of the grounds concerns the fairness of the hearing
    at first instance, I remit the case to a  differently  constituted  FtT
    for the purpose of remaking the decision.

 8. The following directions apply:

    (a)  Any further evidence on behalf of the Appellant will be served  on
         the Secretary of State and lodged with the FtT by 25 August 2014.

     (b) Any response  by  the  Secretary  of  State  will  be  made  by  15
September 2014.

     (c) An interpreter with expertise in Mandarin will be required.




                                            Signed:
                                                      [pic]
                                             THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:   12 July 2014

