
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00869/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 11 June 2013                                 |On 17 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Mohammad Anjum

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Mohammad Anjum, was born on 8 January  1979  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The  respondent  had  appealed  against  the
    decision of the appellant dated 13 December 2012 to refuse to grant him
    asylum and to refuse to vary his leave to enter the United Kingdom  and
    to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  His appeal had been considered by the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a  determination  dated  19  March  2013,
    allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention  and  on  human  rights
    grounds (Articles 2, 3 and 8) and dismissed the appeal  in  respect  of
    humanitarian protection.   I  shall  refer  in  this  determination  to
    Mohammad Anjum as "the appellant"  as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as  "the
    respondent".

 2. The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The  respondent  submits  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility was flawed.  Granting permission, Judge Brunnen stated:

         "The grounds on which the permission to appeal  is  sought  contend
         that the judge erred in law when making  her  findings  as  to  the
         appellant's credibility in that she did not  refer  to  or  assess,
         individually  or  cumulatively,   the   inconsistencies   in   [the
         appellant's]  evidence  of  which  particulars  are  given  in  the
         grounds.  This is arguable."

 3. The grounds refer to a number of inconsistencies between  the  evidence
    of the appellant and that of his witness, Mr Bostan:

         "For example the appellant's evidence was that they had  first  had
         sex some five months after meeting, Mr  Bostan  said  it  was  some
         fifteen - twenty days after first meeting.  The  appellant  claimed
         he was open about his relationship with Mr Bostan  and  was  openly
         affectionate but the latter said he was discreet because he did not
         wish his wife  and  child  to  find  out  about  the  relationship.
         Furthermore, the appellant claimed the plan was  to  live  with  Mr
         Bostan once  his  immigration  status  had  been  settled  but  the
         latter's evidence was that he would continue to live with his  wife
         and child.  As individual points it is submitted that these  issues
         are not determinative.  However, it is submitted that  cumulatively
         they  indicate  a  very  different  account  of   the   appellant's
         circumstances as set out in the  findings  in  this  determination.
         The Tribunal failed to address any of these inconsistencies.  It is
         therefore submitted that the credibility assessment  is  incomplete
         and that it is therefore not sustainable".

 4. I do not find the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    set aside for legal error.  I  say  that  for  the  following  reasons.
    Judge Mensah was very careful to consider the evidence  as  a  totality
    before making her findings. She was  also  best  placed  to  judge  the
    credibility of the witnesses whom she saw cross examined.  At [15], she
    makes a point of stating that she was  "taking  the  evidence  together
    ..."  She  notes  that  "the  appellant  underwent  significant  cross-
    examination" [16].  She found that "much of their [the appellant's  and
    Mr Bostan's] evidence as to the circumstances of their relationship was
    consistent and certainly not  inherently  implausible".   I  accept  Ms
    Mair's submission that the judge had taken the somewhat risky  step  of
    referring here to the evidence being "not inherently implausible" since
    it had  been  in  such  terms  but  the  respondent  had  attacked  the
    appellant's credibility in the refusal letter.  Further, the grounds do
    not make reference to the evidence of the appellant's sister which  the
    judge discusses at [18] and which she found to  be  "compelling".   The
    judge was clearly impressed by the evidence from a witness who  though,
    although she  supported  the  appellant  in  his  appeal,  was  clearly
    distressed by hearing of the appellant's sexual activities of which she
    disapproved.  I find that, faced with that evidence, it is very  likely
    that the judge would have concluded that the appellant is homosexual as
    he claims, whether or not she accepted the evidence  (attacked  in  the
    grounds) of his relationship with Mr Bostan.  As Ms Mair submitted, the
    inconsistencies in the evidence which I have quoted above and which are
    referred to by the respondent go to the  question  of  the  appellant's
    relationship  with  Mr  Bostan  rather  than  his  sexuality.   It   is
    abundantly clear that, having heard from the appellant and his  sister,
    Judge Mensah concluded that the appellant  is  a  homosexual.   In  the
    light of that finding, she would have been bound to have found that the
    appellant was exposed to the real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment
    in Pakistan on account of his sexuality.

 5. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, acknowledged that the challenge to  the
    determination amounted to an assertion that the judge had made perverse
    findings of fact.  Notwithstanding inconsistencies in the evidence  (of
    which I find  the  judge  was  well  aware)  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant and Mr Bostan were in a homosexual relationship together  was
    clearly open to the judge. She could,  perhaps,  have  dealt  with  the
    apparent inconsistencies in the evidence of the appellant and Mr Bostan
    in greater detail but I accept that she took those  inconsistencies  in
    account in finding the core of the evidence to be credible. I find  the
    assertion of perversity is not made out in this instance

 6. Mr Diwnycz agreed to withdraw the Section 47 decision and  consequently
    there was no need for me to address that issue.

DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 13 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
