
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00610/2016
     AA/11829/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals Liverpool |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2017                          |On 9th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           (1) MS MARYAM Aghajooni
                        (2) Mohammad Hossein ZADSHAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ben Williams (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Rawnsley, promulgated on 7th September 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 31st  August  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant on Article 8 grounds, but dismissed
    it on asylum grounds, the appeal on Article 8 grounds being allowed  on
    the basis that she had  a  viable  family  life  right  with  her  son,
    Mohammad Hossein Zadsham (AA/11829/2015).  He was allowed at  the  same
    time on asylum grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 30th September 2016, and hence the matter comes before
    me today.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Iran,  who  was  born  on  23rd
    September 1958.  She is the mother of Mohammad Hossein Zadsham, who was
    born on 5th April 1986, and whose appeal was heard also alongside  that
    of the Appellant herself, and allowed on asylum grounds  on  the  basis
    that he was a deserter from the Iranian  Army  who  would  suffer  ill-
    treatment and persecution upon return.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The  Appellant's  claim  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the fact that, as the mother of a person who had  been
    granted asylum in  this  country,  she  would  risk  ill-treatment  and
    persecution upon return to Iran herself, when she is apprehended by the
    state authorities and questioned about the whereabouts of her son,  who
    has been granted asylum in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge gave consideration to both appeals before  him.   At  various
    parts of the determination, the judge found the Appellant herself to be
    evasive in the giving of her evidence (see paragraphs 34 to 36), and in
    particular in relation to  how  her  husband  passed  away,  which  she
    claimed not to know, which the judge found to be untenable in that  she
    must have attempted to  find  out  the  reasons  for  his  death.   The
    Appellant's claim had been variously that she  had  problems  with  her
    husband when he was alive, and when he passed away that she  would  now
    be at risk of ill-treatment from members of his  family,  because  they
    would blame her  for  his  death.   The  judge  did  not  consider  the
    Appellant would face a risk of ill-treatment for three reasons.

 5. First, she would be of no adverse interest to the  Iranian  authorities
    on account of having left illegally or being a  failed  asylum  seeker.
    Second, there was no evidence to show that the Iranian authorities  are
    aware of her family background (including that her other  children  had
    claimed asylum in the UK).  Third, that the Appellant was quite capable
    of coping with questioning, which she demonstrated by being evasive  in
    her answers, such that she would fare quite well upon  return  to  Iran
    when questioned.  However, her son, Mr Zadsham, the Second Appellant in
    the appeal before the judge, had a heightened risk of suicide or health
    harm on the basis of the medical evidence submitted at the hearing  and
    the judge accepted this evidence  for  her  son.   He  then  noted  the
    Appellant's submission that she had an Article 8 claim on the basis  of
    her family life with her son, such that a  relationship  existed  there
    which goes beyond the normal emotional ties  between  mother  and  son,
    because she is the primary carer for her son and he depends on her  for
    physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.   The  judge  looked  at  the
    evidence in the round and accepted that this was the case  and  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge ought to  have  allowed
    the appeal on asylum grounds because the Appellant faced  the  risk  of
    ill-treatment in her own right if returned back  to  Iran  because  she
    would be questioned about her son who had been granted  asylum  in  the
    UK.

 7. On 30th September 2016 permission to appeal was  granted  and  on  25th
    October 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant had no political profile and  the  Iranian  authorities  were
    unaware of her children having claimed asylum in the UK.   Furthermore,
    the Appellant herself had not come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 18th January 2017, Mr Williams, relied upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  He submitted  that  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Khakhi (at page 240) contains the statement that,

         "It is common the whole family or certain members of the family are
         investigated and sometimes are  taken  into  custody  so  that  the
         authorities will  complete  their  full  investigation.   It  is  a
         frequently used practise for Iranian authorities to  arrest  family
         members when they are suspected of being sympathetic ..."

    with the person that  they  really  are  interested  in.   Mr  Williams
    submitted that this indeed was the position  of  this  Appellant  here.
    She would, as is commonly the practise in Iran be investigated  pending
    the full enquiry into the whereabouts of her son, and especially  given
    that she was sympathetic to him.

    Second, Mr Williams relied upon the recent  country  guidance  case  of
    Iran, namely, SSH and HR (Illegal Exit: Failed Asylum Seeker)  Iran  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00308 which confirmed  the  risk  of  further  questioning,
    detention, and ill-treatment of a person in  circumstances  similar  to
    that in which the Appellant today found herself.

 9. For  his  part,  Mr  Bates  relied  upon  the  fact  that  this  was  a
    comprehensive and exhaustive determination of the  issues.   The  judge
    had early at paragraphs 34 to 38 of the determination made findings  in
    relation to  the  Appellant  whom  he  considered  to  be  evasive  and
    unreliable as a witness.  Eventually he concluded at paragraph 51  that
    the Appellant's ill-treatment could not be inferred from  the  position
    of her son who had been granted asylum because the Iranian  authorities
    were not even aware of her family members having claimed asylum in  the
    UK and she herself was of no adverse interest  to  the  authorities  at
    all.  Insofar as it is the case that Dr Khakhi has referred to the fact
    that there is questioning of family members, all that  will  happen  is
    that the Appellant is will be asked, upon arrival  at  the  airport  in
    Iran, where her son who has been granted asylum in  the  UK,  currently
    is, and when she confirms that he is no longer in Iran, but is  in  the
    UK, the investigations of the Iranian authorities will come to an  end,
    because they will have an answer.  It will then no  longer  be  of  any
    purpose to the Iranian authorities to question or detain the  Appellant
    herself.  This is because up to now she has not  been  of  any  adverse
    interest to the authorities and their only interest  has  been  in  her
    son.  She will be released.  Furthermore,  the  Appellant  already  has
    existing family members living in Iran and there is  no  evidence  that
    they have been mistreated.

10. In reply, Mr Williams submitted that one simply does not  know  whether
    family members in Iran have or have not been harassed.  What  one  does
    know, on the other hand, is that the expert report is  clear  that  the
    Appellant herself, upon returning back  to  Iran,  will  be  questioned
    about her son in the UK.  The  latest  country  guidance  case  of  SSH
    [2016] UKUT 00308 confirms (at paragraph 23)  that  questioning  occurs
    upon return.  One does not know what may happen.  However, it is  clear
    that if further issues arise upon questioning, then the Appellant  will
    be at risk.  The expert report makes it clear (at page 243) that  there
    have been cases of family members being severely beaten in another case
    and the same can happen here.  Mr Bates at this  stage  interjected  to
    say that the case that was being referred to involved the beating of  a
    family member at his home inside Iran, whereas what we were looking  at
    here was the questioning of a failed asylum seeker upon arrival at  the
    airport in Iran, and this was a very different scenario.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)) of
    TCEA [2007] such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

12. First, in what is a comprehensive and well-crafted  determination,  the
    judge makes clear findings of  fact  that  the  Appellant's  claim  has
    fluctuated between threat from her husband to threat from her husband's
    family, and now to the threat of the Iranian  authorities.   The  judge
    has not found the claim itself to be plausible.

13. Second, the judge has not considered the  witness  to  be  a  plausible
    witness, but rather on the contrary to have been  an  evasive  witness,
    who deliberately failed to answer questions.

14. Third, the judge does  consider  (contrary  to  what  Mr  Williams  has
    submitted in his valiant efforts to persuade me otherwise) the position
    of this Appellant in the context of the risk that the  judge  found  to
    have been determined in relation to the Appellant's son, but  concluded
    that the Iranian authorities were not aware of  family  members  having
    made asylum claims in the UK.

15. Fourth, and no less important, even if they were to be aware, and  even
    if it is a case that Dr Khakhi's observation should be  taken  at  face
    value,  namely,  that  family  members  are  questioned   pending   the
    completion of investigations  over  people  that  the  authorities  are
    really interested in, the fact is that the Appellant will only be  able
    to say that  her  son  has  claimed  asylum  successfully  in  the  UK,
    whereupon the investigations would be complete, and the Appellant  will
    be released.  She will be released  because  the  authorities  have  no
    interest in her specifically on account of any adverse activities  that
    she has herself been engaged in.

16. Finally, the judge's approach has been sympathetic, notwithstanding his
    earlier findings, to this Appellant such that he has found there to  be
    a  viable  Article  8  claim  under  the  ECHR  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship that goes beyond normal emotional ties with her  son,  for
    whom she is a primary carer,  and  who  needs  her  for  his  emotional
    wellbeing.  The judge is perfectly entitled to come to the  conclusions
    that he did and there is no error of law in the determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

