

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00342/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th December 2014                          |On 9th December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr LINGESWARAN SANMUKAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:      Mr N Garrod (instructed by Marsh & Partners)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Respondent  with  regard  to  a  Determination  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Adio) promulgated on 29th August 2014 in  which  he
         allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to refuse his asylum claim and to remove him to Sri Lanka.


    2.   For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue  to  refer
         to Mr Sanmukam as the Appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the
         Respondent in this determination.


    3.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd  October  2010
         with  entry  clearance  as  a  student.   After   an   unsuccessful
         application to continue  his  leave  as  a  student  the  Appellant
         returned to Sri Lanka in June  2013.  On  11th  November  2013  the
         Appellant travelled  once  more  to  the  United  Kingdom  using  a
         passport belonging to someone else.   He  claimed  asylum  on  13th
         November 2013.


    4.   The Appellant claimed that his father owned a long standing family
         business exporting paddy rice. After sitting his A levels  in  2003
         the Appellant began working as an  advisor  for  a  Non  Government
         Organisation (NGO), funded by UNICEF, clearing  landmines.  Between
         2005 and 2007 he  worked  for  another  NGO  as  a  community  care
         coordinator helping people affected by the 2004 Tsunami. He claimed
         that he was forced by his superior at that  NGO  to  work  for  the
         LTTE. That included burying weapons and giving assistance  to  LTTE
         members who pretended to be Tsunami victims.


     5.  The Appellant left the NGO in December 2007 and then  worked  with
         his father before coming to the UK.


    6.   On his return to Sri Lanka in 2013 the Appellant  claims  that  he
         was arrested, detained and tortured because of the work he did  for
         the LTTE.  He said that he was taken to court, that he escaped  and
         that there was an arrest warrant issued.


    7.   In his determination Judge Adio at paragraph 33, on the  basis  of
         documents submitted and the Appellant's evidence,  found  that  the
         Appellant had worked for the NGO as claimed.


    8.    At  paragraph  35  Judge  Adio  accepted  as  credible  that  the
         Appellant, although not willing to participate, by  virtue  of  his
         employment was involved in carrying weapons and doing other  things
         for the LTTE.


    9.   At paragraph 36  the  Judge  accepted  on  the  basis  of  medical
         evidence and the Appellant's evidence that he  had  been  detained,
         tortured and had escaped.


    10.  However, at paragraph 37 the Judge found that he was not satisfied
         about the Appellant's account of an arrest warrant and at paragraph
         38 found that there was no outstanding arrest warrant in Sri Lanka.




    11.  At paragraph 39 the Judge  found  the  Appellant's  name  did  not
         appear on the computerised Stop List at Colombo airport.


    12.  At paragraph 40 the Judge found that the Appellant had never  been
         involved in voluntarily helping the LTTE but accepted however  that
         there was imputed political opinion attributed to him given what he
         had in fact done.  He  then said that in view of the severe torture
         that the Appellant experienced and the interest the authorities had
         shown in him in the past that he would be reasonably likely  to  be
         at risk of persecution on return. In particular the  relevant  part
         of the determination [40] reads as follows:-


             "The Appellant has never been involved in voluntarily  helping
             the LTTE although I accept in view of  his  history  there  is
             imputed political opinion attributed to the Appellant  due  to
             his assistance in the past helping the LTTE to bury weapons. I
             find that this is a case in view of  the  severe  torture  the
             Appellant has experienced and  the  interest  the  authorities
             have shown in him in the past that if he were return to return
             to Sri Lanka it is reasonably possible that the Appellant  can
             face risk of further persecution in his home area. It  is  not
             reasonable to  expect  him  to  relocate  because  it  is  the
             authorities who are persecuting him. I have already found I am
             prepared  to  accept  that  the  Appellant  escaped  from  the
             authorities however there is no arrest warrant outstanding for
             him however in view  of  the  interest  that  the  authorities
             maintained in him at the time  he  escaped  it  is  reasonably
             likely that the Appellant can be picked up on return  when  he
             arrives in his home area or even if he relocates and is  found
             out by the authorities. I therefore find that this is  a  case
             in which the Appellant should be given the benefit of doubt in
             view of the  past  persecution  that  he  has  faced  and  the
             interest that was outstanding in him at the  time  he  escaped
             from the authorities.  I  therefore  find  the  Appellant  has
             proved this case under Article 3 and the Refugee Convention".


    13.  The Secretary of State argues in her grounds upon which permission
         to appeal was  granted,  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in
         applying the risk categories outlined in the Country Guidance  case
         of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
         UKUT 00319 (IAC) and in particular paragraph 356(7) thereof.


    14.  The relevant paragraph of GJ is paragraph 356 which I set  out  in
         full

         356. Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including the
             latest UNHCR guidance, we consider  that  the  change  in  the
             GOSL's approach is so significant that  it  is  preferable  to
             reframe the risk analysis for the present political  situation
             in Sri Lanka.  We give the following country guidance:

             (1)      This  determination  replaces  all  existing  country
                  guidance on Sri Lanka.

             (2)      The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has
                  changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE
                  in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been
                  no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

             (3)  The government's present objective is to  identify  Tamil
                  activists in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
                  enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution
                  in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                  integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing  both
                  (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                  separatist organisation and (b) the revival of  the  civil
                  war within Sri Lanka.

             (4)  If a person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
                  services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  harm requiring international protection.

             (5)   Internal relocation is not an option  within  Sri  Lanka
                  for a person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities,
                  since the government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka
                  and Tamils are required to return to a named address after
                  passing through the airport.

             (6)  There are no detention facilities at the  airport.   Only
                  those whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained
                  from the airport.  Any risk for  those  in  whom  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
                  the airport, but after arrival in their home  area,  where
                  their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
                  a few days.

             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                  whether in detention or otherwise, are:

                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                      to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                      because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                      significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                      separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                      hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                  (b)      Journalists (whether in print or other media)  or
                      human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                      criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                      its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                      publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                      Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                      Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                      Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.   Among
                      those who may have witnessed war  crimes  during  the
                      conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                      2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                      themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                      the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                      are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                      on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                      witnesses.

                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                      list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                      those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                      arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a
                      "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                      over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                      pursuance of such order or warrant.

             (8)   The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based   on
                  sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities  within
                  Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities
                  know that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                  economic migrants and also that everyone in  the  Northern
                  Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
                  during the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
                  individual's past history will be  relevant  only  to  the
                  extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities
                  as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state or the Sri Lankan Government.

             (9)  The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led
                  "watch" list. A person whose name  appears  on  a  "watch"
                  list is not  reasonably  likely  to  be  detained  at  the
                  airport but will be monitored  by  the  security  services
                  after his or her  return.  If  that  monitoring  does  not
                  indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
                  destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the
                  internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
                  not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained  by  the
                  security forces.  That will be a question of fact in  each
                  case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by
                  such an individual.

             (10) Consideration must always be given  to  whether,  in  the
                  light of an individual's activities  and  responsibilities
                  during the civil war, the exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
                  (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of
                  the Qualification Directive).  Regard should be had to the
                  categories for  exclusion  set  out  in  the  "Eligibility
                  Guidelines  For  Assessing  the  International  Protection
                  Needs of Asylum-Seekers  from  Sri  Lanka",  published  by
                  UNHCR on 21 December 2012.


    15.  Mr Garrod submitted that the list of risk factors contained in  GJ
         was simply  not  an  exhaustive  list  or  alternatively  that  the
         Appellant did come within a category of risk.   He  submitted  that
         the facts of the Appellant's claim were on a similar factual matrix
         to that of the second Appellant in GJ who won his appeal.


    16.  I do not accept Mr Garrod's submissions. In  the  first  place  GJ
         does contain an exhaustive list as was confirmed by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in MP(Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829.
         The Court of Appeal found there to be no legal error in  the  Upper
         Tribunal's Country Guidance case  despite  the  fact  that  it  had
         narrowed  the  risk  categories  from  those  in  the   Eligibility
         Guidelines of the UNHCR. The Court of Appeal did state however that
         the Upper Tribunal had not prescribed that diaspora activism is the
         only basis on which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing a
         future threat and thus of being  at  risk  on  return.  There  may,
         though  untypically,  be  other  cases  where  the  evidence  shows
         particular grounds for concluding that the government might  regard
         the applicant as posing a current threat to the  integrity  of  Sri
         Lanka as a single state even in the absence of evidence that he  or
         she has been involved in diaspora activism.


    17.  The difficulty for this Appellant is that he  is  neither  on  the
         Stop List nor is there a warrant for his arrest and nor has he been
         involved in diaspora activities. The second Appellant in GJ's claim
         had been involved in diaspora activities.


    18.  I indicated that while it was always open for a  Judge  to  depart
         from a Country Guidance case and in relation to Sri Lanka  to  find
         that the particular facts of  the  case  would  Upper  Tribunal  an
         Appellant at risk despite him not falling into one  of  the  listed
         risk categories, that  would  require  detailed  consideration  and
         justification for departing from the  Country  Guidance  case.   In
         this case the Judge  has  not  done  that,  rather  he  has  merely
         accepted   the   Appellant's   claim   and   allowed   the   appeal
         notwithstanding that he does  not  fall  within  any  of  the  risk
         categories. He has not explained  why  the  Sri  Lankan  government
         would perceive the Appellant as a threat. Accordingly I  find  that
         the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.  The  Judge  has  not
         justified departing from the risk  categories  set  out  in  GJ  or
         explained why on the facts as he has found them to be the Appellant
         falls within one of  them.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  made  a
         material error of law such that the determination cannot stand.


    19.  Mr Garrod did not seek to preserve the findings of the  First-tier
         Tribunal. There are some findings in  the  Appellant's  favour  and
         others, particularly as concerned  the  arrest  warrant  that  went
         against the Appellant.


    20.  I therefore  set  aside  the  determination  in  its  entirety.  I
         preserve none of the findings. The appeal must be heard de novo and
         given the number of findings to be made I remit it  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.


    21.  Although the  appeal  was  originally  heard  in  London,  as  the
         Appellant lives in Liverpool it is appropriate  that  the  case  be
         reheard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  Manchester  hearing
         centre.


    22.  On the basis that I have found the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have
         made a material error of law the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
         allowed.




Signed        Dated 8th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
