
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00419/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2016                              |On 15 April, 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               SORIBA SANYANG
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene of Counsel instructed by Queen's Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Gambia born on 19 February 1967.  On
    8 December 2007 he had arrived and  was  given  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor until 24 April 2008.  He states  he  is  a  widower  with  four
    children in the Gambia born in 1990, 1992, 1995 and 1998. He also had a
    brother and three sisters in Gambia. There was neither information  nor
    documentary evidence about his wife's  death.  On  8  October  2015  he
    entered into an Islamic form  of  marriage  with  Cheryl  Lee  Miles  a
    British citizen born on 7 December 1973.  She has a  daughter  born  in
    1997.

 2. The Appellant stated he had joined the Gambian National  Army  in  1987
    and had risen from the ranks to become a captain.

 3. Following arrival, he remained in the country but did not come  to  the
    attention of the immigration authorities until he attended  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit at Croydon on 8 December  2014  when  he  sought  asylum
    because he feared return to the Gambia on account of imputed  political
    opinion, namely that he was  associated  with  those  involved  in  the
    unsuccessful coup of March 2006: see paragraph 10  of  the  Appellant's
    statement of 15 January 2015. He had brought himself to  the  attention
    of the Respondent following the advice of a solicitor given to him  and
    his partner Cheryl Miles in October 2014:   see  paragraph  24  of  his
    unsigned statement December 2015 .

The Respondent's Decision

 4. The Appellant was screened on 16 December 2014 when  he  was  detained.
    On 5 January 2015 the Respondent conducted a substantive interview  and
    on 7 January 2015 she refused his claim for asylum  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and for  humanitarian  protection  under  the  Qualification
    Directive.  She also proposed to make directions  for  his  removal  to
    Gambia.

 5. On 8 January 2015 the Appellant  through  his  then  solicitors  lodged
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The  grounds  asserted  the
    Appellant was at risk on return because anyone suspected of involvement
    in a coup in the Gambia is executed or imprisoned, whether or  not  the
    suspicions  are  justified.   The  Appellant  had  fled   while   being
    investigated  in  connection  with  the  abortive  2006  coup  and  the
    authorities  in  the  Gambia  have  stated  that  army  deserters,   in
    particular with reference to a failed coup attempt  of  December  2014,
    will be severely dealt and were at real risk of  serious  ill-treatment
    or death.  The grounds also raised claims under Articles 2, 3 and 8  of
    the European Convention in response to a notice previously given to the
    Appellant under Section 120 of the 2002 Act.  The grounds refer to  his
    relationship with Cheryl Miles.

 6. The Appellant's claim was dealt with pursuant to Rule 1(3) and Schedule
    Rule 1(3) to the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and refused.  The appeal was heard on  2
    February 2015 and  dismissed  by  as  determination  promulgated  on  8
    February 2015.

 7.  On  12  October  2015  the  President  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) issued a Notice of Decision under Rule
    32 stating that in the light of the judgment in the Lord  Chancellor  v
    Detention Action [2015] EWCA Civ  840  the  8  February  2015  decision
    should be set aside.

 8. By a decision promulgated on 8 January 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Robinson made credibility findings adverse  to  the  Appellant
    and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 9. On 4 February 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal.  He noted that  in  YL  (rely  on  SEF)
    China [2004] UKIAT 00145 it had been held that  the  answers  given  at
    screening may be compared with answers given later and also that  Judge
    Robinson was entitled to make his adverse finding by way  of  reference
    to Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 because the Appellant had not sought asylum  until  more
    than six years after expiry of his leave to enter as a visitor  and  at
    paragraph 64 of his decision he had highlighted what  he  found  to  be
    material inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account.   The  Judge's
    conclusions were sustainable and so permission was refused.

10. The application for permission to  appeal  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the same grounds and on 26  February  2016  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Finch granted permission to appeal relying on paragraph 19 of  YL
    that "it has to be remembered that a screening interview is not done to
    establish in detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for
    asylum.  It would not normally be  appropriate  for  the  SSHD  to  ask
    supplementary questions".  She considered Judge Robinson  had  made  an
    inference adverse to the Appellant because he had not named his friends
    who had been prosecuted for their part in the  abortive  coup  of  2006
    when he had been screened. Further, it was arguable Judge Robinson  had
    given disproportionate weight to  the  Appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum as to which she cited  SM  (Section  8:  Judge's  process)  Iran
    [2005] UKIAT 00116.

11. The third ground for permission to appeal was that Judge  Robinson  had
    given  inadequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  that  the  documents
    supplied by the Appellant did not show he was an army deserter and  the
    mere fact of his lengthy absence from his  military job in  the  Gambia
    did not mean he was a deserter.  Further, a man of his rank and  length
    of service would not have fled his home country to the  uncertain  life
    of an asylum seeker and  nine  months'  immigration  detention  in  the
    United Kingdom without substantial reason.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Appellant and his partner attended the hearing.  I explained to the
    Appellant the purpose of the hearing and the procedure to be adopted.

Submissions for the Appellant

13. Mr Rene dealt with grounds  1  and  2  of  the  permission  application
    together.  His submissions focussed on the weight to be  given  to  the
    screening discussed at paragraphs 50 and 54 of  the  Judge's  decision.
    Mr Rene referred to page  2  of  the  record  of  the  screening  which
    required the following to be read out to the Appellant:

         The questions I am about  to  ask  you  relate  to  your  identity,
         background and travel route to the United Kingdom.  The information
         you will be asked to provide will be used mainly for administrative
         purposes.  You will not be asked at this stage to  go  into  detail
         about  the  substantive  details  of  your  asylum  claim  as,   if
         appropriate, this will be done at a later interview.  However, some
         details you will be asked to provide may be relevant to your claim.

     He said Judge Robinson had erred in taking  any  credibility  point  in
    respect of the replies given at the screening.  Such  failure  affected
    the weight which could be given to  the  reasons  the  Judge  gave  for
    making a credibility finding adverse to the Appellant.  Mr Rene made  a
    generic reference to  the  determination  in  Chiver  [1997]  INLR  212
    explaining that what mattered was the core of  the  Appellant's  claim.
    Mr Rene  suggested  that  Judge  Robinson  having  erred  in  taking  a
    credibility point on the screening had mis-directed himself with regard
    to his other findings.

14. He pointed out there was no dispute on the objective material or on the
    expert report referred to in paragraphs 68  and  69  of  the  decision.
    Further,  the  Respondent  accepted  in  reliance  on  the  substantive
    interview that the Appellant had served as a  captain  in  the  Gambian
    National Army.

15. Mr Rene then turned to the Judge's treatment of the  Appellant's  delay
    in claiming asylum  and  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act.   He  referred
    generically to the determination in SM and submitted that having regard
    to Section 8 of the 2004 Act, the issue was what weight was  the  Judge
    to give to the evidence.

16. Turning to  the  third  ground,  Mr  Rene  said  it  was  accepted  the
    Respondent's  treatment  of  the  documents  which  the  Appellant  had
    produced could not be criticised but it had been incumbent on the Judge
    to look at the evidence in the round and the essential document was the
    record of the substantive interview of the Appellant and the background
    material about the treatment of army deserters  in  the  Gambia  to  be
    found at pages 23-126 of the Appellant's bundle for the hearing  before
    Judge Robinson.  As the Respondent had accepted the  Appellant  was  an
    officer in the Gambian Army there was no reason why he should have left
    the country unless what he asserted in his asylum claim was true.

17. He continued that the  Judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached at paragraph 69 which  formed  the  basis  for  his
    rejection of the assessment of risk contained in the expert  report  of
    28 January 2015  prepared  by  Ebrima  Ceesay.   The  Appellant  was  a
    deserter or a political opponent of the then President.   At  interview
    reply 135 he had said he had not gone to work on the day he was due  to
    report but had informed his employers he was ill and consequently there
    was no reason to suggest he was then suspected of desertion.   He  only
    became a deserter when he fled  the  Gambia.   He  concluded  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

18. Mr Avery submitted the decision contained no  material  error  of  law.
    The screening was obviously not a full  interview  but  the  Judge  was
    entitled to comment on the omission of key elements in the  Appellant's
    account from mention at screening.  At paragraphs 50, 54 and 62 of  his
    decision the Judge had  identified  a  number  of  implausibilities  or
    credibility points which went to the core of the Appellant's  narrative
    and had noted at paragraph 62 that the screening did not take place  on
    or shortly after the Appellant's arrival but that he had  had  time  to
    prepare and marshal in his mind details of the most  important  element
    of his claim.  The claim was  based  at  least  in  part  on  guilt  by
    association with unsuccessful coup plotters but he  had  not  mentioned
    them when screened.

19. Turning to the issue of the Judge's treatment of Section 8 of the  2004
    Act, the delay of six years in claiming asylum was  in  itself  and  by
    itself damaging to the Appellant's credibility.  The Judge had  made  a
    full and proper assessment of the substance of  the  Appellant's  claim
    and had given sustainable reasons for his adverse findings.  There were
    issues about the connection of the Appellant to the coup  plotters  and
    the Judge had  identified  a  number  of  credibility  issues  in  that
    respect.  At paragraph 64 the  Judge  had  referred  not  only  to  the
    Appellant's delay in claiming asylum but also to inconsistencies in his
    own account and the absence of any evidence other than  bare  assertion
    of his connection to the coup plotters.  The  Judge  had  given  proper
    reasons for not accepting the expert's risk assessment as applicable to
    the Appellant.  There was no error of law in the decision which  should
    be upheld.

Further Submissions for the Appellant

20. Mr Rene referred to the record of the screening and submitted that  the
    Appellant at screening had given an adequate outline for the basis  for
    his claim which he had fleshed out at the  substantive  interview.   He
    referred to paragraph 13 on page 9 of the expert report.  This states:-

         Question iii  The Appellant was  not  arrested  and  questioned  in
                    connection with the foiled coup till September 2007,  is
                    it true that the enquiry into the foiled coup was  still
                    ongoing at that time?

              Some of the men alleged to have taken part in the  March  coup
                    attempt were being investigated up to  late  2009.   For
                    example, Lt General Lang Tong Tamba and  the  other  who
                    were accused of conspiring to stage a  coup  d'etat  and
                    overthrow President Jammeh were convicted of treason and
                    sentenced to death in 2010.

     The Judge had not  taken  into  account  at  paragraphs  53-57  of  his
    decision the delay of the authorities in dealing with all the  plotters
    referred to in the expert report.  The decision should be set aside and
    the appeal heard afresh.

Findings and Consideration

21.  I  turn  to  what  might  be  termed  "the  screening   point".    The
    determination in YL was about  the  treatment  of  the  record  of  the
    substantive interview of the  applicant  by  the  SSHD.   The  Tribunal
    detailed the relevant part of the  process  which  of  course  included
    reference to screening.  The Tribunal stated at paragraph 19:-

         When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he is usually made
         the subject of a  'screening  interview'  (called,  perhaps  rather
         confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form - SEF Screening -).   The
         purpose  of  that  is  to  establish  the  general  nature  of  the
         claimant's case so that the Home Office  official  can  decide  how
         best to process it.  It is concerned with the  country  of  origin,
         means of travel, circumstances of arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,
         preferred language and other matters that might help the  Secretary
         of State understand the case.  Asylum seekers are still expected to
         tell the truth and answers given in  screening  interviews  can  be
         compared fairly with answers given later.  However, it  has  to  be
         remembered that a screening interview is not done to  establish  in
         detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for  asylum.
         It would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary of State  to
         ask supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate  answers  and
         an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
         would be excusable.  Further the screening interview  may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.
         These things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
         the screening interview and the later case are evaluated.


22. The Tribunal found that information  given  at  the  screening  was  to
    establish the general nature of a claim and that it was  not  "done  to
    establish in detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for
    asylum".  The Tribunal  also  found  that  it  did  not  amount  to  an
    examination or investigation to  ascertain  the  full  details  of  the
    claim.

23. The Judge noted the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for  over
    six years before he declared himself to the  Respondent  and  then  was
    given an appointment several days later to attend for  screening  which
    would have enabled him  calmly  recollect  the  events  which  happened
    before he left the Gambia.  Additionally, this was a screening that did
    not take place immediately on the Appellant's arrival at port  when  he
    might have been weary from a journey from the Gambia and in  a  strange
    country and perhaps still partly in shock at what had  caused  him  for
    fear of persecution to leave his home.  I  note  that  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal  stated  that  the  purpose  of  the  screening  is  to
    establish the general nature of an asylum claim. The Appellant's asylum
    appeal is based on his specific fear of persecution or ill-treatment on
    return to the Gambia because he is perceived to be associated with  the
    March 2006 failed coup.  The Appellant could not have  been  physically
    involved in the attempted coup because at the time he was in  Sudan  on
    Gambian Government business.

24. I take into account the opening rubric for the screening which  I  have
    already recited.  The Appellant was  asked  what  caused  his  fear  of
    arrest to which he replied simply that there was  a  military  coup  in
    March 2006 by a former army chief of staff.  He expressly stated he was
    in Sudan at the time and did not return to the Gambia  until  November.
    He stated that on return he was arrested and questioned  in  connection
    with the coup and he was then asked what happened next and  said  "they
    suspected me of being involved".  He then detailed his  two  detentions
    and the requirement that he report  fortnightly.   He  was  asked  what
    happened in the coup while he was away and he replied "for example some
    soldiers were killed and the head of the (NIA) was amongst  them.   And
    some soldiers were put  in  prison".   He  was  then  asked  what  else
    happened and stated that some of the plotters were court martialled and
    sentenced to death and others were sentenced to  life  in  prison:  see
    part 4 of the screening. I find that generic references  to  the  March
    2006 coup without more do not identify the real grounds  on  which  the
    Appellant has based his asylum claim.  I  do  not  consider  the  Judge
    attached too much weight to what was said or not said at screening  and
    so has not made a material error of law in this connection.

25. I also note that at 2.3 the Appellant referred to losing  his  passport
    in about 2011 and that "I did not report it to  the  police  as  I  was
    afraid as I am illegal here".  He  then  went  on  to  mention  he  had
    obtained a new passport from the Gambian Embassy.

26. Taking these matters into account, I find there was no error of law  on
    the part of the Judge to place weight on the failure of  the  Appellant
    to mention his connection with the coup  plotters  at  screening.   The
    core of his claim is that he  is  at  risk  because  of  his  perceived
    association with the coup plotters, some of which he  stated  were  his
    friends, not because there was an abortive coup in March 2006 while  he
    was out of the country.

27.  In  any  event,  the  Judge  found  material  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's account as  detailed  in  his  substantive  interview,  two
    statements and oral testimony.  These matters were noted at  paragraphs
    51-58 together with the fact that the Appellant had been questioned but
    not ill-treated or detained and had been able to leave  Gambia  without
    difficulty on his own passport.  Further, the Judge  made  the  finding
    that the Appellant had obtained a replacement passport from the Gambian
    Embassy in London.  He took this point against the  Appellant  and  the
    reason is clear from the submission  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    recorded at paragraph 24 of his judgment referring to paragraph 121  of
    the UNHCR Handbook.

28. There remains the challenge to the Judge's treatment of the application
    of Section 8 of the 2004 Act. Paragraph 339L of the  Immigration  Rules
    and paragraphs 205 of the UNHCR Handbook impose an obligation  on  a  a
    person claiming asylum to cooperate with the authorities  in  the  host
    state. Paragraph 339 M and section 8 of the 2004 Act expressly  provide
    that a claimant's delay in claiming asylum may be adversely relevant to
    his credibility.

29. The Appellant admitted he knew he was illegally present in  the  United
    Kingdom: to see 2.3 of the  screening  interview.  This  does  not  sit
    easily with his claim at paragraph 24 of his 15 January 2015  statement
    that he did not know he could claim asylum because he  had  not  sought
    legal advice. He brought himself to the attention  of  the  immigration
    authorities only when prompted by his  partner  who  had  sought  legal
    advice about her position on marriage to the Appellant.  There  was  no
    evidence to show that absent this the Appellant  would  have  made  any
    attempt to refer himself to the immigration authorities.

30. The Appellant said he had lost his passport in 2011 and obtained a  new
    one from the Gambian Embassy: see screening 2.5 and paragraph 13 of the
    Judge's decision. I do not find whether the Appellant made a formal  or
    "informal" application for a passport to be material. The fact  remains
    that he obtained a passport from the  authorities  of  his  country  of
    nationality and has not supplied  evidence  to  rebut  the  presumption
    evidencing an  intention  to  avail  himself  of  the  country  of  his
    nationality: see paragraphs 121 of the  UNHCR  Handbook  and  paragraph
    339A of the Immigration Rules. The Judge properly took into account  in
    his assessment of the Appellant's credibility these facts which  go  to
    the issue of delay as well  as  that  of  re-availing  himself  of  the
    protection of his country of nationality. Consequently, I do  not  find
    of the Judge made a material error of  law  in  his  treatment  of  the
    application of Section 8 of the 2004 Act to  the  facts  as  found  nor
    generally in  his  assessment  of  the  relevance  and  impact  of  the
    Appellant's delay in framing asylum on his credibility.

31. I refer to ground 3 at paragraphs 14ff. of the grounds  for  permission
    to appeal. Paragraph 14 does not reflect the contents of  paragraph  34
    of the decision. Reference is made to the documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant at paragraph 55 of the decision. Given the Judge's  extensive
    adverse credibility findings he was entitled to attach little weight to
    the documentary evidence which the Appellant  had  supplied.  It  would
    have been of assistance if he had  referred  to  the  determination  in
    Tanveer Ahmed *[2002] UKIAT 439 recently approved in MA  (Bangladesh  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ.175 .  The  mere  failure  to  cite  by  title  an
    authority relied on is not an error of law.

32. At the hearing reference was also made to the expert report  of  Ebrima
    Ceesay and in particular paragraph 13 commenting on the question:  "The
    Appellant was not arrested and questioned in connection with the foiled
    coup till September 2007, is it true  is  that  the  enquiry  into  the
    foiled coup was still ongoing at that time?" The response confirms that
    investigations were continuing at least until late 2009.  There  is  no
    indication (and indeed such indication might not be  possible)  whether
    or not the Appellant or any of his  claimed  friends  involved  in  the
    foiled 2006 coup were still under investigation in September  2007.  In
    the context of the Judge's other findings at paragraphs 46-60 4I do not
    find that this part of the expert's report has any special  bearing  on
    the Appellant's claim particularly in the light of what the Judge  said
    at paragraph 56 of his decision. There was no request pursuant  to  the
    directions issued in relation to the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  for  the
    submission  of  any  additional  evidence,  notwithstanding  the  clear
    inference of an evidential deficiency to be drawn from paragraph 56  of
    the Judge's decision.

33. In the light of the preceding paragraph I turn to paragraphs 15 and  16
    of the grounds for permission to appeal and to the Judge's treatment of
    the issue of desertion at paragraphs 67-70 of  his  decision.  He  gave
    sustainable reasons for finding the Appellant did not leave the  Gambia
    for fear of persecution by reason of his alleged involvement   with  or
    connection to the 2006 coup plotters. Accordingly, I do not consider it
    would have been necessary for him to consider further the issue of  his
    claimed desertion independently of his claimed association or perceived
    association with the foiled 2006 coup.



 Anonymity

9.   There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the documents in the Tribunal file and having heard the  error  of  law
    appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official   Crest                                                 Date
14. iv. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

