

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00999/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                     MR C M G OCKELTON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Ms K Thomson, Brown & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Quigley allowing an appeal on human rights grounds by
   SA, hereinafter referred to as the claimant.  The  appellant  before  the
   Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State.

2) The claimant is a national of Bangladesh who arrived in the UK  in  April
   2007 as a dependant of her husband who was studying here.  The  appellant
   and her husband have a daughter, born  in  the  UK  in  June  2008.   The
   claimant had her leave extended until August 2009 but in January 2009 she
   returned to Bangladesh before coming back to the UK in  June  2009.   The
   claimant was again granted leave until January 2012.   In  May  2010  she
   claimed asylum on the basis of domestic violence.  This claim was refused
   and a subsequent appeal was  unsuccessful.   Fresh  representations  were
   made in November 2012, which have led to the present appeal.

3) The Secretary of State accepts that the claimant has  been  a  victim  of
   domestic  abuse  and  that  she  suffers  mental  health  problems.   The
   Secretary  of  State  further   recognises   that   there   is   societal
   discrimination against women in Bangladesh.  In summary, the  reason  the
   previous appeal was  unsuccessful  was  because  the  claimant  would  be
   returning to Bangladesh but her abusive husband would be staying  in  the
   UK.  There was a possibility  of  the  claimant's  husband  returning  to
   Bangladesh  but  that  possibility  could  be   addressed   by   internal
   relocation.

4) In view of the findings in the previous appeal, to  a  large  extent  the
   submissions before the First-tier Tribunal  concerned  the  viability  of
   internal relocation and whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the
   claimant to relocate.  The claimant's fear was not only  of  her  husband
   but also of her husband's family and for this reason  she  was  found  to
   have a well-founded fear of persecution in the area of  Bangladesh  where
   her husband's family reside.

5) While the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  found  some  difficulty  with
   regard to a definitive  diagnosis  of  the  claimant's  various  physical
   ailments, the judge found there was no doubt as regards the severe mental
   health  problems  which  she  experiences  and  the  history  of  suicide
   attempts.  There was also a concern that the claimant's daughter would be
   vulnerable to abuse in a household comprising a small child in  the  care
   of a frail woman.  The judge found that the Secretary of State had placed
   too much weight on the fact that the appellant was  highly  educated  and
   had some experience of employment and insufficient weight on  her  severe
   mental health problems and the best interests of her daughter.  The judge
   was satisfied that women in Bangladesh can constitute a particular social
   group, having regard to the case of SA  (divorced  women  -  illegitimate
   child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 00254.  On this basis  the  judge  found
   that it would be unduly harsh for the  claimant  to  internally  relocate
   within Bangladesh to avoid persecution.

6) Under Article 8 the judge found that both the claimant and  her  daughter
   have established private and family  life  in  the  UK.   The  claimant's
   daughter  has  spent  her  whole  life  here.   Given  the  psychological
   assessment of the claimant and the serious child protection issues raised
   in relation to the daughter,  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  best
   interests of the daughter were served by remaining with her mother in the
   UK.  It would be a disproportionate interference  with  their  Article  8
   rights for them to be moved to Bangladesh.

7) Permission to appeal was granted in part on  the  basis  that  the  judge
   arguably did not properly assess the question of internal relocation.  It
   was also arguable that the judge did not  properly  follow  the  case  of
   Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 in respect of  the  findings  made  in  the
   previous appeal.

8) At the hearing before us, Mrs O'Brien relied  upon  the  grounds  of  the
   application for permission to appeal.  The first of  these  is  that  the
   judge did not properly  apply  the  principles  in  Devaseelan.   In  the
   previous appeal the Upper  Tribunal  found  a  real  possibility  of  the
   claimant's  husband  returning  to  Bangladesh  but  this  would  not  be
   sufficient to bring the claimant within the Refugee Convention.  The only
   new evidence was a medical report but this did not affect the risk to the
   claimant.

9) It was submitted secondly in the application  for  permission  to  appeal
   that the judge did not apply the proper  test  with  regard  to  internal
   relocation, in terms of VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5.  The judge applied
   a test of whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh but in  terms
   of VW (Uganda) this test had been replaced by a reasonableness test.   In
   terms of reasonableness the judge should have given greater weight to the
   claimant's educational qualifications and ability to  obtain  employment.
   The judge's approach to the medical evidence was contrary to case law  as
   to the very high threshold to be applied in medical  cases,  particularly
   those involving the risk of suicide in a foreign country.

10) For the claimant, Ms Thomson submitted there was no  material  error  of
   law in the determination by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
   judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  claimant's  deteriorating
   physical and mental health.  If it was unduly harsh for the  claimant  to
   relocate this was the same as it being unreasonable.  The judge took into
   account the findings made in the  previous  appeal  and  found  that  the
   advantages of the claimant's education were  outweighed  by  the  medical
   evidence as to her condition.

11) For our part we are not persuaded in the circumstances  of  this  appeal
   that there is a material difference between the  unduly  harsh  test,  as
   applied by the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  test  of
   reasonableness.  We consider this point as having been settled  at  least
   since Robinson [1997] INLR 182.  The Court of Appeal in VW  (Uganda)  was
   concerned with the test under Article 8 for  considering  whether  family
   life could  be  continued  in  another  country  and  not  with  internal
   relocation to avoid persecution.  Accordingly, we see no error of law  in
   the application by the judge of  the  test  of  undue  harshness  to  the
   viability of internal relocation.  The judge was properly directed as  to
   the law and gave adequate reasons for her decision.

12) So far as the findings from the previous appeal are  concerned,  we  are
   satisfied that the judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  new
   medical evidence and the deterioration in the claimant's condition  since
   the previous appeal.   These  were  material  factors  entitling  her  to
   conclude that internal relocation was now unreasonable whereas previously
   the Tribunal did not find that this was so.  We are  satisfied  that  the
   judge weighed the medical evidence and  the  related  adverse  issues  in
   relation to  internal  relocation  against  the  issues  relied  upon  by
   Secretary of State, such  as  the  claimant's  education  and  employment
   experience, and reached a conclusion which  the  judge  was  entitled  to
   reach.

13) For the foregoing reasons we are not satisfied that there  is  an  error
   of law in the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal such as it
   should be set aside.  The decision will stand.

Conclusions

14) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

15) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

16) The First-tier Tribunal made a direction pursuant to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of
   the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   We  continue
   that order  (pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008.)






Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


