
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00195/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2016                 |On 26th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                         Arshad Ahmed Mohamed Najabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Benfield, Counsel for C K Law Solicitors,
Ashford, Kent
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8th November 1990.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 20th January 2016
    refusing his asylum claim, his claim on humanitarian protection issues,
    his claim under Articles 2, 3, 5 and 8 of ECHR and his claim under  the
    Immigration Rules.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hussain on 5th August 2016 and was dismissed on all grounds in
    a decision promulgated on 15th August 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Martin on 8th  September  2016.   The  permission  states  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge erred in finding that  the  Deed  of  Gift  and
    valuation did not refer to the same property, as both contain the  same
    number relating to the land in question and it is  arguable  that  this
    evidence is capable of adding  to  the  Appellant's  credibility.   The
    other ground of application refers to the judge's failure  to  consider
    the medical evidence when assessing the credibility of  the  Appellant.
    The permission states that this ground is less persuasive.

 3. A Rule 24 response was lodged dated 21st September 2016.   This  states
    that the judge gave  a  series  of  clear  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's account and the adverse credibility findings at  paragraphs
    15 to 19 are more than sufficient to  underpin  the  judge's  decision.
    The response states that there were credibility issues arising from the
    Deed of Gift and the Appellant's assertion that the land was bequeathed
    to him by his father when it never  belonged  to  his  father  and  was
    actually gifted to the Appellant by his uncle.  The response goes on to
    state that the judge was not obliged to consider the  medical  evidence
    in any particular order.  The case of S v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 is referred to relating to medical
    reports and credibility.  The case of HE (DRC) [2014]  UKIAT  00321  is
    also referred to.  This states that a doctor does  not  usually  assess
    the credibility of an applicant.  It is not usually appropriate for him
    to do so.  A medical report will nearly always  accept  at  face  value
    what a patient or client says about his history.  The case goes  on  to
    state that this limits the weight which  can  be  afforded  to  such  a
    report when assessing the credibility of the claim.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant's claim is based
    first of all on the family dispute and then on government  interference
    which the appellant claims resulted in him being tortured.

 5. He submitted that there is  a  clear  error  of  fact  in  the  judge's
    decision about the Deed of Gift and the family home  and  this  affects
    the credibility assessment.  He submitted  that  because  of  this  the
    judge has rejected the medical evidence.

 6. I was referred to the Appellant's original bundle at pages  25  to  33.
    In these pages are the Deed of Gift and the valuation  report  referred
    to in the decision.  I was asked to note that the Deed of  Gift  refers
    to land numbered 6925 as does the valuation report.  I was referred  to
    the Appellant's statement at paragraph 37 in which the Appellant states
    that these are the only two documents which Mr Affan's wife was able to
    find, to support the Appellant's claim.   Counsel  submitted  that  the
    judge did not  realise  that  these  two  deeds  related  to  the  same
    property.  I was referred to 2.0 in the valuation report re  ownership.
    This reads: "Mr Mohomed Nasabi Arshad Ahamed claims  absolute  freehold
    ownership to the property by virtue of Deed of Gift  N6925  dated  21st
    May 1993 attested  by  Mr  A.C.M.A.  Masood  notary  public."   Counsel
    pointed out that the address appears to be different  in  the  Deed  of
    Gift from the valuation report but he submitted that the Deed  of  Gift
    gives a descriptive property address whereas the  valuation  gives  the
    actual address.  He submitted that the property is one and the same.

 7. Counsel submitted that in paragraphs 10 to 15 of the decision the judge
    states that the Appellant was only able to produce one  title  document
    being a Deed of Gift and a valuation report for the  family  home.   He
    submitted that the judge erred at paragraph  12  when  he  stated  that
    there was no valuation for the land  owned  by  the  Appellant  as  the
    valuation report actually refers to that land.  He submitted  that  the
    judge states at paragraph 15 that the Appellant failed to show that the
    land was valuable, which was the reason he states  he  was  persecuted.
    He submitted that this is central to the  Appellant's  claim  and  this
    error of fact has affected the judge's other findings.

 8. Counsel submitted that at paragraph 15 when the judge  states:  "It  is
    unnecessary for me to deal  therefore  with  what  the  Appellant  says
    happened to him in police detention" that this is only  stated  because
    of the error of fact made by the judge about the land and it is because
    of this that the judge finds the Appellant not to be credible.

 9. Counsel submitted that the judge should have used a  holistic  view  of
    the evidence and had he done  so,  based  on  the  correct  facts,  the
    Appellant would not have been found to be incredible.

10. The judge then goes on  to  consider  the  medical  evidence.   Counsel
    submitted that for the judge to state that the  Appellant  should  have
    obtained another medical report relating to sexual abuse which happened
    many years ago, cannot be a valid comment as no  medical  report  would
    show this years after anal rape had taken  place.   He  submitted  that
    what was produced by the Appellant was a  psychiatric  assessment.   He
    referred to paragraphs 18 to 21 of the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that the PTSD the Appellant suffers from cannot  be  related  to
    his time in detention as due to a lack of credibility, he finds that he
    was not detained and tortured for the reasons given by the Appellant.

11. I pointed out that the judge has referred to other credibility findings
    being Section 8 issues (paragraph 23), his dishonesty  as  to  how  the
    land was inherited (paragraphs 13 and 14) and the fact that he did  not
    declare sexual abuse until he was giving  evidence  for  this  hearing.
    Counsel submitted that the Appellant was too embarrassed  to  admit  to
    sexual abuse and that was the cause of that delay.

12. The Presenting Officer made his submissions submitting that the Rule 24
    response deals with all of these issues.  He submitted that  the  judge
    has given a detailed decision and his reasoning is  set  out  properly.
    He deals with the medical evidence based on the approach in HH (medical
    evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164  and  he  also
    points out a number of discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the judge considered the  Appellant's
    general credibility pointed out the Section 8  issues  because  of  his
    delay in claiming asylum and referred to the  fact  that  the  property
    belonged to the Appellant's uncle and not  his  father.   He  submitted
    that these are core issues.  He submitted that at paragraph 29  onwards
    Article 8 is dealt with and the  judge  has  carefully  considered  the
    psychiatric report which is in the Appellant's bundle.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  issue  about  the  valuation
    report and Deed of Gift do not go to the core of the Appellant's claim.
     The judge has made a tight decision and has considered everything.  He
    has made a clear finding on public interest and there is  no  error  of
    law in the judge's decision.

14. Counsel submitted that because of the error of fact made by  the  judge
    he did not properly consider the medical  report  and  the  Appellant's
    PTSD.  He submitted that delay in admitting to sexual abuse  is  common
    in a case like this and the judge  gave  less  weight  to  the  medical
    report because he made the error of fact.

Decision and Reasons

15. The Appellant's application is based mainly on the issue that the judge
    did not find that the valuation report and the deed of  Gift  refer  to
    the same property.   The submission put  forward  by  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant is that because the number N6295 is on the  valuation  report
    and the number 6295 is on the Deed of Gift, both of these refer to  the
    same property.  The Deed of Gift refers to the property as 362 Matugama
    Road, Kurunduwatta, Dharga Town and makes it clear that  the  donor  is
    the Appellant's uncle not his father but that his father had a liferent
    interest in the property.  The valuation is for the property number 143
    Main Street, Dharga Town, Sri Lanka.  The only connection  between  the
    valuation report and the Deed of Gift is the number 6295.  It  is  easy
    to see how the judge made this mistake if it is indeed a  mistake.   It
    is true that the Deed of Gift is referred to in the valuation  but  the
    judge has  pointed  out  that  the  valuation  was  instructed  by  the
    Appellant when he was still a minor.   It  was  not  instructed  by  Mr
    Affan.  Based on the  evidence  the  judge  had  found  that  Mr  Affan
    appeared to  hold  any  deeds  belonging  to  the  Appellant's  father,
    (paragraph 9) and found it strange that the valuation was not  obtained
    by him.  In the valuation report the land is described as "an allotment
    of land depicted as lot 01 in plan N1332 dated 17th June 1993".  It  is
    named in the valuation as Fazi Marrikkarwatta alias  Para  Addarawatta.
    The land in the Deed of Gift is described  as  Pasimarikkarwatta  alias
    Para Addarawatta situated along Alutgama-Matugama Road in Dharga  Town.
    There could still, based on these descriptions, be an argument that the
    valuation does not refer to the same piece of land as the Deed of Gift.

16. In the Appellant's statement he refers to his father's friend Mr  Affan
    and he states that Affan told him that he could only do something about
    the properties when he was 18.  The Appellant also  stated  that  there
    are many properties belonging to him but no evidence has been  produced
    of this.

17. The judge gives a number  of  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account.  I shall deal with the Deed of Gift and the valuation first of
    all.

18. At paragraph 10 the judge states that he was surprised  that  the  only
    evidence of any properties belonging to the Appellant was the  Deed  of
    Gift and the valuation.  He states that the  only  property  apparently
    owned by the Appellant is the land identified in the Deed of  Gift  and
    he is surprised the Appellant has not been able to  produce  the  title
    documents to the family home.  The Appellant's argument  is  that  this
    Deed of Gift is for the family home.  The judge goes on to refer to the
    valuation report not being a legal document and  not  establishing  the
    ownership of the property and he points out that it  was  requested  by
    the Appellant before he was 18.   This  goes  against  the  Appellant's
    statement that he was unable to do anything about the properties  until
    he was no longer a minor.

19. At paragraph 11 the judge states that because of this he may have  been
    wrong to accept that Affan had legal authority in connection  with  the
    Appellant's father's estate. He finds that the property never  belonged
    to the Appellant's father; it belonged to his uncle  which  is  another
    credibility issue.  He states at paragraph 13 that there is no evidence
    to show that what the  Appellant  owns  is  valuable  and  produces  an
    income.  This is what Counsel is stating is an error  of  fact  but  he
    then goes on to state that in spite of what the Appellant states he has
    not shown that he owns vast tracts of land  which  produce  substantial
    rental income.    At paragraph 14 the judge  mentions  the  Appellant's
    dishonesty about the donor in the Deed of Gift.  The Appellant accepted
    that he was wrong to tell the Tribunal that his father owned this land.
     He accepted that it was his uncle who owned it.

20. At paragraph 15 the judge finds that  the  Appellant's  claim  that  Mr
    Senaratne is his stepfather's partner is likely not to  be  true.   The
    judge refers to there being no evidence of any relationship between his
    stepfather and Mr Senaratne.  The Appellant's claim  was  that  it  was
    because of Mr Senaratne that he was arrested and detained.

21. The judge has considered the psychiatric report.  He  does  this  after
    stating what was quoted by Counsel that he does not need to  deal  with
    what the Appellant says happened to him in police detention.  He  deals
    with it to illustrate the implausible and unreliable evidence given  by
    the Appellant. It is true that any medical report would show not sexual
    abuse from the time when the Appellant  states  he  suffered  this  and
    there is a lack of logic when the judge refers to this.

22. At paragraph 19 the judge states that the Appellant was evasive in  his
    evidence as he would not accept that he had lied to obtain his visa  in
    2009 although he later  admitted  that  he  had.   In  the  Appellant's
    statement he states that he had no intention of studying when  he  came
    to the United Kingdom.  He originally entered on a student  visa.   The
    Appellant lied about his passport claiming that he left Sri Lanka on  a
    false passport because his stepfather had burnt the original but in his
    screening interview he said he had sold his passport to the agent.   At
    paragraph 23  the  judge  finds  that  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004  applies  as  the
    Appellant travelled through  safe  countries  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although he was originally in the United Kingdom in  2009  he
    returned to Sri Lanka for three months and then came back in  2011  but
    he did not claim asylum until after he was arrested for handling stolen
    goods.  Any delay by the Home Office in issuing their decision must  be
    weighed against this Appellant's delay in claiming asylum.   The  judge
    believes that had he not been encountered he would still  be  at  large
    and would still not have claimed asylum.

23. The judge finds the Appellant's evidence to be lacking  in  credibility
    not only because of the Deed of Gift and the valuation  report  on  the
    property in Sri Lanka but also for these other reasons,  all  of  which
    have been specified in the decision by the judge.

24. Because of  the  general  lack  of  credibility  the  judge  finds  the
    Appellant was not arrested, detained  and  tortured  as  claimed.   The
    judge also notes that treatment for PTSD is available in Sri Lanka  and
    points out that the appellant  has  previously  lived  in  Colombo  and
    internal relocation would be a possibility for him.

25. The judge has dealt properly with the medical evidence as per the  said
    case of HH (medical evidence; effect  of  Mibanga)  Ethiopia.   He  has
    taken all the evidence before him in the  round  and  has  reached  his
    decision.  As stated in Mibanga there is no rule of law as to the order
    in which judicial fact-finders should approach the evidential  material
    before them.

26. The judge finds that the Appellant is not  in  any  risk  category  and
    based on credibility he has dismissed  the  appeal.   Adequate  reasons
    have been given for this and although there is  an  arguable  error  of
    fact it was not sufficient to adversely affect his decision.

Notice of Decision

27. There is no material error of law in the judge's decision.

28. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated  on  15th
    August 2016 must stand.

29. Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         26th October 2016




