
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00087/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 15th May 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                            SIMBARASHE MURADZIKWA
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Y Gwashawanhu of Obaseki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, appeals with  permission  against
    the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C J Lloyd, following a
    hearing on 3rd  February  2014,  to  dismiss  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights  grounds  his  appeal  against  removal  to
    Zimbabwe.

 2. The Appellant had claimed to be at risk as a result of  his  connection
    with the MDC and as in 2006 friends  returning  to  Zimbabwe  had  been
    found with a photograph of Zimbabweans  in  British  Army  uniform  and
    amongst the group in the photograph was the Appellant.  At the  hearing
    the Appellant in his evidence stated that he had never been a member or
    supporter of the MDC and Judge Lloyd found that there was  no  evidence
    of MDC support on his part of which the authorities in  Zimbabwe  would
    be aware. The judge noted that the Appellant  had  applied  for  a  new
    Zimbabwean passport after the alleged incident  following  his  friends
    returning to Harare and that the delay in making the claim, only lodged
    after  his  arrest  for  a  driving  offence,  adversely  affected  his
    credibility.  She noted that the Appellant's last address had  been  in
    Harare and that return would be to that location.  She  found  that  he
    would not face any risk on return there, following the country guidance
    given in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT
    59 (IAC).  She  noted  the  submission  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    destitute with no means to sustain himself but referred to comments  in
    CM as to the improved economic situation and noted that  the  Appellant
    had been educated to A level and there was reference  to  a  family  in
    Zimbabwe.  She went on to refer to Article 8 issues which are  not  the
    subject of the current appeal.

 3. The grounds, which are commendably short, contend that  the  judge  did
    not assess  the  risk  on  return  in  respect  of  the  socio-economic
    circumstances of the family such that they might find themselves forced
    to live in a rural area and issues under RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38
    were relevant if they had to relocate internally within  Zimbabwe.   It
    was submitted that there had been an inadequate assessment of  risk  on
    return.

 4. At the hearing before us Mr Mills raised an initial point as to whether
    the application for permission to appeal had been out of time.  He said
    that accordingly to Home Office records the determination had been sent
    out by recorded delivery  post  on  7th  February  2014  and  had  been
    received by the Appellant on the following day, Saturday  8th,  and  by
    the solicitors on the following Monday, the 10th.  If that was the case
    the application should have been received by the Tribunal on or  before
    17th February whereas in fact it was received the following day on  the
    18th.  He accepted that the Respondent had not been prejudiced by  that
    short delay.  We noted that in his grant of  permission  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Gibb had  expressly  regarded  the  application  as
    having been made in time.  We took the view that  the  issue  had  been
    decided by the judge granting permission. However  to  the  extent,  if
    any, that the matter remained unresolved, and as it was  accepted  that
    the Respondent had not been prejudiced, we considered that  it  was  an
    appropriate case for time to be extended under Rule 24(4) of the Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended).

 5. Judge Hanson then summarised the  grounds  of  application,  which  now
    stand as the grounds of appeal, and referred to the  findings  made  by
    Judge Lloyd, which on the face of them appeared to have dealt with  the
    issues. Mrs Gwashawanhu made her submissions as to the  alleged  errors
    of law made.  She pointed out that  the  Appellant's  home  address  in
    Harare had been where he had last lived more than ten years  previously
    and his evidence had been that he had no access to  the  house  he  had
    then occupied.  He had given evidence about difficulties  of  returning
    to Harare but, she said, the judge had made no express findings on that
    point. She accepted that the judge was not  obliged  to  summarise  the
    facts.  She argued that the judge had not made adequate findings as  to
    whether the Appellant would have been  destitute,  as  he  claimed,  in
    Harare and therefore have been obliged to relocate  to  a  rural  area.
    She accepted that  she  could  not  properly  argue  that  the  judge's
    findings had been irrational or perverse.  Judge Hanson pointed out the
    findings which had been made by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Ms Gwashawanhu accepted that if we were of the view  that  Judge  Lloyd
    had dealt adequately with the  issue  of  the  Appellant  returning  to
    Harare and being able to remain there then the second ground,  relating
    to relocation to a rural area, would not come into play.

 6. Having considered the matter we reached and announced our  decision  at
    the hearing, giving our reasons which we now set out in more detail.

 7. There was no challenge before us as to the judge's findings on  Article
    8 issues nor as to the allegation that he would be at risk  because  he
    appeared in a photograph with British soldiers nor as  to  the  finding
    that the Appellant had no profile of any significance  with  regard  to
    the MDC which would bring him  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities
    either at the airport or in the area  of  Harare  where  he  had  lived
    before travelling to the United Kingdom (Mabelreign).  The judge  dealt
    with this latter point at paragraph 24 of her  determination  in  which
    she stated:

         "I note the case of CM, return would be to Harare and that was  his
         last home address.  CM referred to the durable change  in  Zimbabwe
         and the reduced politically motivated violence.  The  return  of  a
         failed asylum seeker with no significant MDC profile  -  like  this
         Appellant - would not result in him facing a real risk of having to
         demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF especially if returned to Harare and
         not the rural areas.  The Appellant has no ZANU-PF connections  but
         as he has no MDC profile and there was no suggestion he  wanted  to
         engage in opposition political activity I do not find that he would
         be at risk on return to Harare. ..."

    She went on, at paragraph 27, to  refer  to  the  submission  that  the
    Appellant would be destitute in Harare and would  have  to  move  to  a
    rural area, the implication being that if he did so he  might  then  be
    required to demonstrate a loyalty to ZANU-PF which he did not  possess.
    The judge stated:

         "It was submitted that he would  be  destitute  with  no  means  to
         sustain himself or his family.  CM noted economic improvements, the
         Appellant was educated to A level standard and there was  reference
         to family in Zimbabwe (although he said he was out of contact  with
         his parents - his father had been in the mining  business  and  the
         skeleton argument maintained he had no family connections).  On the
         fairly limited evidence I do not find he has discharged the  burden
         of proof."

 8. Although the judge might have explained her reasoning in greater detail
    it was clear to us that she was well aware of  the  argument  that  the
    Appellant would be destitute if returned to Harare with the  likelihood
    that he would have to relocate to a rural area.   The  judge's  finding
    was to the effect that he was an educated man,  that  the  economy  had
    improved in Zimbabwe (as referred to in CM) and that the Appellant  had
    family.  He had not demonstrated to  the  necessary  standard  that  he
    would not be able to live in Harare.  That was a finding  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence.  She addressed  the  points  made  and  came  to
    conclusions, with  reasons,  which  enabled  the  Appellant  and  those
    advising him to be aware of the findings she had made and the basis for
    them.  In short the Appellant was able to know why he had not succeeded
    in his appeal.

 9.  In R (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 (at paragraph  9  of
    the judgment) Lord Justice Brooke referred to examples of errors of law
    commonly encountered.  One of those errors so identified  was  "failing
    to give reasons or  any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
    matters."  He made clear, in particular at the summary  of  conclusions
    appearing at paragraph 90 of the judgment, that a decision  should  not
    be set aside for inadequacy  of  reasons  unless  the  judge  fails  to
    identify and record the matters that were critical to his  decision  on
    material issues in such a way that the appellate tribunal was unable to
    understand why he reached that decision.  For the reasons that we  have
    given we found that it was readily ascertainable why  Judge  Lloyd  had
    reached the decision she did and the reasons she gave were adequate for
    that purpose.   Her  conclusions  were  entirely  consistent  with  the
    country guidance in CM.  If, as she found, the Appellant  was  able  to
    remain in Harare then no issue arose as to the hypothetical question of
    relocation to a rural area.  There was no potentially material error of
    law in  the  determination  and  this  appeal  therefore  falls  to  be
    dismissed.

10. In the First-tier Tribunal a direction  was  made  for  anonymity.   No
    request was made to us for an order in that respect to be made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal and we can see no necessity for such an order.

Decision

The original determination did not contain a material error on  a  point  of
law and the decision that the appeal be dismissed therefore stands.




Signed                              Dated 16 May 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
