
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00826/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 7 January 2014                             |On 20 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           JEANNE (or JOY) MBABAZI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms J Todd, of Latta & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

1) The  appellant's  identity  details  are  unclear.   She  has  identified
   herself as Jeanne Mbabazi, a citizen of Rwanda, date of birth  1  January
   1971 or 23 May 1971, granted refugee status in Uganda  on  or  around  14
   December 2006.  (The claimed date of refugee status seems to be misstated
   in the respondent's refusal letter of 11 January 2013 at paragraph 16  as
   14 December 2009.)  The refusal letter at paragraph 37 quotes information
   that Jeanne Mbabazi, born on 4 March 1973, arrived in Uganda from  Rwanda
   on 18 August 2006, registered with UNHCR on  5  September  2006  and  was
   granted refugee status on 7 August  2007.   Around  September  20111  she
   obtained a visa to enter the UK on a Ugandan passport  in  the  name  Joy
   Mbabazi, date of birth 4 May 1971.

2) The respondent at paragraph 38 of the refusal  letter  accepts  that  the
   appellant's country of origin is Rwanda  but  considers  she  has  "legal
   status and permanent right of residence in Uganda either as a refugee  or
   as a Ugandan citizen."  For record purposes she has been treated  as  Joy
   Mbabazi, born 23 May 1971, a citizen of Uganda, the proposed  country  of
   removal.  (As long as she would be permitted to return there, it does not
   matter whether she is a refugee or a citizen.)

3) The appellant says that she entered the UK on  24  January  2012  on  the
   above Ugandan  passport  (obtained,  she  says,  irregularly  through  an
   agent).  She sought asylum on 21 February 2012.

The claim.

4) (The appellant's husband refused to testify against parties  involved  in
   the genocide, was taken by the authorities in June 2006 and  is  presumed
   dead.  She does not base her claim on that  circumstance.)   Her  brother
   was a captain in the Rwandan Patriotic Front and in the Rwandan Army.  In
   2004, the authorities arrested him for political reasons, the details  of
   which are unknown to  the  appellant.   He  was  released  and  fled  the
   country, but the authorities want to re-arrest him.  Police officers with
   an interest in the appellant's brother detained and beat her  on  one  or
   two occasions.  A soldier friendly to her brother arranged  to  transport
   her and her 3 children by car to Uganda  in  August  2006.   In  November
   2006, Rwandans came to her house at night, speaking  about  her  brother,
   and raped her.  In a similar incident in October 2007 the  appellant  and
   her second daughter were raped.  In 2009 or 2010, Kiriwandan speaking men
   attempted to pull the appellant into a car.  The appellant raised matters
   with the Ugandan authorities and with UNHCR.  At a police station she met
   a man called George who offered to arrange  her  departure  from  Uganda.
   Her pastor and people from her church paid US  $500  to  George  for  her
   travel to the UK to seek asylum.  She left her children with the  pastor.
   On arrival she was taken to a woman who kept her locked up  for  3  weeks
   and used her as a child minder.  She escaped when asked to  go  shopping.
   She met a man with whom she stayed overnight.  He took her  to  the  Home
   Office to claim asylum the next  day.   She  needs  protection  from  (a)
   Rwandan state agents active in  Uganda,  seeking  information  about  her
   brother and (b) her trafficker.  She could not relocate from  Kampala  as
   she would be a lone vulnerable female parent, with no support.

Competent authority's decision on trafficking.

5) The competent authority (UKBA Scotland and Northern  Ireland)  by  letter
   dated 15 May 2012 found that there were no reasonable grounds to  believe
   that the appellant was a victim of human trafficking for purposes of  the
   Refugee Convention.  Mainly, this was because her account was  not  found
   to be credible, but the authority also declined to accept that the  claim
   would succeed even taken "at highest" (page 13).



The refusal reasons.

6) The refusal letter analyses the credibility of  the  appellant's  account
   at paragraphs 32-72.  Beyond the concession that she is  a  Rwandan  with
   refugee recognition in Uganda, she is not found credible in core aspects,
   particularly as to threats from the Rwandan  authorities  in  July  2011,
   trafficking to the UK, and leaving Uganda in the way she says.

First-tier Tribunal.

7)  Designated  Judge   Murray   dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal   by
   determination promulgated on 24 May 2013.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

8) These are the grounds:

    1. Failure to provide reasons  for  findings  -  at  paragraph  50  the
       Immigration Judge  states  that  she  gives  little  weight  to  the
       detailed  neuro-psychological  report  lodged  on  behalf   of   the
       appellant; she fails to provide reasons for this finding.


    2. Similarly, it  appears  the  Immigration  Judge  has  dismissed  the
       medical evidence on the basis of a finding  that  the  appellant  is
       lying, rather than taking that evidence into account as  part  of  a
       holistic credibility account - see paragraph 56.  This approach  has
       been rejected as wrong, see HH (medical evidence; effect of  Mbanga)
       Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164.  It is accepted  that  the  Immigration
       Judge is not automatically bound but the detailed  medical  evidence
       ought to have been given considerably more weight  than  that  which
       was afforded to it in this appeal.

    3. Failure to take into account country evidence  - at paragraph 54 the
       Immigration Judge finds that there is no evidence that  "someone  in
       the appellant's position, a refugee in Uganda, would be in danger of
       attacks such as these" - this ignores the country evidence lodged in
       appellant's bundle 3, pages 9 (see third last paragraph) and pp  36-
       37 - both of which clearly refer to Rwandan refugees in Uganda being
       targeted/intimated by Rwandan state agents.

    4. Failure to properly consider the definition of trafficking and apply
       to facts of the case  - at paragraph 54 the Immigration Judge  finds
       that the appellant's account is dissimilar to that of the  appellant
       in the unreported determination which was lodged (ref AA/10046/2013)
       and therefore she cannot be a  trafficking  victim.   With  respect,
       whether a gentleman or a "Madame" was involved is  irrelevant.   The
       appellant claims to have been deceived by an individual into  coming
       to the UK on the pretences of work, only to be detained in a  house,
       without pay, for several weeks.   Trafficking  encompasses  domestic
       servitude  as  well  as  sexual   exploitation.    The   appellant's
       description  of  events  was  more  than  capable  of  meeting   the
       definition of trafficking.  The Respondent had  found  these  claims
       not to be credible but the Immigration Judge had a duty to  consider
       the explanations given by the appellant in her witness statement and
       the points mentioned in the skeleton argument.  There is  a  further
       error here in that the  Immigration  Judge  has  failed  to  provide
       adequate reasons as to why she finds  that  the  appellant  was  not
       trafficked.


    5. Failure to take into account relevant evidence - at paragraph 55 the
       Immigration Judge dismisses the appellant's account of  being  raped
       several times in Uganda, partly on the basis of a lack  of  evidence
       of her  reports  to  the  police  (despite  the  fact  there  is  no
       requirement for corroboration).  She fails to make  mention  of  the
       medical report which was capable of verifying at least  one  of  the
       incidents.  This is an error in law.

    6. Failure to take into account country  evidence  -   the  Immigration
       Judge has failed to take into account relevant evidence in assessing
       sufficiency of state protection for someone such as the appellant eg
       a victim of trafficking/lone female - see paragraphs  56  and  59  -
       this finding fails to engage with the detailed evidence which showed
       that access to justice is harder for women in Uganda, corruption  is
       rife, there is no government funding for support for  adult  victims
       of trafficking and the government does not enforce its own laws (see
       bundle 3 pp 22, 23, 25, 28, 30, 31).

    The errors which relate to credibility  are  material  because  if  the
    appellant had been found credible - either as a victim  of  trafficking
    or sexual violence - then the background evidence suggested  she  would
    be vulnerable to further persecution if returned and would not be  able
    to access sufficient state protection.  The Immigration Judge was bound
    to consider all the evidence presented with the most anxious  scrutiny;
    taken together the above points suggest this was not  done  and  it  is
    submitted that the appeal should be re-heard.


9) At the outset of the hearing on 7 January Ms Todd tendered  a  report  by
   Dr John McTaggart, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 24 December  2013,  but
   said that she would seek its admission  into  evidence  only  if  matters
   reached a rehearing stage.  She relied upon the above grounds.

Respondent's reply to the grounds.

10) Grounds 1 and 2.   Mr Matthews said that the amount of weight to  attach
   to the neuro-psychological report was very much a matter for  the  judge.
   She gave it appropriate weight, as she said  at  paragraph  50,  and  was
   entitled to find it of "limited value".  That conclusion had to be put in
   context of the determination as a whole, which gave  proper  reasons  for
   finding the appellant generally not to be a credible witness.  The  judge
   acknowledged the appellant's undoubted mental difficulties and  took  the
   medical evidence into account in reaching her findings on the core claim.
    The ground amounted only to the complaint that the judge had  not  given
   as much weight to the report as the appellant sought, and a  disagreement
   with the overall findings.

11) Ground 3.  Evidence that Rwandan refugees in  Uganda  were  targeted  or
   intimidated by Rwandan state agents did  not  amount  to  evidence  of  a
   general risk to Rwandan refugees in Uganda.   The  judge  had  to  assess
   whether there was such a risk to the appellant on the facts  found.   She
   was entitled to conclude that there  was  no  such  risk  to  the  family
   members of someone of suspicion to the Rwandan authorities years ago, and
   no risk to this appellant.

12) Ground 4.  Mr Matthews queried whether there had  been  a  proper  basis
   for the  appellant  to  found  upon  an  unreported  determination.   The
   circumstances in the unreported determination were very  different  -  an
   appellant forced into prostitution and confined for those purposes over a
   period of years.  This ground did not fairly represent what  the  present
   determination says.   The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  account  as
   incredible, and  so  the  case  did  not  turn  upon  the  definition  of
   trafficking.

13) Ground 5.  The judge's narration that there was no evidence (other  than
   from the appellant)  of  incidents  being  reported  to  the  police  was
   accurate, and no undue significance had been attached.  There were  other
   reasons in paragraph 55 for finding that this aspect did not advance  the
   claim - background evidence of the Rwandan authorities  pursuing  targets
   in Uganda, but the appellant not being such a target, or in an equivalent
   position to someone like a journalist; nothing to suggest  that  even  if
   the appellant's brother was of interest to the authorities in Rwanda, his
   sister would be; no  explanation  of  how  such  agents  could  find  the
   appellant; sufficiency of protection in Uganda; and nothing to show  that
   any attacks in Uganda had anything to do with her brother.  The criticism
   based on absence of mention of a medical  report  raised  only  the  same
   issues as grounds 1 and 2.

14) At this stage Ms Todd pointed out that there was another medical  report
   before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  this  was  the  intended  point  of
   reference of ground 5.   It  is  in  the  appellant's  second  bundle  of
   evidence in the FtT, item 3, pp - a photocopy of  a  handwritten  record,
   not entirely legible, but clearly referring to a medical  examination  on
   20 October 2007 following upon an allegation of rape by  3  unknown  men.
   Ms Todd accepted that the determination refers to it at paragraphs 10 and
   53, and then discounts it at paragraph 55.

15) Mr Matthews submitted that given these  references  the  judge  had  not
   failed to take it into account, and gave it the appropriate place in  the
   overall analysis.

16) Finally, Mr Matthews argued that ground  6  was  only  relevant  if  the
   other grounds were made out, and the appellant therefore might have  been
   found essentially credible.   He did not agree that  the  appellant  must
   then have succeeded, but he did accept that this was to a large extent  a
   credibility case, so that if the other grounds  were  made  out  a  fresh
   hearing would be required.

Response for appellant.

17) Ms Todd agreed with the Presenting Officer's approach to ground 6.

18)  As  to  reference  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal   to   an   unreported
   determination, this was justified not because it involved a  report  from
   the same expert, but  as  a  case  on  trafficking  from  Uganda  and  on
   sufficiency  of  protection  there,  on  which  there  is   no   reported
   determination or country guidance.

19) The key point in the grounds is the lack of  substantial  reasoning  for
   giving little weight to the neuro-psychological report.   The  judge  had
   not done enough to explain  why  it  was  of  only  limited  value.   She
   overlooked conclusions based on thorough  cognitive  testing,  where  the
   expert found no sign of the test having been manipulated.  The judge  had
   not been entitled to conclude that the appellant  was  lying,  given  the
   medical evidence before her.

20) The country evidence mentioned at paragraph 53  went  not  only  to  the
   objective risk but also to the credibility  assessment  -  evidence  that
   Rwandan refugees in Uganda are intimated by Rwandan state agents enhanced
   the credibility of the appellant's account of what happened to her.

21) On ground 4, the lack of reasoning went to the  conclusion  whether  the
   appellant was trafficked at all.  One reason for dismissing  her  account
   was that she had a verifiable Barclays bank account with  the  equivalent
   of �4,000 at credit,  which  the  judge  found  inconsistent  with  other
   evidence, but financial support for a  visa  application  was  consistent
   with third party involvement in trafficking the appellant, and not a good
   reason to reject her account.

22) The determination should be set aside and a fresh hearing directed.

Conclusions and reasons.

23) The judge did  not  fail  to  take  into  account  the  findings  in  Dr
   Copstick's report.  She summarised them fairly and accurately.  There can
   be no doubt that the judge approached  the  appellant  in  the  light  of
   evidence that she is of poor intellectual ability and mental health,  and
   likely to be an unimpressive witness even when trying to tell the  truth.
   That did not dictate a conclusion that she was a reliable witness at  the
   core of her account.  To find  otherwise  did  not  devalue  the  medical
   report, or imply any criticism of it.  The judge  was  entitled  to  note
   that contrary to the doctor's expectation the appellant did not  clam  up
   in the course of the hearing but was able to answer all the questions.

24) As Mr Matthew submitted, the judge said at the end of paragraph 50  that
   she gives weight to the report but finds it to be of limited  value,  and
   to say so before going on to the rest of  the  credibility  consideration
   does not disclose an error.  In effect the report is properly  considered
   in the context of all the other evidence.

25) Ground 3 does not disclose failure to take account of country  evidence.
    The country evidence is noted but the judge found, as she  was  entitled
   to do, that this did not disclose a risk to someone  in  the  appellant's
   position.  Ground 3 refers to 2  specific  passages.   The  first  is  at
   bundle 3, page 9, third last paragraph.  This  does  refer  to  "Rwandans
   living in Uganda" being at particular risk  and  reporting  threats  from
   Rwandan intelligence agents, but the item  as  a  whole  deals  with  the
   murder of a critical journalist who had received  a  series  of  threats.
   The second citation, at pp 36-37 of the same bundle, is an example  of  a
   person who refused to give a false statement in a trial before the  ICTR.
   (There was no specific reference at the hearing to this passage,  and  no
   explanation of the reference, but I think it must mean the  International
   Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, established by the  UN  Security  Council.)
   The gist of the materials is as the judge found - there may  be  risk  to
   persons of some political interest, but not general risk to all  Rwandans
   in Uganda.

26) Objection to reference to the unreported determination was not taken  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant's solicitor  gave  reasons  in  a
   letter of 25 March 2013 for seeking to rely upon it.  It is an  exemplary
   FtT determination;  but  this  appellant's  account  of  trafficking  was
   rejected for several good reasons in the trafficking report  and  in  the
   refusal letter, and for the further reasons  given  by  the  judge.   The
   appellant justified reference to an unreported determination but  it  did
   not advance her  case  significantly,  given  those  adverse  credibility
   findings, so there is no inadequacy of reasoning.

27) As to ground 5,  the  relevant  medical  report  is  mentioned  in  some
   detail.  There was an abundance of material before the judge, and she did
   not have to expound on this particular aspect to any greater extent  that
   she did.

28) It was correctly agreed between representatives that ground  6  did  not
   arise unless the adverse credibility findings fell to be set aside.

29) I conclude generally thus. The boundaries in the evidence between  fact,
   genuine confusion, exaggeration and invention could  never  be  precisely
   defined.  The appellant even on the accepted  facts  has  a  rather  grim
   history, but not one which qualifies her for protection in  the  UK  over
   and above the protection afforded to her in Uganda.  She  has  been  well
   served by her representative, who has pressed the case as far in the  FtT
   and in the UT as it could reasonably be taken, but it has not been  shown
   that the judge erred in law by not finding her credible  to  any  greater
   extent than she did.  I conclude in particular that  the  judge  did  not
   fail to give reasons;  did  not  approach  Dr  Copstick's  report  having
   already found against the appellant,  but  gave  the  report  its  proper
   place; did not fail to take proper account of country evidence;  did  not
   err on the definition of trafficking, because that did not arise  on  the
   facts found; and did not fail to  take  account  of  the  evidence  of  a
   medical examination in Uganda.

30) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

31) No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                               [pic]
                                10 January 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

