
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2015                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  upper tribunal judgeS DEANS AND MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     YL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mozolowski dismissing an appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant was born in February 1987 and is  a  national  of  China.
    She entered the UK unlawfully on 19th  July  2010.   She  came  to  the
    attention of the immigration authorities on 19th June 2014 and  claimed
    asylum.  At that time the Appellant was pregnant and she gave birth  to
    a daughter in September 2014.  The father of the child  was  a  Chinese
    national without any status in the UK and the couple are no  longer  in
    contact with each other.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim  was  her  involvement  in  a
    house church in China and fear of sanctions under the  family  planning
    regulations were she  to  return  there.   She  claimed  to  have  been
    detained in China as a consequence of her religious activities  and  to
    have escaped.  In her  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant said she no longer goes to  church  and  would  not  practise
    Christianity if she returned to China.  The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not accept as  credible  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    participated in Christian worship in China.  The judge did not  believe
    the Appellant had been detained  in  China  as  a  consequence  of  her
    religious activities.

 4. In relation to the Chinese family planning regulations the Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal noted at paragraph 40 that in terms of the  country
    guideline case of AX (family planning  scheme)  China  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00097 the attitude taken by provincial  birth  control  authorities  to
    parents returning  with  foreign-born  children  was  unclear  but  the
    consequences of any unauthorised birth were social  and  financial.   A
    parent returning with a foreign-born child would be expected to produce
    a birth certificate for the child and pay a social compensation payment
    or "social upbringing charge".

 5. At paragraph 44 the  judge  noted  that  under  Chinese  law  household
    registration should not be refused.  At paragraph 47 the  judge  stated
    that although the Appellant and her family might not qualify  for  free
    birth control, medical treatment and education, medical  treatment  and
    education would be available  albeit  at  a  price.   There  were  many
    Chinese parents who did not  qualify  for  free  medical  treatment  or
    education.   The  child  would  not  be  denied  education  or  medical
    treatment.

 6. At paragraph 59 the judge referred  to  the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8 and observed that the child had been born only recently.  The
    child's young life was centred around  the  Appellant.   There  was  no
    dispute that the Appellant and her child would not be  separated.   The
    child was a Chinese national and had no claim to remain in the UK.   An
    argument had been advanced that the child would be deprived  of  access
    to healthcare and education because  a  high  social  compensation  fee
    would be imposed upon the Appellant.  The judge was not satisfied  that
    a social compensation fee would necessarily be imposed on the Appellant
    because of a foreign-born child, or whether, if such a fee was imposed,
    it would be imposed in full.  The Appellant could return to China  with
    assistance  from  the  Respondent   which   would   include   financial
    assistance.  It was indicated in AX that once a social compensation fee
    was paid, the child would have access to health and education.

 7. At paragraph 60 the judge then noted that the child's  extended  family
    of grandparents and uncle were living in China.   The  child  would  be
    able to learn  about  her  Chinese  heritage  and  culture.   The  best
    interests of the child would be for her  to  be  with  her  mother  and
    conditions in China for the child were  not  so  bad  to  outweigh  the
    family and cultural influences which the child would not experience  if
    she was in the United Kingdom.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on a  number  of
    grounds.   These  included  that  the  judge  had  taken  into  account
    irrelevant  considerations;  had  failed   to   resolve   contradictory
    findings; had erred in assessing the amount of any social  compensation
    penalty; and as a result had not properly assessed the  best  interests
    of the child.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before  us  Mr  Winter,  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    referred to the grounds of the application for  permission  to  appeal.
    The first point arose from paragraph 35  of  the  decision,  where  the
    judge noted that giving  birth  outside  wedlock  breached  the  family
    planning  regulations  in  Fujian,  which  was  the  Appellant's   home
    province.  This would lead to a very  substantial  compensation  charge
    being imposed.  At paragraph 36 the judge had regard to  a  COI  Report
    about laxity in the Chinese family planning regulations  for  returning
    Chinese nationals.  This, however,  was  not  relevant  to  the  Fujian
    family planning regulations, which were referred to in AX at paragraphs
    61-66.  These prohibited giving birth out of wedlock and did not  allow
    any exception if the child was born abroad.

10. Mr Winter continued that at paragraph 37 the judge referred to it being
    rare for a single woman to give birth in China due to  family  planning
    restrictions.  The judge had earlier stated at  paragraph  27  that  in
    such a populous country as China there  would  be  a  large  number  of
    unmarried mothers.  This was irrelevant to  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, whose appeal should be considered on  an  individual  basis.
    At paragraph 39 the judge referred  to  there  being  an  appeal  right
    against any administrative calculation of a social compensation  charge
    but there were no such appeal rights and this was a further  irrelevant
    consideration.

11. Turning to the alleged failure to resolve  contradictory  findings,  Mr
    Winter referred to paragraphs 43, 44 and 49 of the decision.  The judge
    found at paragraph 43 that there was  no  direct  legal  barrier  to  a
    single mother registering a child.  At paragraph  44  the  judge  found
    that a child born out of wedlock had the same rights as those  born  to
    married couples.  At paragraph 49, however,  the  judge  accepted  that
    children  from  pregnancies  outwith  the  scope  of  family   planning
    regulations might not be registered  or  treated  equally  until  their
    parents had paid the financial sanctions imposed.  It  seemed  that  at
    paragraphs 43 and 44 the judge had failed to  bear  in  mind  that  the
    child could not be registered until the social compensation penalty was
    paid.

12. Mr Winter then turned to the alleged error by the  judge  in  assessing
    the amount of any social compensation payment.  He submitted  that  the
    Appellant's former partner was unemployed.  Her father  was  in  a  low
    paid job and the Appellant herself had been  in  low  paid  work.   The
    judge found at paragraph 46 of the  decision  that  even  if  a  social
    compensation payment was imposed it  would  not  be  excessive  as  the
    Appellant claimed.  However, the family were not in a position to  pay.
    The judge's finding  that  the  payment  would  not  be  excessive  was
    contrary to AX  at  paragraph  66.   The  judge  had  speculated  about
    possible financial assistance being given to the Appellant  on  return.
    There was either no or insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant
    would be able to make  arrangements  to  pay  the  social  compensation
    charge.

13. Turning to the fourth ground, Mr  Winter  submitted  that  the  judge's
    errors in relation to whether the Appellant would  be  able  to  pay  a
    social  compensation  charge  affected  her  assessment  of  the   best
    interests of the child.  The decision in AX was based on the return  of
    a couple.   The  judge  had  disregarded  the  Fujian  family  planning
    regulations, which gave no exemption  for  foreign-born  children  from
    payment of the charge.  It could not be in the best  interests  of  the
    child to be returned where the Appellant would not be able to meet  the
    social compensation payment.  At paragraph 49 of the decision the judge
    acknowledged that the child  would  be  discriminated  against  if  she
    remained unregistered.   Internal  relocation  would  not  resolve  the
    situation of the child.  There would be loss of  privileged  access  to
    schools,  housing,  pensions  and  free   medical   and   contraceptive
    treatment.  Although this discrimination might not amount to  a  breach
    of Article 3, it would be relevant in assessment of the best  interests
    of the child in terms of Article 8.

14. For the Respondent, Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge  had  properly
    considered the credibility of the  Appellant's  claim  and  taken  into
    account aspects of the family planning policy.   At  paragraph  53  the
    judge found that the Appellant could relocate to other parts  of  China
    and this would not be unduly harsh for her to do so, taking  her  claim
    at its highest.

15. Mrs O'Brien continued that when considering Article 8  the  judge  took
    into account the best interests of the child.  Arguably the child would
    have better access to educational and medical facilities in the UK  but
    this was only part of the consideration.

16. In response Mr Winter said the adverse credibility findings  that  were
    made by the judge related to the Appellant's alleged Christianity,  not
    to a breach of the family planning regulations owing to the birth of  a
    child outwith marriage.  The family's low income was not fully explored
    by the judge.  As far as internal relocation was concerned,  the  child
    was still young but would be  disadvantaged.   Reference  was  made  to
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 at paragraph 10, and the need to set out clearly
    the circumstances of the child and whether the best  interests  of  the
    child were outweighed by other considerations.

Discussion

17. The first part of the challenge to the  judge's  decision  was  on  the
    basis that she had erred in  law  by  taking  into  account  irrelevant
    considerations.  We do not accept this contention.  What the judge  did
    was to look at the evidence  relating  to  the  application  of  family
    planning policies in China and assess that  evidence  and  decide  what
    weight to give to different parts of it, having  particular  regard  to
    where the evidence was unclear or seemingly  inconsistent.   Making  an
    assessment of the evidence or country information in this manner is  by
    no means the same as taking  into  account  irrelevant  considerations.
    The judge was not only entitled  but  indeed  required  to  assess  the
    evidence and make findings of fact based upon  it  in  respect  of  the
    conditions which the Appellant and her child would be likely to face on
    return to China.

18. Looking at the decision with this in mind, we note that at paragraph 36
    of her decision the judge referred to the family  planning  regulations
    in Fujian, as set out at paragraphs 61 to 66 of AX.  She compared  this
    information with information in the COI Report, as she was entitled  to
    do.  She was not taking into account irrelevant considerations.

19. At paragraph 37 the judge referred to a passage in the COI Report which
    states that it is rare for a single woman to give birth in China.   She
    then comments that in such a populous country there would  nevertheless
    be a large number of unmarried mothers but it would be rare  that  this
    would lead to persecution.  This is  not  a  failure  to  consider  the
    individual circumstances of the Appellant but simply an observation  on
    the size of China and what risk there might be for  unmarried  mothers.
    These matters were not beyond the range of considerations to which  the
    judge was entitled to have regard.

20. At paragraph 39 of the decision the judge referred to paragraph  37  of
    AX, in which it was said that there is a right of  appeal  against  the
    calculation of  the  social  compensation  fee.   The  grounds  of  the
    application for permission to appeal dispute this and state that  there
    are no such appeal rights.  The judge, however, was simply  relying  on
    the country guideline case of AX.  No evidence has been referred to  in
    the application for permission to appeal to indicate that the  decision
    in AX was wrong on this point.  Accordingly the judge was  entitled  to
    have regard to what was said in AX about a right of appeal.

21. The second main ground of challenge to the decision of the Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal was on the basis that she  had  failed  to  resolve
    contradictory findings about whether the  Appellant's  child  could  be
    registered in China.  Registration would  be  important,  according  to
    paragraph 41 of the judge's decision, in  order  to  obtain  access  to
    education and medical treatment.  At paragraph 41 the judge referred to
    paragraph 167  of  AX.   According  to  AX  hundreds  of  thousands  of
    unauthorised children are born every year and family planning officials
    are required to register them once a penalty has been  paid  (paragraph
    173).  The judge then referred, at paragraphs 43 and  44,  to  evidence
    contained in the COI Report, at paragraph 25.17, to the effect that  in
    China there was no  direct  legal  barrier  to  even  a  single  mother
    registering a child and, at paragraph 25.23, that children born out  of
    wedlock had the same rights as those born  to  married  couples  and  a
    child could be registered by any of its relatives.

22.  According  to  the  Appellant  the  information  in  the  COI   Report
    contradicted what was said in AX about the social  compensation  charge
    having to be paid before registration could take place.

23. To a certain extent what the judge has done at paragraphs 41-44  is  to
    summarise the evidence on this issue.  In doing so some of the  nuances
    may not be entirely apparent.  Paragraph 25.17 of the COI Report states
    that there is no direct legal barrier to a  single  mother  registering
    her child but that in most provinces there are heavy fines for having a
    child out of wedlock.  This is not inconsistent with what was  said  in
    AX.  The implication is that registration can take place  provided  the
    fine is paid.  It is worth pointing out that the decision in AX  avoids
    the use of the word "fine" because it is clear that under  Chinese  law
    the social compensation fee is a civil rather than a criminal penalty.

24. What is stated at paragraph 25.23 of the  COI  Report,  sourced  to  an
    expert in Chinese law, is that children have the  same  rights  whether
    born to a married couple or born out of wedlock.  Any child  should  be
    able to  obtain  a  household  registration.   This  appears  to  be  a
    statement that there is no legal disability applied  to  children  born
    out of  wedlock.   It  does  not  specifically  state  that  no  social
    compensation payment has to be made.

25. On close examination there  does  not  appear  necessarily  to  be  any
    conflict in the evidence on  these  points.   The  judge  accepted  the
    likelihood that a social compensation charge would have to be paid  and
    if this was done the child could  then  be  registered.   This  is  the
    import of the succeeding paragraphs of the decision, namely  paragraphs
    46-47.  Indeed, having considered the evidence in paragraphs 41 to  45,
    the judge then makes her findings on that evidence at paragraphs 46-47.
     She finds that there would be a social upbringing charge to be paid by
    the Appellant but this would not  be  as  excessive  as  the  Appellant
    claimed.  The judge considers that the Appellant would be able to  make
    arrangements to pay the social compensation charge and the child  would
    not be denied access to education or  medical  treatment,  albeit  that
    this would not be free.

26. The application for permission to appeal  then  takes  issue  with  the
    judge's findings  that  the  social  upbringing  charge  would  not  be
    excessive  and  would  not  be  beyond  the  means  of  the  Appellant.
    Reference is made to the Fujian regulations in relation  to  an  income
    multiplier of four to six times for calculating  the  charge  when  the
    child was born as a consequence  of  an  extramarital  affair.   It  is
    further submitted that the judge erred by taking into account that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK since 2010 and speculated  that  financial
    assistance from the UK government would be provided to  her  which  she
    could use to pay the charge.

27. In our view the judge's findings about whether  the  social  upbringing
    charge would be excessive must be read having  regard  to  the  judge's
    observations on how the charge is calculated, set out at  paragraph  39
    of the decision.  The judge noted that according to paragraph 37 of  AX
    the social compensation  or  social  upbringing  charge  is  calculated
    taking into account the actual income of the persons concerned and  the
    detailed circumstances of any breach.   The  circumstances  affect  the
    income multiplier which is used.  As pointed out in the application for
    permission to appeal, according to  AX,  at  paragraph  66,  an  income
    multiplier of four to six times may be used in Fujian in respect  of  a
    child born as a result of an extramarital affair.

28. In finding that the payment required would not be excessive  the  judge
    was clearly aware of this evidence.  The judge noted at paragraph 39 of
    the decision that according to the Appellant because the child had been
    born in the UK and the Appellant was a single mother there would  be  a
    particularly harsh social compensation charge which  would  breach  the
    threshold of Article 3.  Based on the evidence before her the judge did
    not accept this submission.  It seems that when the judge used the term
    "excessive" at paragraph 46 she was doing so by  reference  to  whether
    the amount of the charge would be a breach of  Article  3.   She  found
    there would not be a breach of Article 3 and this was a finding,  based
    on the evidence, which the judge was entitled to make.

29. It is not clear where in the context of this particular case the  judge
    obtained information to which she refers  at  paragraph  46  about  the
    possibility of financial assistance to the Appellant for  returning  to
    China, but it is well known in this jurisdiction that assistance may be
    available.  Even if this was incorrect, however, it was not material to
    her decision.  The judge was entitled to find that the  requirement  to
    pay a social upbringing or social compensation charge would  not  be  a
    breach of Article 3.  As the judge  concluded  at  paragraph  46:  "The
    social upbringing charge can be paid over three years and  is  tailored
    to the financial circumstances of  the  Appellant."   This  finding  is
    supported by the evidence and reinforces the judge's conclusion.

30. It was argued for the Appellant that the errors supposedly made by  the
    judge in assessing the evidence led to her Article 8  assessment  being
    flawed in respect of the best interests of the child.  For the  reasons
    given above, we are not satisfied the judge did err in any material way
    in her consideration and assessment of the evidence.  When  considering
    the case under Article 8, at paragraphs  55-65  of  her  decision,  the
    judge made a proper assessment of the best interests of the child.  The
    judge did not accept that the child would  be  deprived  of  access  to
    healthcare or education as a  result  of  a  high  social  compensation
    charge which would have to be paid.  The judge  found  that  there  was
    clear guidance about the social compensation charge and that the  child
    would have access to health and education once this  was  paid.   These
    were findings the judge was entitled to make upon the proper assessment
    of the evidence which she carried out.

31. Finally it is argued in the application for permission to  appeal  that
    internal relocation would not avail the  Appellant  because  the  child
    would be  discriminated  against  if  she  remained  unregistered.   At
    paragraph 53 of her decision  the  judge  said  that  even  taking  the
    Appellant's account at its highest in respect  of  the  impact  of  the
    family planning regulations, her claim centred on a very localised area
    in Fujian.  The Appellant could relocate to other parts of China and it
    would not be unduly harsh for her to do so.

32. In the application for permission to appeal it  was  argued  that  this
    would not resolve the situation of the child, who would lose access  to
    education, housing, medical treatment and other facilities.  This would
    be discrimination against the child.

33. In making a finding about internal relocation the Appellant had  relied
    upon paragraph 182 of AX, referred to at paragraph 42 of the  decision.
    This passage in AX refers primarily to the risk of forcible termination
    of pregnancy.  The decision further states,  however,  that  there  are
    over 200,000 unauthorised births in China, many of them in cities.  The
    country information did not  indicate  effective  pursuit  of  internal
    migrant women by birth control officials from their hukou area.

34. As already mentioned,  this  finding  in  AX  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation was made in relation to forcible terminations.   It  is  not
    being argued here that the Appellant is facing  anything  more  than  a
    requirement to pay a social upbringing charge  in  Fujian  based  on  a
    multiplier of four to six times the notional income attributed  to  the
    Appellant.  The finding of the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that such a charge would not be excessive under Article 3 and could  be
    paid by the Appellant, if necessary over an extended  period  of  three
    years.  Based on this  finding  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child was properly carried out and sustainable reasons
    were given for the conclusions reached.  We find no error of law in the
    Article 8 assessment.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.   We  have  not
been asked to make such an order and we see no reason of  substance  for  so
doing.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

