

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/00219/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 16th April 2014                            |On 01st August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIS

                                   Between

                              MR GODSPOWER ALAO
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on  25th  May  1975.   The
    Appellant applied through his Solicitors on 11th October  2013  for  an
    extension of his discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
    the basis of his family life.  Discretionary  leave  had  been  granted
    originally on 28th October 2010 until 28th October 2013 on the basis of
    the Appellant's family life  with  his  partner,  Blessing  Ehimen  and
    children.  The Appellant stated in his application for extension,  that
    his relationship with Miss Ehimen was no longer subsisting and that  he
    did not currently have contact with the children.  He  stated  that  he
    was attempting to establish contact with the children and  intended  to
    take court action to pursue contact rights, but no  evidence  had  been
    provided.   As  a  result  the  Appellant  had  failed  to   show   the
    circumstances upon which he had previously been granted leave  had  not
    changed, and his application for an extension for  discretionary  leave
    was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 19th December 2013.

2.    The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before First Tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Birk  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  10th  February  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 15th February 2014, the Appellant's appeal
    was  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  pursuant  to   the
    application for discretionary leave but was  allowed  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

3.    The Secretary of State lodged grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    dated 2nd March 2014.  Those grounds contended  that  the  Tribunal  in
    finding that the best interests  of  the  child  made  removal  of  the
    Appellant disproportionate, that  in  making  that  assessment  it  was
    respectively submitted that the Tribunal misdirected itself in law  and
    that the Immigration Rules made clear that children who spent less than
    7 years in the United Kingdom would not have developed a strong  enough
    private life in the United Kingdom to outweigh the public interests  in
    immigration control outside of exceptional circumstances.

4.    Further, the grounds contended that  it  was  made  clear  in  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640(IAC) that the Article 8  assessment  should  only  be
    carried out where there are compelling circumstances not recognised  by
    the Rules, and in  this  case,  the  Tribunal  did  not  identify  such
    compelling circumstances and its findings were therefore unsustainable.



5.    On 14th March 2014, Designated Judge  McClure  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In granting permission, Judge McClure  noted  that  the  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge had made reference to the case law,  but  that  the
    Judge did not identify what the exceptional factors were  or  what  the
    compelling circumstances were to justify  the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal.

6.    For the sake of continuity throughout  all  proceedings,  Mr  Alao  is
    referred to herein as the Appellant, and the Secretary of State as  the
    Respondent, albeit that the Secretary of State is the Appellant to this
    appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Deller.  The Appellant appears, as he did before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal, in person.

7.    I explained to Mr Alao as he was acting in person,  the  procedure  in
    the Upper Tribunal and he indicated that he  understood.   I  indicated
    that as the appeal was by the Secretary of State, Mr Deller would  make
    the initial submissions and I would invite him to comment  on  anything
    he wished to add at the end of those submissions.

Submissions

8.    Mr Deller starts by indicating that this appeal  revolves  around  the
    2012 Amendments to the Immigration Rules and the Secretary  of  State's
    complaint thereafter that the appeal was allowed under Article  8.   Mr
    Deller acknowledges that the tasks are set out at paragraph 16  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Judge's determination, and that he has set out  the
    relevant case law to be considered.  He submits that the  complaint  of
    the Secretary  of  State  is  to  be  found  in  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination and that whilst the Judge has accepted  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his wife and children subsists, and that  the
    family are British citizens, he has not in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    view gone on to say why it  succeeds.   He  submits  that  there  is  a
    difference between naming cases and applying the case law.

9.    He further considers that paragraph 5 of the determination may not  be
    right in that the family were separated at the date of decision and  if
    the case law is properly considered, it is necessary  to  look  at  the
    Rules and he submits that the First Tier Tribunal Judge has not carried
    out that exercise properly.  He submits that there is an  argument  for
    saying that the case should be worthy of consideration under the  Rules
    because the family have been reunited and the question to be  asked  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children or the mother  to
    move to Nigeria and would there  be  insurmountable  objects  in  their
    doing so.  He submits  that  the  points  raised  to  be  addressed  at
    paragraph 16 are not addressed in paragraph 22 and therefore there is a
    material error of law.

10.   Mr Alao merely reiterates the scenario to be found in the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  He acknowledges the  factual  scenario
    set out at paragraph 9 of the determination and agrees that there was a
    short period of time at the end of last year when he moved out from the
    matrimonial home, but even then exercised contact with his children and
    was allowed to sleep in the house for a couple of  days.   Further,  he
    points out that the evidence taken by the First Tier Tribunal Judge was
    not merely from himself, but also from his wife as she  attended  Court
    to give evidence and I note that her evidence is recited  at  paragraph
    11 of the Judge's determination.

The Law

11.   Errors of legislative interpretation,  failure  to  following  binding
    authority or  to  distinguish    it  with  adequate  reasons,  ignoring
    material   considerations   by   taking   into    account    immaterial
    consideration, reaching irrational conclusions on  fact  or  evaluation
    give  legally  inadequate  reasons  for  the  decision  and  procedural
    unfairness, constitute errors of law.

      It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration  Judge  to  give
    too little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality
    is alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to  fail
    to deal with every factual issue of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story told is untrue.  If a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12.   It is true that there is a considerable developing body  of  case  law
    as to the approach to Article 8 in the event that an  Appellant  cannot
    satisfy the conditions set out in the new Immigration Rules.  Paragraph
    16 of the First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination  recites  those
    authorities that were prevalent at the  time  that  the  learned  Judge
    heard the appeal.  Since then  there  have  been  subsequent  decisions
    including decisions of the Court of Appeal.

13.   The law is still best succinctly set out at paragraph  31  of  Shahzad
    (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

      "Where an area of the rules does not have such an  express  mechanism,
      the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) (29-31) in particular and Gulshan (Article 8 -
      new Rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  should  be
      followed: i.e. after applying the requirements of the Rules,  only  if
      there may be arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
      outside them is it necessary for  Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to
      consider whether there are compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under them".

      The question is does paragraph  22  of  the  determination  meet  that
    criteria.  I am satisfied that it does.   The  determination  has  been
    addressed with the consideration of reasoned care to the facts  of  the
    case.  The basis upon which Mr Deller poses his submissions are to  his
    credit restricted very much to the analysis of the  Judge  and  to  the
    grounds of appeal, rather than trying to make capital of the fact  that
    at the time of application the Appellant was briefly separated from his
    spouse, albeit  that  he  was  maintaining  regular  contact  with  his
    children.

14.   The fact remains that the Appellant has a wife and  children  who  are
    British citizens with whom he lives.  The issues  were  looked  at  and
    considered by the First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  also  went  on  to
    consider the principles set out in  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  in  particular
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.

15.   In all  the  circumstances  paragraphs  22  and  23  show  a  balanced
    reasoned approach setting out grounds for granting  leave  outside  the
    Rules and consequently the determination does not disclose any material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Decision

16.   The decision of the First Tier Tribunal does not disclose  a  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

17.   The First Tier Tribunal Judge did not make an Order pursuant to Rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     No application is made to vary that Order and none is made.

Signed:  D N Harris               Dated:  22 July 2014



D N Harris
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
