
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00444/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 18th May 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MR Yasir Alam Choudhry
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th August  1994.   The
    Appellant arrived in the UK on a valid student  visa  which  was  valid
    from 9th July 2007 until 31st December 2008.  Following the  expiry  of
    that visa the Appellant made no attempts to  legalise  his  stay  until
    encountered by immigration officials.  On 25th July 2012 the  Appellant
    claimed asylum.  His claim was based on  the  purported  fear  that  if
    returned to Pakistan he would be forcibly asked to undergo training  by
    the JKLF (Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front) also known  as  AJKLF.   That
    application was refused on 11th July 2013.

 2. The Appellant renewed  his  application  for  asylum  and  his  renewed
    application was dismissed by a Notice of  Refusal  dated  10th  January
    2014.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration
    Judge Dennis sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  20th  February  2014.   That
    appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 7th April 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds noted that  the  Appellant  had  not  attended
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in  failing  to  take  medical  evidence  into
    account or place weight, if any, on a  certificate  submitted  on  20th
    February 2014 entitled MED3 statement of fitness to work.

 4.  On  28th  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers   granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission Judge Chambers noted that
    Judge Dennis had taken  into  account  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    medical certificate signed by a GP on the day of  the  hearing  stating
    the Appellant was unable to attend  on  medical  grounds  and  that  he
    considered the grounds to be arguable.

 5. The matter was listed for appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  for  18th
    July.  That notice was sent by first class post  to  the  Appellant  on
    12th June 2014.   On 16th July the  Appellant  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    stating that he had been unable to instruct legal  representatives  due
    to his financial difficulties and contended that his  asylum  case  was
    difficult and complex and that he was in the process of obtaining money
    from his family in Pakistan  for  his  legal  fees.   He  requested  an
    adjournment of at least two months contending that such an  adjournment
    would not prejudice the Respondent.

 6. That letter was placed before an Upper Tribunal Judge and by  a  letter
    dated 17th July to the Appellant he was advised  that  the  application
    for an adjournment was refused, the Appellant having known the date  of
    hearing for almost a month.

 7. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    does not appear.  At 11.10am I released the requested interpreter.  The
    Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office  Presenting  Office  Mr
    Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Bramble submits that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that  all  the  Appellant
    has done is to file a form MED3 - statement of  fitness  for  work  for
    social security or statutory sick pay dated 20th February  2014.   That
    certificate signed by a doctor is  for  seven  days  stating  that  the
    Appellant would be unable to attend the hearing as unwell  and  advised
    to take bed rest and fluids.  He points  out  that  the  Appellant  has
    given no other evidence as to why he could not attend  court  and  that
    the judge correctly refused to adjourn and that he has not in  any  way
    materially erred in law in formulating his determination.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. At paragraph 2 of his determination  Judge  Dennis  had  given  a  very
    detailed description as to the process he went through  in  determining
    whether or not to grant an adjournment.  He has referred in  detail  to
    the  form  MED3  but  notes  that  the  form  does  nothing  more  than
    identification of the  condition  as  diarrhoea  and  that  he  is  not
    prepared to accept that as a valid medical excuse for non-attendance of
    a hearing three days subsequent.  He notes that there is no  suggestion
    of palliative medication, whether prescription or over the counter  and
    he was not satisfied that the condition was so serious or  debilitating
    as to preclude the Appellant's attendance at court.

12. In addition it is interesting to note  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
    appears  to  indicate  that  within  seven  days  of  receipt  of   the
    certificate, although not well enough to attend three days later,  that
    within seven days he was  well  enough  to  get  married.   No  further
    medical evidence is produced.  I find that the judge  was  entitled  to
    make the findings of fact that he did and to draw the conclusions  that
    he made.  In such circumstances the determination discloses no material
    error of law and the appeal of  the  Appellant  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Decision

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  not  disclose
    any material error of law  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore
    dismissed.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           31st July 2014


