
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00958/2015
                                                               AA/00961/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                          |On 21 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     NN
                                     MS
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S. Jegarajah of Counsel, instructed by H & S
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burns promulgated  on  21  October  2015  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions to refuse to grant asylum.


 2. I have made an anonymity direction following that which was made in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds raise various issues in regard to the  judge's  assessment
    of risk on return in light of contradictory expert evidence and  assert
    that the judge erred by failing to give adequate weight to  the  expert
    evidence of [JH].  Whilst the question of weight is a  matter  for  the
    judge, the issues in this case are sufficiently complex and serious  so
    as to justify a more detailed assessment of the grounds  and  for  that
    reason I am prepared to grant permission."


 4. The first Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from
    both representatives, following which I reserved my decision,  which  I
    set out below with reasons.


Error of law


Failure to depart from country guidance

 5. It was submitted that it was perverse  of  the  judge  to  reject  JH's
    evidence and that, applying the relevant legal test, this  was  a  case
    where it was lawful and necessary for the  judge  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance in reliance on "relevant cogent fresh evidence".


 6. The judge deals with JH's evidence from paragraphs [50]  to  [56].   In
    paragraph [54] the judge states:


    "I found [JH] to be a helpful and honest  witness.   However  I  cannot
    consider  him  to  be  independent  given  his  relationship  with  the
    Appellant's brother.  I do not consider his evidence to be deliberately
    exaggerated but I cannot exclude the  very  real  possibility  that  in
    agreeing to give evidence for his business partner's sister,  when  his
    business partner was also present in court,  would  place  the  witness
    under undue stress.  At paragraph 10.3 of the Practice Direction we are
    reminded that "Expert evidence should be the independent product of the
    expert uninfluenced by the pressures  of  litigation".   [JH]  was  put
    under considerable pressure."


 7. In paragraph [56] the judge states:


    "That is not to say that I criticise [JH] in anyway at all.   I  accept
    that he has a wealth of knowledge about Iraq and  that  this  has  been
    gleaned from his work with the  Central  Bank  of  Iraq,  the  National
    Intelligence Service and his decision to stay outside of the green zone
    in Baghdad in a hotel where he would be  more  likely  to  get  a  true
    picture of the city."


 8. The judge found that JH was a "helpful and  honest  witness".   However
    she then states that his evidence was not  "deliberately  exaggerated",
    leaving open the suggestion  that  there  has  been  some  exaggeration
    albeit not deliberate.  This is not compatible with her finding that JH
    was an honest witness.  Either JH has given honest evidence or  he  has
    exaggerated his evidence.


 9. In paragraph [56] the judge accepts JH's wealth of knowledge.  She sets
    out in paragraph [51] that he had "considerable experience  of  working
    in Iraq", including six or seven trips "during this year".  She  states
    that he is  a  former  intelligence  officer  and  a  former  diplomat.
    However in paragraph [54],  despite  having  acknowledged  this  former
    experience of JH, she  states  that  he  was  put  under  "considerable
    pressure" due to the presence of NN's brother in court.  No reasons are
    given for the finding that he was put under considerable pressure,  and
    given the previous experience of JH, and the finding that he  has  been
    an "honest witness", this failure to give reasons for why he would feel
    under considerable pressure is an error of law.


10. In paragraph [105] the judge states:


    "If I accepted [JH]'s evidence in this regard as  I  understand  it  he
    would be effectively saying that no Shia woman is  safe  on  return  to
    Iraq and to reach this conclusion I would have to  disregard  the  very
    recent country guidance."


11. In paragraph [59] the judge states:


    "[JH]'s experience is perhaps more recent than that of Dr.  F.   Indeed
    he was in Iraq the previous week and is due to return at the  beginning
    of November.   He  described  the  situation  as  fluid.   The  country
    guidance case which was heard on 18th and 19th May 2015 he said did not
    now set out the true position.  For example Islamic state seized Ramadi
    in May 2015."


12. I have found above that the  judge's  treatment  of  JH's  evidence  is
    contradictory.  She acknowledges that accepting his evidence would have
    required her to depart from the country guidance case.  It was open  to
    her to  depart  from  the  country  guidance  case  were  she  to  have
    considered that she had fresh evidence before her.  In  paragraph  [59]
    she  accepts  that  Mr  Holden's  experience  is  very   recent.    She
    acknowledges that the situation is fluid and that the country  guidance
    case does not now reflect the true  position  in  Iraq.   However,  her
    treatment of JH's evidence, and her failure to give adequate and  clear
    reasons for not relying on it, is an error of law.


CSID


13. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal  that  the  country  guidance
    case required the judge to decide whether the Appellants  had  a  CSID,
    but she had failed to take into account the fact that  the  CSID  which
    the Appellants possess was only of use to  them  in  their  home  area,
    which was an area which was unsafe for the Appellants.


14. In paragraph [95] the judge states:


    "The Appellant's evidence was that her CSID was for her home area which
    is Al-Jihad.  The Appellant would not need to go to Al-Jihad to  obtain
    a CSID (as per paragraph 13) because she already has one."


15. In paragraph [96(a)] she states "I am told that the Appellant  and  her
    daughter have  a  CSID".   In  paragraph  [100]  she  states  that  the
    Appellant would not be required to return  to  Al-Jihad  district,  but
    that she would be returned to Baghdad and is  likely  to  settle  there
    [101].  In paragraph [103] she sets out the fact that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that she would be unable to live in  Al-Jihad.   She  sets
    out the evidence of JH that Al-Jihad is a predominantly Sunni area, and
    states that she cannot find reference to Al-Jihad in Dr. F's report.


16. The judge has stated that the Appellant's evidence was  that  the  CSID
    was for her home area, and has also found that the Appellant would  not
    be required to return there, but would be likely to settle in  Baghdad.
    She has not found any reference to the situation in this  area  in  the
    report of the expert on whom she has chosen to rely.  She has failed to
    indicate why she has rejected the Appellant's evidence that  she  would
    only be able to use her CSID in her home area.   She  has  acknowledged
    that the Appellant does not need to return to this area but  is  likely
    to settle in Baghdad, but  she  has  not  made  any  finding  that  the
    Appellant would be able to use her CSID in Baghdad.


17. Further evidence was provided at the hearing before me relating to  the
    issue of CSIDs but, irrespective of this further evidence, I  find  the
    judge has failed to give reasons as to why the Appellant would be  able
    to use her CSID in Baghdad, and why she has rejected  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant that would only be able to use it in Al-Jihad.


Lone women - particular social group


18. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that  the  reasoning  on  the
    issue  of  the  Appellants  being  lone  females  in  Iraq  was  wholly
    inadequate.  I was referred to paragraph 202 of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq
    CG [2015] UKUT 00544.  It was submitted  that  the  considerations  for
    women were far more nuanced.


19. The judge deals with the issue of particular social group  in  relation
    to asylum in paragraph [89],  and  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)  at
    paragraph [96].  She further considers it in paragraph [110].  However,
    given her  failure  to  address  properly  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellants could use their  CSIDs  outside  of  their  home  area,  her
    finding that there are a considerable number of lone females living  in
    Iraq particularly in Baghdad, given that she had not  established  that
    they will be entitled to use their CSIDs in  Baghdad,  is  inadequately
    reasoned.  The judge acknowledges that the CSID is needed in  order  to
    access  financial  assistance,  employment,   education   and   medical
    treatment [94]. In paragraph [110], when considering  the  position  as
    unaccompanied females, she finds that they would be able to relocate to
    an area of Baghdad which would be safe, but this  is  set  against  the
    failure to find that they would be able to use their CSIDs in Baghdad.

The position of MS


20. It was submitted that the judge had failed to note that MS is Sunni.  I
    find it is unclear from the decision whether the judge  considered  the
    position of MS separately from that of her mother at all.  In paragraph
    [83] the judge finds that NN is not at risk simply  for  being  a  Shia
    Muslim or as a result of a  mixed  marriage.   In  paragraph  [90]  she
    indicates that she is aware of the fact that MS has a "mixed heritage".
     She refers to the issue of MS's surname in paragraph [39] when setting
    out the evidence of MN, NN's brother.  In paragraph [68] she  addresses
    Dr. F's evidence on those with the same surname as MS, and states  that
    "they would not be targeted more greatly than any other  Sunnis".   She
    then finds that NM would not be at risk  for  having  entered  a  mixed
    marriage, but does not address the fact that MS is a product of a mixed
    marriage and carries a Sunni surname, in contrast to her Shia mother.


21. I find that it is not clear that the judge  has  fully  considered  the
    position of MS on account of her carrying a Sunni surname, whereas  her
    mother is a Shia.  She does not  consider  the  implications  for  both
    Appellants as a result.


22. I find that the above are errors of  law  which  are  material  to  the
    decision.


23. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of material  errors  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 9 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
