
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2016                         |On 11th March 2016            |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     H M

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm

For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born in 1975.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  The matter was not addressed in
    the Upper Tribunal.  In view of the  nature  of  the  case  and  as  it
    involves young children, a further anonymity order is made below.

 2. The appellant is a Christian from the Temne tribe.  She  was  subjected
    to FGM when aged about 7.  Her husband  is  a  Muslim  from  the  Mende
    tribe.  They have two daughters, born in 2009 and 2012.  The  appellant
    says that her husband and his family  may  force  the  children  to  be
    initiated into the Bondo secret society and to have FGM performed  upon
    them.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for reasons explained in a
    letter dated 12th December 2014.

 4. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  dismissed  her  appeal  for  reasons
    explained in his decision promulgated on 2nd November 2015.

 5. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are,  in
    summary, as follows:-

      i) failure to  treat  the  children's  best  interests  as  a  primary
         consideration;

     ii) failure to consider the children as members of a particular  social
         group, namely "intact women in Sierra Leone";

    iii) erroneous conclusions about sufficiency of protection -  the  judge
         held that protection might come from one or both  parents,  but  he
         ought to  have  considered  whether  the  authorities  would  offer
         protection, which they do not;

     iv) internal  relocation  -  failure  to  consider  exactly  where  the
         appellant and her daughters would be expected to live, and  whether
         this would be unduly harsh; and

      v) credibility errors, including a fundamental misunderstanding of the
         nature of different societies and the notion of respect for  elders
         within the family, and wrongly applying section 8 of the  2004  Act
         as if it obliged the judge to draw an adverse inference.

Submissions for appellant.

 6. Ms Warren (who was not the author of the grounds) said that the essence
    of the appellant's challenge was  that  the  judge  overemphasised  the
    question of credibility, and paid inadequate attention to the situation
    of the children.  Whatever conclusions were reached on credibility, the
    judge was bound to  consider  the  risk  that  the  children  might  be
    subjected to FGM, both from their family and from  the  wider  society.
    This had to be considered in the context of  background  evidence  that
    the incidence of FGM is around 95% in the appellant's tribe, and around
    90% in the tribe of the children's father.  When dealing with the  best
    interests of the children the judge also had to take into  account  the
    situation for intact women in such a society.

 7. There is no sufficiency of protection from the state in  Sierra  Leone,
    and no possibility of internal relocation.   Grounds  (3)  and  (4)  on
    their own would support the challenge, although the credibility matters
    in ground (5) were also to be pursued.

 8.  The  judge  at  paragraphs  133  to  135  found  a  high   degree   of
    implausibility in the appellant's  claim,  but  did  not  explain  that
    conclusion.  He had to look at such  matters  in  the  context  of  the
    social pressures in Sierra Leone.  The accepted evidence is that female
    societies apply pressure which leads to high levels of FGM in  most  of
    the country, and in particular among the tribes of both  sides  of  the
    family.   The  absence  of  credibility  in  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding her husband was not an answer to the rest of the case.

 9. As brought out in the grounds, it is striking that the  judge  stressed
    throughout his determination that there does exist a small minority  of
    women who avoid FGM.  The small  size  of  that  minority  should  have
    demonstrated to the judge that there had to be very strong  reasons  to
    conclude that there might be an ability to  resist  in  any  individual
    case.  The judge failed to consider that on the evidence  it  was  most
    likely the children would be subject to FGM, even if both their  mother
    and their father were against it.

10. The judge did not turn his mind to the difficulties for intact women in
    living in Sierra Leone.  The judge said regarding the best interests of
    the children and section 55 of the 2009 Act that there was a noticeable
    absence of evidence about  what  their  best  interests  might  require
    (paragraph 197).  He should not have taken  that  as  the  end  of  the
    matter, given the whole tenor of the evidence regarding the requirement
    to undergo FGM not only as a precursor to marriage, but as a  means  of
    initiation into secret societies of women which dominate  the  country.
    The expert report  stressed  women's  needs  for  membership  of  these
    societies.  The judge said he noted the background including the expert
    report, but he did not discuss in that context how the  children  might
    have to live their lives.

11. The judge appeared to have accepted that the paternal grandmother,  who
    is still alive and lives in Sierra Leone, is an advocate of FGM.   That
    would be the most obvious source of pressure, even if her  father  were
    to be against the practice.  There were  pressures  from  female  power
    structures.  These matters were also relevant to  internal  relocation.
    The judge had not examined the question where they might go, either  in
    a rural area or in Freetown.

12. It was insufficient to say  that  the  father  might  be  a  source  of
    protection.  The judge was bound to look at the availability  of  state
    protection, and there was no evidence that there  is  any.   The  judge
    noted at paragraph 73 that what the appellant said about pressure  from
    her husband's family was consistent with background evidence.  That had
    to be contrasted with paragraph 83 where he was not able to accept that
    the appellant's mother [living in the UK] was  able  to  influence  her
    husband as claimed, as opposed to his changing his mind under influence
    from his own mother [living in  Sierra  Leone]  after  the  appellant's
    mother died.  There was no good basis for that finding.

13. The judge went wrong in applying section 8, which  does  not  say  that
    adverse inferences "must" be drawn from delay.

14. The judge failed to give the appellant credit for the  high  degree  of
    consistency among her five accounts of events,  which  he  should  have
    balanced with the minor nature of the inconsistencies to be found,  and
    the broad consistency of her account with background evidence.

15. For all these reasons, the case should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Submissions for respondent.

16. The decision was a notably careful and thorough one  [it  runs  to  209
    paragraphs over 26 pages].  The judge was correct to note that there is
    a significant minority (around 10%) of women in Sierra Leone  who  live
    their lives without being subjected to FGM.  A  high  prevalence  of  a
    practice does not correlate directly to the same degree of risk that it
    will be inflicted unwillingly on anyone who is  against  it,  or  whose
    family is against it.  The judge was thoroughly aware of the background
    and of the small percentages of women in the relevant  tribes  who  did
    not accept FGM or had not undergone it.  He considered the position  of
    the children  and  the  wider  pressure  from  society  throughout  his
    determination.

17. Based on the judge's findings on credibility and on  absence  of  risk,
    there was no need to go into  whether  the  state  offered  protection.
    That ground of appeal was misleading, because the  respondent  did  not
    argue that there is state sufficiency of protection.

18. On credibility, the findings were open to the judge.  He  set  out  all
    the conflicting evidence and explained why he reached  the  conclusions
    he did.  His treatment of section 8 was appropriate.  Although he  said
    at paragraph 122 that an adverse inference must be drawn, he went on to
    consider carefully the circumstances in which the appellant made a late
    disclosure of her claim before concluding at paragraph 129 that he  had
    no alternative but to make an adverse  credibility  finding  under  the
    statute as a result of her behaviour.  That properly reasoned  out  the
    amount of weight to be given to the delay, based on there being no good
    explanation for it.  The judge did not weigh  the  point  only  on  the
    obligatory wording of the statute.

19. The judge's essential finding was that there is a significant  minority
    of women in Sierra Leone  who  do  not  risk  persecution  through  the
    unwilling infliction of FGM.  He was entitled to find that the children
    fell into that significant minority.  That encompassed that  aspect  of
    their best interests, which was the  main  thrust  of  the  case.   The
    appellant had not produced evidence that life for all intact  women  in
    Sierra Leone involved such disadvantages as to justify the claim.

Response for appellant.

20. Even if the credibility findings were  found  to  be  sustainable,  the
    other grounds were enough to make out the  case,  in  the  category  of
    particular social group, identified along the lines  of  Fornah  [2006]
    UKHL 46.

Conclusions.

21. The length of a decision does not necessarily correlate to its quality,
    but the judge did carry out a scrupulously thorough examination of this
    case.

22. The appellant says that the judge  over-concentrated  on  the  evidence
    regarding the minority of women in Sierra  Leone  not  subject  to  FGM
    risk.  I do not think that criticism is well taken.  Obviously evidence
    of the prevalence of FGM in Sierra Leone and in  the  two  tribes  from
    which  the  children  descend  was  very   significant.    Apart   from
    credibility, it was the main point on which the appellant presented her
    case.  The existence of a small minority which avoids the  practice  is
    simply the correlative of the large majority who participate (willingly
    or unwillingly, in various degrees).

23. The rate of prevalence of a practice does not directly correlate  to  a
    similar risk, expressed as likelihood in percentage terms,  of  such  a
    practice being enforced upon an unwilling participant.  The  judge  did
    not find that all intact females  in  Sierra  Leone  are  at  risk.   I
    consider that he was entitled so to conclude.  The  evidence  is  of  a
    very extensive practice, but not of a nature to justify such an overall
    finding.

24. After credibility, the main question for  the  judge  was  whether  the
    children fell into the small but significant minority who  are  not  at
    such risk.  That is largely what his determination had to be about.

25. The credibility finding is not shown to be in any way  legally  flawed.
    The judge gives several sensible reasons for  not  accepting  what  the
    appellant said, including the delay in her claim, to which he  attached
    no more weight than was appropriate.  The grounds going to  credibility
    amount to no more than insistence and disagreement.

26.  The  focus  at  the  hearing  was  naturally  to  a  large  extent  on
    credibility, but the judge did not fall into the error of thinking that
    was the beginning and the end of the case.

27. The ground based on legal sufficiency of protection is misleading.   It
    was not the respondent's  case  that  there  is  legal  sufficiency  of
    protection in Sierra Leone.  It is, in effect, common ground that there
    is none.  The judge correctly treated the question as whether there was
    shown to be a risk to these particular children.  The case did not turn
    on the evidence of the availability of state protection.

28. The conclusion the judge drew from all the relevant background  reports
    and from the expert evidence was that while the  overwhelming  majority
    of women and girls in Sierra Leone are subject  to  FGM,  it  does  not
    apply to all - see paragraphs 64 to 67, in particular.  He  then  noted
    the evidence of the consequences  for  girls  and  women  who  had  not
    undergone FGM, being exclusion from decision making and other forms  of
    participation  in  local  society,  in  particular  in  rural  areas  -
    paragraph 69.  He reached his conclusions in that context.

29. The ground relating to internal relocation is also  rather  misleading.
    The judge noted that there are areas where the  prevalence  of  FGM  is
    significantly lower, including the west of the  country  and  Freetown.
    However, the evidence before  him  from  the  appellant  was  that  her
    relationship with her husband  had  broken  down,  which  he  for  good
    reasons did not accept.  He  thought  it  much  more  likely  that  the
    appellant and her daughters would be able to obtain "a very great  deal
    of protection" from him (paragraph 169).  As the judge did  not  accept
    the appellant's account of the circumstances  to  which  she  would  be
    returning, it was hardly open to him to explore  the  possibilities  of
    internal relocation any further than he did.  The appellant was  hiding
    the true likely circumstances on return from the judge, so she  is  not
    in a strong position to complain.  The judge's fundamental finding  was
    that risk was not established.  He did not need to go any further  into
    where it might be possible for the appellant and her  children  to  re-
    establish themselves.

30. The judge found the background and expert evidence  to  fall  short  of
    justifying an overall conclusion that a risk  of  FGM  extends  to  all
    intact women in Sierra Leone.  He found that the  appellant  failed  to
    establish her individual allegations, or the risks claimed  in  respect
    of her daughters.  In none of these findings has any error of law  been
    shown.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

31. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt proceedings.


                           [pic]


                           2 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
