
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00032/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th September 2017                     |On 15th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     RF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Aihe of Wisestep Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Tobin of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th September 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born [ ] 1983.  He  claimed
    asylum on 5th January 2015 on the basis that he feared  persecution  in
    Pakistan because of his marriage to  his  partner,  who  is  an  Indian
    citizen.  The Appellant claimed that  he  was  entitled  to  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection, and his  removal  from  the  UK  would  breach
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).

 3.  The  Appellant's  claim  was  refused  on  22nd  December  2015.   His
    subsequent appeal was dismissed by the FtT on all grounds.  The FtT did
    not find that the Appellant would be at risk if returned  to  Pakistan,
    and did not accept that his removal  would  breach  any  of  his  human
    rights protected by the 1950 Convention.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Saffer.  Solicitors
    who were then acting on behalf of the  Appellant  submitted  a  renewed
    application for permission to appeal, contending that the FtT had erred
    in law in considering Article 8.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  who
    found it arguable that the FtT had erred in law in failing to  consider
    extensive  mental  health  evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    partner, and failing  to  consider  the  background  to  her  grant  of
    discretionary leave in the UK, which would appear to have been  due  to
    her being a victim of family based violence in this country,  and  this
    may have been relevant when options for  the  couple's  relocation  was
    being considered.

Error of Law

 6. On 1st June 2017 I heard representations from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  Full details of the application for  permission,  the
    grant of permission, the oral representations made, and my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 5th June 2017, promulgated  on  13th
    June 2017.

 7. I found that the FtT had erred in law in considering Article 8.   There
    had been no challenge to  the  FtT  findings  in  relation  to  asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and Articles 2 and 3 of the  1950  Convention.
    I set out below paragraphs 18-25,  which  contain  my  conclusions  and
    reasons for setting aside the FtT decision in relation to Article 8;

         "18. The application for permission to appeal, which was considered
             by Judge Lindsley, did not contend that the FtT had  erred  in
             law in considering risk on return or protection  issues.   The
             application was made on the basis that the FtT  had  erred  in
             considering Article 8, and Judge Lindsley  granted  permission
             on that basis.

         19.  The Respondent, in the refusal  decision,  accepted  that  the
             Appellant and his partner are  in  a  relationship.   The  FtT
             finding on this is unclear.  At paragraph 15 the FtT describes
             the Appellant and  his  partner  as  being  in  some  form  of
             supportive relationship, but states  that  there  are  "doubts
             that they are in a genuine and subsisting relationship".

         20.  At paragraph 29 the FtT, when  referring  to  the  Appellant's
             partner, states that "if Ms V is in a genuine and  substantive
             relationship with the Appellant  she  may  initially  have  to
             apply for a temporary visa for Pakistan - or even a succession
             of temporary visas -  until  her  immigration  status  becomes
             established in Pakistan".   In my view, a clear finding  needs
             to be made by a Tribunal, as to whether it  is  accepted  that
             the couple are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

         21.  Article 8 is considered briefly by the FtT, the findings being
             contained in paragraph 29.

         22.  The status of the Appellant's partner in the United Kingdom is
             unclear.  She previously had discretionary leave, but  at  the
             date of hearing before the FtT appeared to have no leave.  The
             Appellant, before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  indicated  that  his
             partner has solicitors acting on her behalf in relation to her
             immigration status.

         23.  I find that the FtT erred in law in failing  to  consider  the
             mental health of  the  Appellant's  partner  when  considering
             Article 8, and the ability of the couple to live  together  in
             Pakistan.  It is clear that there was evidence before the FtT,
             in relation to the partner's mental health.  The  Respondent's
             own guidance on whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to
             family life  continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  makes
             specific reference to the impact  of  any  mental  disability,
             which  in  some  cases  could  amount  to  serious   hardship,
             depending upon  the  circumstances  and  the  availability  of
             healthcare.

         24.  The failure to consider the partner's mental  health,  amounts
             to a material error of law and I find that the decision of the
             FtT therefore needs to be set aside.

         25.  However, no error of law is disclosed in the findings  of  the
             FtT  in  relation  to  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,  and
             Articles 2 and 3.  Those findings are therefore preserved."

 8. The hearing on 1st June 2017 was adjourned so that the  decision  could
    be re-made by the Upper Tribunal after further evidence was given.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 4th September 2017

Preliminary Issues

 9. The  Appellant  attended  the  hearing.   There  was  no  need  for  an
    interpreter.

10. Directions had been made that any further documentation  to  be  relied
    upon by the Appellant should  be  lodged  with  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Respondent no later than fourteen calendar  days  before  the  hearing.
    Unfortunately those directions had been disregarded and  Mr  Bates  was
    served with the Appellant's bundle of documents on the morning  of  the
    hearing, the Tribunal having received the bundle on 1st September 2017.
     In addition to the bundle Mr Aihe served further documents  which  are
    not included in a bundle and are not paginated.  Mr Aihe numbered  some
    of these documents 3-9, and in addition  to  taking  into  account  the
    Appellant's bundle indexed 1-9, I took into account further documentary
    evidence in relation to the partner's mental health, those being a  fax
    dated 20th January 2014 together with risk follow-up,  a  letter  dated
    17th January 2014, a fax dated 11th December 2014 and  risk  follow-up,
    and letters dated 13th January 2015, 3rd February 2015,  13th  December
    2016, 24th August 2017, and 3rd September 2017.

11. In view of the late service of  documents  Mr  Bates  would  have  been
    entitled to apply for an adjournment but did not do so.   He  requested
    that the case be put back to enable  him  to  consider  the  documents,
    which request was granted.

12. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed.  In addition to the documentation referred to  above,
    the Tribunal had the Home Office bundle with Annexes A-E which had been
    before the FtT.

13. Mr Aihe confirmed that the Appellant accepted that he could not satisfy
    the requirements of Appendix FM in relation to family life.  He  relied
    upon paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in relation  to  private  life,  and  also
    relied upon Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Mr Aihe confirmed
    that the Appellant would be giving oral evidence.  His wife was present
    in the hearing room but Mr Aihe considered that she was not fit  to  be
    called to give evidence.

14. Mr Bates confirmed that it was accepted that there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his partner.

The Appellant's Oral Evidence

15. The Appellant adopted as his evidence his witness statement  dated  4th
    September 2017.  He was questioned by  both  representatives.   I  have
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.  I  set  out  below  a
    summary of the Appellant's case.

16. The Appellant came to the UK as a student in October 2005.  He did  not
    complete his studies as he suffered from depression, but  he  currently
    does not have any mental health  issues.   The  Appellant  returned  to
    Pakistan in March 2007 for one month, before coming back to the UK.

17. The Appellant's leave as a student ended on 31st January 2009.  He  has
    overstayed without leave.  He made an asylum claim in July  2014  which
    he subsequently withdrew.  He  made  a  further  appointment  to  claim
    asylum in December 2014, and underwent a  screening  interview  on  5th
    January 2015, and substantive asylum interviews on 10th June  2015  and
    21st September 2015.  His asylum and human rights claim was refused  on
    22nd December 2015.

18. The Appellant met his partner, who is an Indian citizen, in 2013 in the
    UK.  She had come to the UK from India with her husband.  She had  been
    subjected to domestic violence and separated from her husband, although
    there is no evidence that she is divorced.

19. The Appellant and his partner started living together  in  2013.   They
    underwent an Islamic marriage in this country  on  16th  January  2015.
    They were not issued with documentation to prove this because they  had
    been unable to supply the required identification documents.

20. Initially the Appellant claimed to be at risk if returned  to  Pakistan
    because of his marriage to an Indian citizen.  The FtT  found  that  he
    would not be at risk and  those  findings  have  been  preserved.   The
    Appellant's family in Pakistan do not approve of his relationship,  and
    his partner's family in India do not approve of the relationship.

21. The Appellant contends that he is his partner's carer and that she  has
    very significant mental health problems, and that there is  documentary
    evidence to prove this.  His partner has  tried  to  self-harm  in  the
    past.  The Appellant's case is that his partner would not be allowed to
    enter Pakistan with him, because she is  an  Indian  citizen,  and  she
    could not manage without him if she remained in the UK and he  returned
    to Pakistan.  Separation would bring about an  increased  risk  of  his
    partner committing suicide.

22. The Appellant could not live in India with his  partner.   He  contends
    that his partner's family made a complaint to the Indian  police  about
    him,  although  the  complaint  is   completely   without   foundation.
    Therefore, the Appellant's case is that  because  he  and  his  partner
    could not live in either India or Pakistan, he should be granted  leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of his private and family life.

The Respondent's Oral Submissions

23. Mr Bates submitted that the appeal should be dismissed, and pointed out
    that neither the Appellant nor his partner has any leave to  remain  in
    the UK.  Mr Bates indicated that the Appellant's partner  had  made  an
    application for further  leave  to  remain,  and  a  decision  on  that
    application was pending.  The parties had entered into  a  relationship
    when  they  knew  that  their  immigration   status   was   precarious.



24. Mr Bates did not dispute  the  evidence  that  had  been  submitted  in
    relation to the partner's mental health.  He submitted that the crucial
    issue in the appeal was proportionality.

25. It was submitted that the Appellant had not  proved  that  his  partner
    would not be allowed to enter Pakistan.  They could travel to  Pakistan
    together, which would mean that  there  would  be  no  separation,  and
    therefore no risk of  an  adverse  effect  upon  the  partner's  mental
    health.  I was asked to find that the Appellant had not discharged  the
    burden of showing that he could not reasonably  return  and  settle  in
    Pakistan.  There was  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  could  not  find
    employment in Pakistan.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

26. Mr  Aihe  relied  upon  the  skeleton  argument  at  1(a)-1(e)  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  I was asked to allow the appeal.  I was  asked  to
    note that the Appellant's partner had entered the UK with valid  leave,
    and her past experiences  of  domestic  violence  must  be  taken  into
    account.

27. I was asked to find that the Appellant and his  partner  would  not  be
    allowed to return to Pakistan and live  together.   Although  they  had
    married under Islamic law, they  had  not  been  issued  with  a  Nikah
    document.  If the Appellant returned to Pakistan without  his  partner,
    there would be a separation which would have a detrimental effect  upon
    the partner's mental health and would be disproportionate.

28. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Findings

29. The findings made by  the  FtT  in  relation  to  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection, Articles 2 and 3, and risk on return have  been  preserved.
    I summarise those findings below.

30. At paragraph 17 of the FtT decision it was found  the  Appellant  would
    not be at risk from either the police  or  the  military  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker if returned to Pakistan.  Return to  Pakistan  would  not
    cause significant difficulties for either himself or his partner.

31. At paragraphs 19 and 20 the FtT found that the Appellant's partner is a
    Muslim, the same religion as the vast majority of citizens in Pakistan.
     The FtT did not accept the Pakistani authorities would attempt to kill
    or harm the Appellant or his partner simply because a Pakistani  Muslim
    had married an Indian Muslim.  The FtT found the Appellant's  claim  to
    have been threatened by his family because of his marriage to be "vague
    and unconvincing".

32. At paragraphs 21-23 the FtT did not accept that the political party  in
    Pakistan (the PTI) to which the Appellant's mother belongs, was hostile
    towards Indian Muslims.  The FtT found that the Appellant's partner did
    not represent any security threat.   The  FtT  found  that  should  the
    Appellant return to Pakistan and wish to avoid his family, there was  a
    reasonable internal relocation option.

33. At paragraphs 24-28, the FtT summarised its conclusions, by confirming,
    having taken into account the low standard of proof, that the Appellant
    was not entitled to refugee status,  neither  was  he  entitled  to  be
    granted humanitarian protection, because there was no reasonable degree
    of likelihood that he would be killed or that he would suffer  harm  if
    returned to Pakistan, and there would be no breach of Articles 2  or  3
    of the 1950 Convention.

34. The above findings were not subject  to  challenge,  and  therefore  no
    permission to appeal was granted in respect of them, and  the  findings
    are preserved.

35. The issue before me relates to Article 8.  I firstly have  to  consider
    whether Article 8 is engaged.  I find that it is, both in  relation  to
    family and private life.  For ease of reference I set out below Article
    8;

         'Right to respect for private and family life

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.'

36. The burden of proving that he has established a family  and/or  private
    life is on the Appellant.  The  standard  of  proof  is  a  balance  of
    probabilities.  In my view, if a  private  and  family  life  has  been
    established, it is for  the  Respondent  to  prove  that  the  decision
    appealed             against             is              proportionate.



37. I make the following findings of fact.  The Appellant arrived in the UK
    as a student in October 2005.  His leave was valid until  31st  January
    2008.  He returned to Pakistan  for  one  month  in  March  2007.   His
    student leave was extended until 31st January 2009.  On  that  date  he
    made an application for further leave to remain which  was  refused  on
    13th July 2007.

38. He claimed asylum in July 2014 and subsequently  withdrew  that  claim,
    making a further leave to remain application on 22nd July  2014.   This
    was refused without a right of  appeal  on  28th  November  2014.   The
    Appellant made an appointment to claim asylum on  11th  December  2014,
    and his screening interview took place on 5th January 2015.  His asylum
    and human rights claim was refused on 22nd December 2015.

39. The Appellant's partner, who was born in June 1985, was  granted  leave
    to enter the UK on 11th February  2010  as  the  partner  of  a  person
    settled in this country.  Her leave was valid until 21st February 2012.
     She arrived in the UK on 1st March 2010.  On 22nd  February  2012  she
    applied for further leave to remain as the partner of a person  settled
    in the UK and this application was granted until 22nd April 2013.

40. On that date she applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  dependent
    partner and this application was granted until 29th December 2014.  She
    made an asylum claim on 19th May 2013 which was refused on 19th  August
    2013 but she was granted discretionary leave to  remain  on  the  basis
    that she was a witness in a criminal trial.  She  was  granted  further
    leave to remain on the same basis on 7th August 2014 until 6th February
    2015.  She then made an application for further leave to remain on 22nd
    January 2015 which was refused on 3rd March 2016.  The  criminal  trial
    has been concluded.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant's  partner  has  a
    further application for leave to remain awaiting a  decision  from  the
    Respondent.




41. I accept that the Appellant and his partner met in the UK in  2013  and
    commenced  a  relationship.   They  started  living   together.    They
    underwent an Islamic marriage on 16th January 2015.  It  is  not  clear
    whether the Appellant's partner has been  divorced  from  her  previous
    husband who was abusive towards her.  I find, as  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, that the Appellant and his partner are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and wish to live together permanently.

42. I find that the couple entered into a relationship when  the  Appellant
    had no leave.  He  has  had  no  leave  since  2009  and  has  been  an
    overstayer since that time.  When they entered  into  the  relationship
    the Appellant's partner had separated from her husband, and she  had  a
    precarious immigration status in that she only  had  limited  leave  to
    remain.  Neither the Appellant nor his partner have any  current  leave
    to remain in this country.  Their marriage is not recognised under  the
    civil law in the UK.  In considering Article 8,  I  adopt  the  balance
    sheet approach recommended by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali
    v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and in so doing have regard to the  guidance  as
    to the functions of this Tribunal given by Lord Reed at  paragraphs  39
    to 53.

43. The Appellant has the burden of establishing his personal circumstances
    in the UK, and why the decision to refuse his human rights  claim  will
    interfere disproportionately in his private and family life  rights  in
    this country.  It  is  for  the  Respondent  to  establish  the  public
    interest factors weighing against him.  The  standard  of  proof  is  a
    balance of probabilities throughout.

44. It is necessary to consider  whether  the  Appellant  can  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8.  So far as family  life  is
    concerned, it is accepted on his behalf  that  he  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   I  find  this  to  be  correct.   The
    relationship requirements set out in E-LTRP.1.2 are not  satisfied,  as
    the Appellant's partner is  not  a  British  citizen,  neither  is  she
    present and settled in the UK, and she does not have refugee leave  and
    has not been granted  humanitarian  protection.   Turning  to  consider
    paragraph 276ADE(1) which contains the requirements to be met for leave
    to remain on the grounds of private  life,  the  only  provision  which
    could apply to the Appellant  is  (vi)  which  involves  the  Appellant
    proving on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan.   I  find  that
    the Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof.  This is  because
    I find that he would not be at risk if returned.   He  is  a  Pakistani
    citizen and has lived the majority of his life  in  that  country.   He
    does not have any relevant health issues, and would have no  linguistic
    or cultural difficulties.  The Appellant is highly educated, and in  my
    view he could return to Islamabad where his family  live,  and  in  the
    alternative, he has a reasonable relocation option to any other part of
    Pakistan including any of the major cities.  I find  that  no  adequate
    reason has been given as to why the Appellant could not find employment
    and accommodation.   I  therefore  conclude  that  this  appeal  cannot
    succeed with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

45. Turning to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, as I  find
    that the Appellant has established both family and private life, I must
    consider section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act).  This provides that the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  It  is  in  the  public
    interest that a person seeking leave to remain can speak English.  I am
    satisfied that the Appellant can speak fluent  English,  although  this
    must be regarded as a neutral rather than  a  positive  factor  in  his
    favour.

46. It is in the public interest that a person seeking leave to  remain  is
    financially independent.  I do not find that there is adequate evidence
    to prove that the Appellant is financially independent.  I find that in
    the past he has worked illegally, but there  is  no  evidence  that  he
    currently has permission to work, and there is  no  evidence  that  his
    partner is currently working.  I therefore  do  not  find  that  he  is
    financially independent, but even if he was, that again would only be a
    neutral factor rather than a positive factor in his favour.

47. According to section 117B(4) little weight should be given to a private
    life, or a relationship formed with  a   qualifying  partner,  that  is
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  I accept that this does not mean that no  weight  must  be
    attached, but in my view I must attach little  weight  to  the  private
    life established by the Appellant since 2009 as he  has  been  in  this
    country unlawfully since that time.  A qualifying partner is a  partner
    who is a British citizen or settled in the UK.  The Appellant therefore
    does not have a relationship with a qualifying partner.

48. Section 117B(5) provides that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  Having limited leave to remain  means  having  a
    precarious immigration status.  I therefore must attach  little  weight
    to the private life established by the Appellant between 2005 and  2009
    when he had limited leave to remain as a student.

49. In considering Article 8, I consider not only the Appellant,  but  also
    his partner.  She has only ever had limited leave to remain, which  was
    initially granted on the basis of her marriage to a person  settled  in
    the UK, and subsequently because she was to be a witness in a  criminal
    trial.  She has therefore only ever had a precarious immigration status
    and currently has no leave.

50. I  accept  that  the  Appellant's  partner  has  mental  health  issues
    commencing in  2013.   I  have  considered  all  the  medical  evidence
    submitted on her behalf.  The most  recent  letter  from  a  consultant
    psychiatrist was written by Dr Alachkar on 24th August 2017,  addressed
    to the partner's general practitioner.  This confirms  a  diagnosis  of
    recurrent   depressive   disorder,   confirming   moderate   depression
    currently, mainly related to uncertainty about the  immigration  status
    of herself and the Appellant.  Medication is 200 mg  Sertraline  daily.
    There is reference to the partner, a few  weeks  prior  to  the  letter
    being written, taking an overdose of  between  fifteen-twenty  sleeping
    tablets.  The Appellant made her vomit.  Dr Alachkar confirms that  the
    partner remains at high risk of suicide if a decision  was  made  which
    required her to be parted from the Appellant.   Dr  Alachkar  confirmed
    that the partner was to be referred for further counselling.

51. The most recent medical letter is written by Dr  Arora,  the  partner's
    GP, who has been involved with her care since December 2016.  Dr  Arora
    makes reference to acute anxiety and severe depression with  a  history
    of past and recent suicide attempts, and ongoing post traumatic stress.



52. The medical evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  partner  has  not
    been challenged by the Respondent and is therefore accepted.

53. The view of the medical professionals involved  with  the  partner,  is
    that there would be an increased risk of suicide if the partner had  to
    be separated from the Appellant.  The  Appellant's  case  is  that  his
    partner would not be allowed to live with him in Pakistan.  That  I  do
    not accept.

54. The visa policy of the Pakistani government is set out in a document at
    page 5g of the Appellant's bundle.  Basic requirements for obtaining  a
    visa are to have a valid passport, which is  valid  for  at  least  one
    year.  The Appellant stated that his passport and that of  his  partner
    are held by the Home Office.  There was no indication that they are not
    valid.  In the event that the partner does not have a  valid  passport,
    there is no reason why there should not be an  application  for  a  new
    passport to be issued.  The partner would be eligible for  a  visitor's
    visa to Pakistan.  These visas can be extended.

55. The Appellant and his partner have entered  into  an  Islamic  marriage
    which would be recognised in Pakistan.  If they  produce  passports  by
    way of identification, no reason has been given as to why  they  should
    not be issued with a Nikah.

56. I therefore find that the Appellant has not  proved  that  his  partner
    would be refused entry into Pakistan.  I also find that  the  Appellant
    has not proved that his marriage would not be recognised in Pakistan.

57. It has not been suggested on behalf of the Appellant that  his  partner
    would not receive the appropriate medical treatment  in  Pakistan.   It
    has not been contended that treatment is not available, and it has  not
    been contended that  the  medication  she  currently  receives  is  not
    available.  If the  partner  chose  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  the
    Appellant, there would be no separation, and therefore medical evidence
    indicates that there would be no  adverse  effect  upon  the  partner's
    mental health.  I  find  that  any  medication  and  medical  treatment
    required by the partner would be available in Pakistan.

58. I have considered all of the evidence, and considered that evidence  in
    the round.  The Appellant would not be at risk.  He is highly educated.
     I accept that the Appellant and his partner wish to remain in the  UK,
    and I have taken that into account.  However, I have  also  taken  into
    account the need to maintain effective  immigration  control,  and  the
    weight that must be attached to  effective  immigration  control.   The
    Appellant and his partner  currently  cannot  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules in order to be granted leave to remain.  The Appellant could find
    employment in Pakistan and provide for  himself  and  his  partner.   I
    therefore conclude that the Respondent has  proved  that  the  decision
    made in the Appellant's case is proportionate, and if the Appellant was
    removed from the UK, his partner could accompany him, and  there  would
    be no breach of Article 8.  Therefore the appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it was set aside.  I substitute  a  fresh  decision
as follows.

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


Anonymity

The FtT did not make an anonymity direction.  However, I have  decided  that
such a direction is appropriate because  this  appeal  involves  considering
the mental health of the Appellant's partner.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of The Tribunal (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date         11th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date         11th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


