
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 February 2016                      |On 8 March 2016                     |
|Prepared 10 February 2016                |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                   miss lk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Davies, Blunden &
Evans
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Namibia, date  of  birth  17  August  1985
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 7 January 2015 to make
    removal directions.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge M
    Whitcombe (the judge)  who  on  29  June  2015  dismissed  the  appeal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade,
    on 23 July 2015, and the Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 5 August
    2015.

2.   The  grounds  on  which  permission  was  given  did  not  address  the
    particular grounds except in a generality.  The appeal proceeded on the
    basis that all grounds were regarded as arguable.

3.   The principal ground of attack was that the  judge's  consideration  of
    the sufficiency of protection was at fault.  There had been  a  failure
    to  properly  consider  and  explain  why  it  was  decided  there  was
    sufficient protection to which the Appellant could have recourse.   The
    second ground was a challenge to the judge finding that  the  Appellant
    did not fall within  a  particular  social  group  by  his  failure  to
    properly consider a USDOS Report  for  2013  which  it  was  said  "...
    provides  that  there  is  discrimination   against   women   including
    discrimination and violence based  on  sexual  orientation  and  gender
    identity".  The third ground was that the judge had  failed  to  assess
    the risks the Appellant  feared  subjectively  or  otherwise  from  the
    friends and family of a Mr Alfons:  The man who it was said had over  a
    number of years pestered, threatened and  used  conduct  equivalent  of
    domestic violence against the Appellant.  Finally, it was said that the
    judge had failed to consider this matter under either paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules (the Rules) or with  reference  to  Article  8
    ECHR outside of the Rules.

4.   Having heard the parties' submissions I was satisfied  that  the  judge
    received limited evidence. Ms Iqbal, doing the best she could with  the
    material, did not have any skeleton argument or notes of how the matter
    was put by Counsel, Mr D Rehman, to the judge.  The grounds  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal against the judge's decisions  were  settled
    by Miss Yong of Counsel, who did not appear before the judge.  Ms Iqbal
    has essentially taken over those  grounds  upon  which  permission  was
    generally given.  It was wholly unclear what material, in  relation  to
    the USDOS Report of 2013 or indeed any other background material, in  a
    slim twenty page bundle submitted by  the  Appellant  was  relevant  or
    relied upon.  I do not know and I do not speculate but it seemed to  me
    that the judge (D 47, 48 and  49)  had  limited  material  before  him,
    insufficient to establish a particular  social  group.   In  any  event
    there was a further consideration that the  person  who  the  Appellant
    feared, plainly a non-state agent on any view, sought to establish  the
    PSG by reference  to  the  fact  of  persecution  rather  than  to  the
    generality of the position as in Shah and Islam  [1999]  UKHL  20  that
    there are immutable characteristics to show the disadvantage  to  women
    as women on their own or otherwise in Namibia.

5.   Accordingly as a matter of structure in the decision it  did  not  seem
    to me that  the  judge  failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  why  the
    particular Convention reason relied upon was not engaged.

6.   As to the threat from family and friends of Mr Alfons the fact was  the
    judge dealt with those issues as raised in the  evidence.   Plainly  if
    there was a material threat it had existed  over  many  years  and  yet
    apart from two brief incidents nothing  appears  to  have  happened  in
    terms of serious action and persecutory ill-treatment.  Accordingly  it
    seemed to me that whilst it might have  been  helpful  to  have  fuller
    reasons why the judge was not concerned about those  threats  or  fears
    from the family the absence of that does not suggest that  a  different
    result was likely based on a source of fear outside  of  Mr  Alfons  or
    that his conduct was condoned or permitted by the state.

7.    In the circumstances it did not seem to me that the Original  Tribunal
    made any error of law in the approach to  either  identifying  the  PSG
    under the Refugee Convention or indeed those who posed  a  threat.   On
    the contrary in fact the judge in a significant  number  of  paragraphs
    addressed the factual basis of the Appellant's  claim,  the  activities
    taking place, the police taking action against Mr Alfons,  as  well  as
    investigating, bringing him before the court  and,  in  the  course  of
    their dealings with Mr Alfons, shooting him in such a way as to require
    hospital treatment  for  a  period  of  one  to  two  months.   In  the
    circumstances therefore it did not seem to me that the judge has failed
    to  address  relevant  information  relating  to  the  sufficiency   of
    protection. In the  circumstances,  although  it  is  not  specifically
    argued, the judge has addressed the sufficiency of internal  relocation
    and its reasonableness.  The judge did find the  Appellant  a  credible
    witness and largely accepted the facts as to both what has happened  to
    her and to her fears which were  plainly a relevant  consideration  but
    it did  not  through  the  acceptance  of  facts,  determine  that  the
    Appellant was in need of  refugee  status  or  humanitarian  protection
    under the Qualification Directive.

8.   The position therefore  turned  to  whether  or  not,  looking  at  the
    decision as a whole, the judge has failed to address material arguments
    being advanced.  I did not find the grounds demonstrated  that  matters
    were raised by Mr Rehman or which had not been  sufficiently  addressed
    or that the judge has not properly, in the context of the case,  looked
    at  both  the  claims  under  the  Refugee   Convention,   Humanitarian
    Protection under the provisions of the Rules and Articles 2 /3  of  the
    ECHR in terms of real risk on return.

9.   The judge did address the issue of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of
    the Rules in the determination (paragraph 57 and  following).   In  the
    circumstances it did not seem to  me  that  the  grounds  disclose  any
    procedural error of law in relation to that assessment bearing in  mind
    Mr Rehman was not suggesting that the provisions under the  Rules  were
    met and not withstanding the intention of more  recent  case  law,  the
    judge did go on to consider Article 8 seemingly outside  of  the  Rules
    and for the reasons given concluded that Article 8 was not engaged.  In
    the circumstances I do not find that  the  four  grounds  of  challenge
    demonstrate any error of law by the Original Tribunal.

10.  The appeal is dismissed.



ANONYMITY ORDER

11.  On 29 June 2015 the  judge  imposed  an  anonymity  order  and  in  the
    circumstances of the case it seems to me appropriate that such an order
    should continue.


Signed                                  Date 27 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

