
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00244/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd September 2016                    |On 4th October 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  enea [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Scott of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision by the Respondent to refuse his application
    for asylum in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal accepting that the Appellant was the  subject  of  a
    blood feud and deciding that there was not a sufficiency of  protection
    in Albania and that it was not reasonable for the Appellant to relocate
    within Albania.  The Respondent now appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    erred in concluding that the Appellant could  not  internally  relocate
    within Albania.  The Secretary of State contends that the  judge  erred
    in referring to the Appellant as "a person  who  had  been  trafficked"
    [27] when it is not the Appellant's case that he  was  trafficked.  The
    criminals who exploited the Appellant in Brussels were not involved  in
    his departure from Albania nor were they involved in  his  movement  to
    the UK and therefore  his  case  was  not  that  he  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  It is contended that the judge  has  provided  no  lawful
    explanation as to how a criminal gang in Brussels, who had no prior and
    no subsequent dealings with the Appellant, would have any knowledge  at
    all that he had returned to Albania.  It is further contended that  the
    judge makes no findings as to whether this criminal gang had  any  link
    to Tirana at all.  It is contended that the judge has failed to explain
    why the Appellant who plainly escaped from the gang in Brussels and who
    has by choice limited counselling received in the  UK  is  so  mentally
    affected as to prevent him from looking for work and  accommodation  on
    return in Tirana.  It is submitted that there is no engagement with any
    background evidence about the levels of male trafficking in Albania  or
    any finding on potential services supplied by the state or NGOs.  It is
    contended that in the absence of such  findings  the  judge's  findings
    with respect to internal relocation are wholly unlawful.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the judge made a mistake of fact in finding that the Appellant had been
    trafficked because this does not appear to have been his case.  It  was
    also considered to be arguable that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  would  be  vulnerable   to
    exploitation and would be unable  to  access  accommodation  or  obtain
    employment.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Norton relied on the grounds and  submitted
    that the judge had failed to apply the correct test in  paragraph  [27]
    based on his error in relation to his mistake of fact  in  relation  to
    the Appellant being a victim of trafficking.

 6. Mr Scott submitted that the issue is whether it is reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to internally relocate, the judge correctly  identified  this
    in paragraph [27].  He submitted that it is clear from  paragraph  [13]
    where the judge sets out the background to  the  Appellant's  departure
    from Albania that the judge  was  aware  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    trafficked.  He submitted that the judge concludes  the  discussion  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim by stating  that  he  was  abused  in
    Brussels whilst in transit to the UK.  The judge found at  the  end  of
    paragraph [26] that there is not a sufficiency of protection in Albania
    and he submitted that at paragraph [27] it is clear that the judge  had
    a correct understanding of the test in relation to internal relocation.
     The judge  at  paragraph  [27]  discussed  the  Appellant's  age,  the
    physical abuse he had been subjected to  in  Brussels,  his  access  to
    accommodation and maintenance and the risk of further exploitation upon
    return to Albania.  He also submitted that the judge may  have  had  in
    mind that the Appellant would be vulnerable and at risk of  trafficking
    upon return to Albania in light of the psychological effect upon him of
    the violence inflicted upon him.  He submitted that this may have  been
    why the judge referred to the Appellant in connection with trafficking.
     However he submitted that this is not the core of the decision and the
    judge does not find as a matter of fact that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked.  He submitted that there was sufficient evidence before the
    judge  that  the  gang  who  abused  the  Appellant  in  Brussels  were
    criminals.  He submitted that any mistake of fact was not material.

Error of Law

 7. In his consideration of internal relocation at paragraph [27] the judge
    said:

         "Whilst it may be possible for the Appellant to internally relocate
         to Tirana the primary question  is  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable for him to do so given his age as an 18 year old and  as
         a person who had been trafficked and had been subject, as I find he
         was, to physical abuse as a child, probably  of  a  sexual  nature,
         whilst in the hotel in Brussels.  If returned to  Tirana  he  would
         not have any accommodation, maintenance or family support  to  turn
         to and would be vulnerable to further exploitation as I  find  that
         he is a person  who  had  suffered  exploitation  from  traffickers
         already during the ten day period that he stayed in  the  hotel  in
         Brussels.  I find that there is not a fine line  between  a  person
         having just turned 18 and the vulnerability of a  minor  under  18.
         This is a somewhat artificial distinction which would  not  protect
         the Appellant from abuse in my view."

 8. Going on at paragraph [28] to  highlight  factors  that  indicate  that
    there is still  an  ongoing  blood  feud  the  judge  pointed  to  "his
    experiences  and  vulnerability  because  of  the  abuse  suffered   in
    Brussels".

 9. I accept that the judge appears to have  made  a  mistake  of  fact  in
    relation to his reference to the Appellant as a  person  who  had  been
    trafficked.

10. Whilst there is no dispute that it was not the Appellant's case that he
    had been trafficked, he did say that that he was exploited by  Albanian
    criminals in a hotel in Brussels staying in the hotel arranged for  him
    by the agent who arranged his journey to the UK and that  these  people
    came and went from his room when they wanted and that this group  found
    out where he lived and names and addresses of people at home  and  they
    took his phone (asylum interview Q110-125).

11. Looking at this evidence therefore it is  clear  that  the  Appellant's
    case was not that he was trafficked but that he  was  exploited  by  an
    Albanian criminal gang who knew about his family and where he was from.
    I am satisfied that the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had
    suffered from exploitation in Brussels and that he would be  vulnerable
    in Albania as a result of this exploitation to be one open  to  him  on
    the basis of this evidence. The erroneous use of the words 'trafficked'
    and 'traffickers' in  paragraph  27  does  not  undermine  the  Judge's
    conclusion.

12. Mr Scott referred to the Albanian Operational  Guidance  Notes  of  May
    2013 where at paragraph 2.3.5 it is stated that it may be practical for
    applicants in some categories who  may  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in one area to relocate to other  parts  of  Albania  where
    they would not have a well-founded fear and taking into  account  their
    personal circumstances it would not be unduly harsh to expect  them  to
    do so.  It states that careful  consideration  must  be  given  to  the
    relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on  a  case-by-case
    basis taking full  account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
    particular claimant.  It is stated that consideration should  be  given
    to  the   age,   gender,   health,   ethnicity,   religion,   financial
    circumstances and support network of the Appellant as well as security,
    human rights and socio-economic conditions  in  the  proposed  area  of
    relocation including the Appellant's ability to sustain themselves.

13. It is clear that the judge did consider the  factors  set  out  in  the
    guidance  in  considering  the  question  of  internal  relocation   in
    paragraph 27.

14. In my view the judge took full  account  of  the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances  and  placed  particular  weight   on   the   Appellant's
    vulnerability in light of the exploitation he had suffered in  Brussels
    and I am satisfied that the  judge  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  his
    finding that it would be  unduly  harsh  and  not  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to relocate within Albania.

15. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge made no material  error
    of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material error  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
