
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00972/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Date Sent                  |
|On 7th June 2013                                |On 8th July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                               mr Ehsan Zahedi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Jackson & Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Mr Ehsan Zahedi date of  birth  21st  July  1981,  is  a
    citizen of Iran.

 2. We have considered whether any of the parties require the protection of
    an anonymity direction.  Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
    all the evidence presented we do not consider it necessary to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Law.  The judge dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent to remove the Appellant from the
    United  Kingdom  after  refusing  the  Appellant  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or other relief under the ECHR  or  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge heard the appeal on 19th March 2013.   Permission  to  appeal
    against that decision was granted on 24th April 2013.  Thus the  matter
    now appears before us to determine in the first instance whether or not
    there was an error of law in the original determination.

 4. The first point made by the Grounds of Appeal is  that  it  is  alleged
    that the judge failed to make clear findings of fact and failed to take
    account of evidence.  That in part relates to the Appellant's claim  to
    be a tattoo artist.  It is the  Appellant's  claim  that  as  a  tattoo
    artist he would be at risk on being returned to  Iran  as  tattoos  are
    considered un-Islamic and the Appellant claims  that  those  that  have
    tattoos and those that tattoo individuals are at risk  of  mistreatment
    and harm from the authorities within Iran.

 5. That in part raises two issues.  Firstly whether or not  the  Appellant
    is a tattoo artist and secondly whether tattoo artists and persons with
    tattoos are at risk by reason of either of tattooing  others  or  being
    tattooed.

 6. With regard to  the  second  question  the  Appellant's  representative
    sought to rely upon extracts from the  bundle  of  documents  submitted
    before Judge Law.  The pages specifically referred to are page 79,  81,
    84 and 85.

 7. With regard to page 79 that indicates that Iran has banned tight  jeans
    and tattoos at some universities.  The specific reference provides:-

         "Iran has enforced a stricter Islamic dress code  at  a  number  of
         universities including a ban on female students wearing long nails,
         bright clothes and tattoos, a local news agency reported on Monday.
          ...

         The new rules ban women from 'wearing caps or hats without scarves,
         tight and short jeans, and body piercing,'  except  earrings,  Fars
         said.

         It said tattoos, long nails, tooth gems, tight overcoats and bright
         clothes were also banned."

 8. The ban appears specifically to relate to women.  Lower down  the  page
    the reference to male students makes no reference  at  all  to  tattoos
    being banned in respect of men.

 9. Page 81 deals with the specific arrest of twelve individuals  allegedly
    promoting Satanism.  That involves the promotion  of  Satanism  through
    underground music and the production of blasphemous video clips.  There
    is no specific reference to Satanism involving tattoos within the cited
    passage.  Page 84 is a similar reference with regard to  that  incident
    which again makes no reference to tattoos.

10. The references relied upon to prove that individuals with  tattoos  are
    at  risk  within  Iran  does  not  support  that  contention.   Certain
    universities have banned women with tattoos but otherwise there  is  no
    reference to arrest of individuals merely by reason of  the  fact  that
    they have tattoos.  The references otherwise indicate that  individuals
    that are thugs or otherwise involved in criminal activity,  who  happen
    to also have tattoos, have been arrested  but  the  arrest  is  not  by
    reason of the fact that  they  have  tattoos.   Further  there  was  no
    evidence at all that those that are tattoo artists  were  arrested  for
    tattooing individuals.

11. Without the evidence to support the contention that tattoo artists  are
    at risk the challenge to Judge Law's determination in that  respect  is
    not made out.  It is to be noted that the Appellant wanted the judge to
    look at his "Facebook page" to confirm that he was  in  fact  a  tattoo
    artist. Before us issues were raised  relating  to  his  facebook  page
    resulting in us looking at the page on-line.

12. Besides the details with regard to the Appellant being a tattoo  artist
    there were other details on the Facebook page.  An examination  of  the
    Facebook page indicated  that  the  Appellant  had  on  and  after  8th
    November 2012 uploaded new photographs to his  Facebook  page  and  had
    answered a series of comments by individuals  about  his  new  Facebook
    page. There was nothing on facebook, which could impact on the  judge's
    assessment taking account of the matters set out above.

13. It was also asserted in the Grounds of Appeal that Judge Law failed  to
    make a finding as to whether or not the Appellant was an employee of  a
    company and the editor of the company's magazine.   With  respect  that
    does not take account of what Judge Law says in his determination.   It
    is evident from paragraph 26 of the determination  that  the  judge  is
    proceeding on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  in  fact  been  the
    publisher of a magazine within his workplace.  He takes account of  the
    fact that the authorities had checked the contents of the magazine  and
    had not questioned the contents of the magazine.   The  judge  examined
    then whether or not the claimed consequences from the  Appellant  being
    an editor were credible.  The judge finds that  he  does  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant would be blamed and did  not  find  in  the
    circumstances that the claimed raid of the Appellant's home  had  taken
    place. It is clear however that the judge was attempting to assess  the
    Appellant's story on its own terms.

14. The judge had proceeded on the basis that the Appellant  had  been  the
    editor of the company magazine but found that others had considered the
    poems submitted by the Appellant.  Those others had passed the poem for
    publication.  As Sepah had not attended to arrest the Appellant and  as
    the Appellant himself says that the poem is not anti-Islamic  there  is
    no evidence that the Appellant was  suffering  any  problems  from  the
    authorities by reason of his position of being an editor of a magazine.

15. We have to say that a careful examination of the  Appellant's  Facebook
    page certainly indicates that  the  Appellant,  who  was  allegedly  in
    hiding at the time, was managing to update his Facebook page  with  new
    photographs and answering comments from individuals about his  Facebook
    page without any apparent qualms.   The  Appellant  had  asserted  that
    Sepah had raided his home and had taken away his computer.  Sepah could
    have access to his Facebook page and could therefore be  aware  of  the
    activities of the Appellant.  Such conduct on the part of the Appellant
    we do not find would be consistent  with  an  individual  that  was  in
    hiding and seeking to avoid the authorities.   This  evidence  was  not
    before Judge Law, but it gives no cause to doubt his conclusions.

16. However Judge Law did note that the Appellant  had  certainly  gone  to
    Tehran and had openly gone into  the  Italian  Embassy  and  sought  to
    obtain a visa for Italy.  The judge did not consider that that was  the
    actions of an individual that was in hiding.

17. The judge has given valid reasons for finding that the  Sepah  did  not
    raid the Appellant's home and seize the Appellant's computer  and  seek
    to arrest the Appellant.

18. That raid in part arose from the assertion that the Appellant would  be
    seen as a supporter of Satanism because he had tattooed certain people.
     However there was no evidence of arrest of others, for  example  those
    bearing these tattoos.  The judge again did not find that the Appellant
    was in any way associated with Satanism or devil worship.

19. In the circumstances the judge has carefully assessed the evidence that
    was presented before him.  He has made findings of fact  based  on  the
    evidence and has acted upon the basis that the Appellant was the editor
    of the magazine in question.  The judge thereafter  has  concluded  the
    Appellant was not at risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  by  reason
    thereof.  Those were findings of fact that the judge  was  entitled  to
    make on the basis of the evidence.  There is  accordingly  no  material
    error of law within the determination.

20. The appeal is therefore dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
