
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00065/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Upper Tribunal IAC Newport           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2015                            |On 11 December 2015           |
|Prepared 2 November 2015                      |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              miss fenqing lin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rhys Davies, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
     (Balham High Street)
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of the People's Republic of China (PRC)  date
    of birth 18 June 1983 appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated
    12 December 2014 to make removal directions following the service of  a
    form IS151A on 26 June 2013 following the refusal  of  an  asylum/human
    rights based claim to remain.

2.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Maciel (the Judge) who in a decision  re-promulgated  on  21  May  2015
    dismissed the appeal with reference to the Refugee Convention and under
    Article 8 and 3 ECHR claims.    The Judge also  for  the  avoidance  of
    doubt concluded that the Appellant did  not  qualify  for  Humanitarian
    Protection and a claim based on  private  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was dismissed.

4.   Mr Rhys Davies appeared for the Appellant  before  the  Judge  made  it
    plain that the issue of the best interests of the child  had  not  been
    canvassed before the Judge (Grounds of Appeal ground  1  paragraph  4).
    The child, date of birth 29 July 2013, had been born to  the  Appellant
    in the United Kingdom and had not as yet established her nationality by
    reference to the PRC.

5.   However the principal grounds of a challenge to  the  Judge's  decision
    set out in what was called ground 1 at paragraphs 4  to  7  essentially
    sought to argue a  number  of  points  of  which  some  have  not  been
    effectively pursued before the Judge.  It was noteworthy that there are
    references in the grounds to a family planning scheme which it was said
    the Appellant breached (see paragraphs 5 and 6).  There was not on  the
    face of the evidence a formal family planning scheme for a  child  born
    out of wedlock but the background information indicated that  a  parent
    who did so may have to pay a  financial  penalty  by  way  of  a  civil
    process.

6.   The Judge at paragraph 34 of the determination concluded amongst  other
    things

         "I've considered the risk  of  prosecution  on  the  basis  of  the
         Appellant falling foul of the Chinese One Child Policy.   I  accept
         the Appellant has a child out of wedlock.  I  have  considered  the
         background evidence.  I find that the Appellant  is  likely  to  be
         fined.  However her child will be recognised as a Chinese  national
         and will be registered by the authorities."

7.   The submissions by Mr Rhys Davies were made  with  reference  to  later
    Country Information and Guidance of July 2015 which was not before  the
    Judge and nor was a similar provision confirmed which the Judge  seemed
    to have accepted namely that it was unlawful for an unmarried mother to
    give birth and doing so could result in a fine.  The reference for that
    comes from the OECD Development Centre Social Institutions  and  Gender
    Index China 2014 but that was as far as the matter went.

8.   It was said by reference to paragraph 5.6.3 of the OECD document, on  a
    similar basis to that which had previously been, that children born out
    of wedlock were still regarded with pity and distain, teased at school,
    single  mothers  subject  to  discrimination  when  accessing  housing,
    education and medical services.  The  quotation  is  sourced  from  the
    Australian Refugee Review Tribunal China: Family Planning 8 March 2013.



9.   Mr Rhys Davies said it followed from that the Judge, assuming  he  knew
    something of these matters and assuming the issue had been raised  with
    him which it was not, should have gone on to consider what  effects  of
    societal discrimination might have in terms of the  best  interests  of
    the child.

10.  I conclude that the Judge made  no  error  of  law  for  the  following
    reasons.   First,  the  matter  was  not  raised  with  the  Judge   in
    submissions or in the evidence advanced and therefore I do not see that
    he can be criticised for failing to address it.  Secondly, it  did  not
    seem to me a Robinson obvious point that needed to  be  addressed  once
    the Judge found as a fact in paragraph 34 that the Appellant had  given
    birth to a child out of wedlock.  Thirdly, the matter was not  referred
    to in a  skeleton  argument  or  in  submissions  made  to  the  Judge.
    Fourthly, there was no reference raised  by  the  Presenting  Officer's
    written submissions submitted on the day,  touching  upon  this  issue.
    Therefore it appeared that it was simply not a matter that the  parties
    were expecting to or did pursue.

11.  It was clear that the Reasons for Refusal Letter  did  address  Section
    55 BCIA 2004 from 2009 and in the circumstances given the  age  of  the
    child, the availability of PRC nationality, the evidence simply did not
    show that either societal discrimination gave rise to the real risk  of
    adverse effects on such a young child who was just over the  age  of  2
    and was being brought up by a Chinese speaking mother.

12.   Therefore even if there had been a  failure  to  consider  Section  55
    BCIA 2000 which of course identified the importance of the child's best
    interests as a consideration nevertheless  there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence that gave rise to the suggestion that any  different  decision
    could reasonably have been reached by another Tribunal looking at  this
    matter for their own part.

13.  In these circumstances therefore  I  find  that  there  are  no  issues
    arising from the Judge's failure to address Section 55 of  the  Act  in
    terms of the child's best interest  and  no  evidence  which  showed  a
    different decision, had it been considered, would be reached. There was
    no material error of law that would have made any difference.

14.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal of  the  Appellant
    is dismissed.

15.  Given the age of the Appellant no anonymity direction is  necessary  or
appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 2 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 2 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
