
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00377/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2013                                |On 30 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                                    M R L
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination incorporates (with appropriate amendment)  an  error
    of law decision and direction sent to the parties on 31 May  2013.  The
    parties have responded to my  direction  with  further  argument  on  a
    ground on which permission to appeal was sought  but  not  granted.   I
    have also made an anonymity order as this  appeal  involves  a  child's
    interests.

 2. The appellant, a national of Guinea born  25  September  1979,  appeals
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Heynes  who
    dismissed her appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds against a decision  refusing  to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave to remain for reasons given in  a  determination  dated  9  March
    2011.

 3. The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on  26  November  2009.
    She gave birth to a daughter on 10 June 2010.  The appellant  has  HIV.
    At the time of the hearing of the appeal it  was  unclear  whether  her
    daughter had acquired this infection. The basis of her asylum claim was
    that she would face mistreatment in Guinea  due  to  imputed  political
    opinion.

 4. The grounds of application argue:

         "(iv) The judge erred in law in his approach to the best  interests
             of the child with reference to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and
             further erred in failing to take proper account of all aspects
             of the appellant's private life both as to her  mental  health
             and a failure  to  take  into  account  all  the  evidence  in
             reaching adverse credibility findings in respect of the asylum
             claim.  There was a failure to consider  the  situation  of  a
             single woman with HIV returning to Guinea  and  a  failure  to
             bring her HIV status in the private life equation.

         (v)  The judge erred in failing to take account of the Secretary of
             State's  failure  to  exercise  direction  in  favour  of  the
             appellant  under  Rule  395C  in  the  light  of   the   clear
             compassionate  circumstances.   The   Secretary   of   State's
             representative had taken instruction to inform the judge  that
             her policy was not issue a removal decision until  all  appeal
             rights were exhausted which was clear wrong with reference  to
             the decision in Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ 159.  Removal  would  be
             way of Section 10 in  the  light  of  the  previous  grant  of
             dictionary leave to the appellant both of which qualified  for
             consideration of paragraph 395C factors and the  Secretary  of
             State was therefore required to give this consideration. There
             were clearly compassionate factors in the case which cried out
             for clear demonstration of their  proper  application  and  no
             reasonable judge could  fail to see that these could   justify
             the exercise of discretion in the appellant's favour with  the
             threshold being lower than that for Article 8.  It  is  argued
             the judge should  have  allowed  the  appeal  insofar  as  the
             respondent should have exercised her discretion differently.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart  on
    30 March 2011 after observing that much of the grounds  of  application
    were taken up with extracts from established case law and otherwise  in
    substance no more than a  series  of  disagreements.   He  went  on  to
    observe:

         "3.  In a very detailed and thorough determination, the Immigration
             Judge adrese and made  findings   on  the  significant  issues
             before him. the grounds claim that the Immigration Judge erred
             in failing to apply the law as set out in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
             UKSC  4  and  erred  in  failing  to  take  account   of   the
             respondent's failure to exercise her discretion in  favour  of
             the appellant under Rule 395(c).

         4.   The grounds fail to explain how or in what  circumstances  the
             respondent was obligated to consider paragraph 395(c)  bearing
             in  mind  the  application   that  had  been   made  and   the
             respondent's assessment of the  appellant's  circumstances  as
             set out in the refusal letter. Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ 159.  Nor
             do the grounds  explain  how  or  in  what  circumstances  the
             Immigration Judge arguably erred in taking  into  account  the
             appellant's circumstances bearing  in  mind  the  findings  at
             paragraphs 29 to 53 of the determination.

         5.   As regards ZH, the Immigration Judge  carried  out  a  careful
             assessment  reminding   himself  of  the  criteria  of   'best
             interests' at paragraphs  32 to 325 of the determination.

         6.   The evidential basis of the findings of the Immigration  Judge
             was sufficient. The Immigration Judge gave sufficient  reasons
             for conclusions that were open to  him  on  the  evidence  and
             disclosed no arguable error of law."

 6. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal in which it is argued
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart had totally failed to engage  with
    the grounds., it is argued that  no  reasonable  reading  of  ZH  would
    entitle a judge to take (such an) approach  to  such  to  the  "primary
    consideration" of  the  best  interests.  The  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Peart is also challenged with reference to  EO  (Turkey)
    [2007[ UKAIT 00062 and TE (Eritrea) EWCA Civ 174.

 7. In granting permission to appeal Senior Immigration  Judge  Storey  had
    this to say:

         "Save on one matter, I concur with the  judge who refused the first
         application for permission to appeal in finding  that  the  grounds
         are in substance no more than a series of  disagreements  with  the
         IJ's findings of fact. I agree in particular that the determination
         demonstrates  a proper assessment of the  ZH issues. As regards  ZH
         the grounds fail to note the important fact that in this case there
         was no British citizen or settled  parent  affording  a  connection
         with the UK.  The para 395C issue raised in the grounds  is however
          a different kettle of fish. The IJ did not deal with this  at  all
         save to note that it had been raised by the appellant (see para  5)
         and further, did not indicate why he thought  that  paragraph  395C
         considerations could not lead to  a  different  result  from  those
         considered under Article 8.  That failure was arguably an error  of
         law."

 8. Mr Nicholson also drew my attention to a letter  from  his  instructing
    solicitors dated 16 June 2011 addressed to the Upper Tribunal. In  this
    it is stated that they  would  like  to  renew  the  grounds  submitted
    regarding ZH (Tanzania) and Section 55 and it is respectively submitted
    that IJ Peart and SIJ  Storey  had  both  erred  in  stating  that  the
    findings could  only be attributed  to  children  in  the  UK  who  are
    British citizens.  It is also argued that SIJ Storey erred  in  stating
    that the grounds failed to note that there no British citizen  children
    or settled parents in the case and it is argued that the obligations of
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  apply
    to both British citizen children and non-British citizen  children  who
    are resident in the UK. The hearing began with a consideration  of  the
    jurisprudential landscape regarding the segregation  of  variation  and
    removal decisions and the role of the now superseded paragraph 395C  in
    that context.

 9. I observed to the parties that SIJ Storey may  have  misunderstood  the
    reference in [5] of the determination which was to  paragraph  339C  of
    the Immigration Rules in the context of  humanitarian protection.   The
    determination did not make any  reference  at  all  to  paragraph  359C
    considerations and it was not at all clear to me  whether  the  parties
    themselves were aware that such considerations had  been  addressed  by
    the Secretary of State in the refusal letter at [29]  even  though  the
    decision was a variation one.  Mr  Nicholson  submitted  that  what  Dr
    Storey had said was that paragraph 395C should have  been   considered.
    He also submitted at the outset of the  hearing that all grounds remain
    arguable having regard to Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey's  decision  in
    Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) and the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Kizhakudan [2012] EWCA Civ 566.

10. Remaining with the  issues  surrounding  paragraph  395C  Mr  Nicholson
    argued that there had been a challenge before the judge to the validity
    of the immigration decision based on the current case law. He contended
    that the observations of the judge at [8] of the determination did  not
    accurately reflect what he had argued.  The judge had stated at [8]

         "Mr Nicholson raised the issue of whether there was a valid  appeal
         before me on the basis that no IS151A or B had  been  issued  since
         those that had been produced  after  the  appellant's  unsuccessful
         asylum claim. There is no merit in this argument. The appellant had
         applied for a variation of leave. An immigration decision was  made
         refusing that application.  The appellant lodged an appeal  against
         that decision.  The appeal before me is plainly valid."

11. According to a note he had sent his instructing  solicitors  after  the
    hearing he had argued before the judge that it was wrong  to   have   a
    two step process. This was an  academic  point  as  the  appellant  was
    entitled to have her circumstances considered  under  395C.   What  the
    judge had recorded was  not  the  point  made  regarding  the  need  to
    consider whether there should have been  a combined decision.

12. Candidly however Mr Nicholson accepted that  subsequent  decisions  had
    demonstrated that the judge  was  correct  to  proceed  as  he  had  in
    deciding that the immigration decision was  validly  made.   He  agreed
    that there remains a removal decision  outstanding  for  the  appellant
    although maintained that  to  that  extent  his  application  had  been
    successful.

13. It has to be said there is some confusion in Mr  Nicholson's  approach.
    The ground of his application to the First-tier  Tribunal  argued  that
    there had been an invalid decision on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take account of the Secretary of State's failure to  exercise
    her discretion in favour of  the  appellant  under  Rule  395C.   As  I
    reminded the parties, that exercise had been  exercised.   The  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal also appears to have been  predicated
    on the basis that there had been no such exercise by the  Secretary  of
    State.  If this was the basis on  which the paragraph  395C  issue  had
    been raised, it appears to have been based on a misconception.

14. If it is the case as Mr Nicholson now submits, the judge  misunderstood
    the submission made which was that the decision was invalid because  it
    was a segregated one, as he  himself  has  acknowledged,  there  is  no
    longer any merit in that argument.  See Patel v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    741.

15.  Whether  it  is  possible  to  rescue  from  Mr  Nicholson's   renewed
    application  the  argument  that  paragraph  395C  as  raised  by   the
    respondent should have been  exercised differently is one which he  did
    not consider necessary to pursue.  He accepted that the  appellant  was
    still entitled to consideration of her circumstances  under  Article  8
    before a further decision is made. Such a decision will  need  to  take
    into account as indicated by Mr Nicholson of a further  change  in  the
    appellant's circumstances which includes the  birth  of  an  additional
    child.

16. Accordingly I am satisfied that no error of law has been  made  out  on
    the basis on which permission was granted in the light of  matters  now
    conceded.

17. This leaves the issue whether it was open to Mr Nicholson to renew  the
    grounds of application on which the appellant had been  unsuccessful as
    reflected in the letter from Jackson & Canter of 16 June 2011 regarding
    the application of ZH (Tanzania) and s.55.  eHe

18. I reminded Mr Nicholson that Ferrer was concerned with the  consequence
    of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
    granting permission only on limited grounds.  I refer in particular  to
    [2] of the head note.

         "2.  Where the First-tier Tribunal Judge  nevertheless  intends  to
             grant permission  not  only  in  respect  of  certain  of  the
             applicant's grounds, the  judge should  make  this  abundantly
             plan, both in his or her decision  under  Rule  25(5)  of  the
             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  by
             ensuring that the Tribunal's administrative staff send out the
             proper notice, informing the applicant of the right  to  apply
             to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on  grounds  on
             which the applicant has been  unsuccessful in the  application
             to the First-tier Tribunal."

19. The guidance continues:

         "3.  If an applicant who has been granted permission to  appeal  to
             the Upper Tribunal on limited  grounds  only  applies  to  the
             Upper Tribunal on grounds in respect of which  permission  has
             been  refused,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  considering  that
             application should not regard his or her task as  merely  some
             form of review of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  on  the
             application."

20. In the case of the appeal before me the  situation  is  different.  The
    appellant was refused permission to appeal by a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal but granted permission only on a limited ground by a Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  It is Mr Nicholson's  case  that  his  instructing
    solicitors gave notice to the Upper Tribunal in the letter that I  have
    referred to above of 16 June 2011.  This  letter  states  this  in  the
    second paragraph :

         "In addition to the enclosed IA102 form we would like to renew  the
         grounds we submitted regarding  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  s.55.   It  is
         respectfully submitted that IJ Peart and SIJ Storey both  erred  in
         stating that findings in ZH can only be attributed to  children  in
         the UK who are British citizens.   I  have  attached  our  previous
         grounds which clearly show that this is not the case."

21. The letter goes to amplify those points.

22. Two questions arise.  Does the  Upper  Tribunal  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider applications to enlarge grounds or reply on grounds for  which
    permission has not been granted where permission has been granted on  a
    limited ground and if so what is the correct procedure?

23. Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  provides
    in terms that a party to a case has a right  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and any point of law arising from a decision made by the First-
    tier Tribunal other than an  excluded  decision.   With  permission  to
    appeal having been granted even on a limited  ground,  I  am  satisfied
    that it is open to the Upper Tribunal to consider grounds that were not
    raised in the grounds of application and this would not exclude grounds
    for which permission had not been granted.  Accordingly,  my  view  has
    changed from that expressed to Mr Nicholson at the hearing particularly
    in the light of my further consideration of  the  decision  in  Ferrer.
    That decision refers to DL-H v Devon Partnership SH Trust  [2010]  UKUT
    102 (AAC) where Upper Tribunal Judge  Jacobs  in  an  appeal  from  the
    Health, Education and Social Care Chamber of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    rejected "the argument that an appeal is  necessarily  limited  to  the
    grounds in the application on  which  permission  was  given  and  that
    further permission is ruled to raise other grounds".

24. As observed by the Tribunal in Ferrer, having regard to the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Rules, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jacobs found that "as a matter of interpretation, it would not be  fair
    and just to restrict the scope of appeal to grounds in the  application
    on which permission was given".

25. The Tribunal in Ferrer went on to observe at [27]

         "In the immigration and asylum jurisdiction we do not consider that
         the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, read with the Upper
         Tribunal Rules, is such as to excuse a party from a requirement  to
         be seen and obtain the permission of the Upper Tribunal in order to
         raise grounds which are not  already  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Proceedings in immigration and asylum appeals are considerably more
         adversarial in nature than in many, at least of  the  jurisdictions
         covered by the Administrative Appeals Chamber. We do  not  consider
         that the overriding objective is, in general, likely to be advanced
         by adopting a procedure  in  which  new  grounds  can  be  advanced
         without permission of the Tribunal.  It should also be noted  that,
         in immigration and asylum appeals, the Upper Tribunal does not have
         power to strike out whole or part of a party's case, other than for
         want of jurisdiction (Rule 8(1A) and 2(A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Rules).  Further, in [30] the Tribunal made the point which appears
         on the head note quoted  above.   The  first  step  appears  to  be
         therefore a need for the appellant who  has  been  unsuccessful  on
         certain grounds to seek permission to appeal on those grounds."

26. The letter from Jackson and Cantor  is  not  on  the  court  file.   It
    postdates the grant of permission by SIJ Storey dated  5  May  2011  by
    some six weeks. However there is  an  indication  from  the  Tribunal's
    computerised file management system that the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal had been repromulgated on 8 June 2011 and a faxed copy of IA102A
    had been received from the representatives on 28 June.  I am  therefore
    satisfied that the letter was received.

27. In the light of my revised view on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal  to
    consider an enlargement of the grounds I considered the parties  should
    be given the opportunity to make further submissions if  desired.   The
    parties were reminded in my decision giving them  the  opportunity  for
    making further submissions that it is simply not the  case  that  Judge
    Storey stated that the findings in  ZH  could  only  be  attributed  to
    children in the UK who are British citizens.  It is also not  the  case
    also that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider  the  case  on
    the basis that the absence of British nationality  of  the  parent  was
    determinative  of  the  application  of  the  principles  in  ZH.    In
    particular the parties were informed of the need to consider  paragraph
    [47] of the determination.

28. I expressed the preliminary view, subject to argument, that the  points
    made in the letter of 16 June did  not  on  the  face  of  it  identify
    arguable error. In the interests of fairness however the  parties  were
    given the opportunity to make such further submissions on this point in
    writing to be received by the Upper Tribunal no later than 4 pm 10 June
    2013. Unless I considered that points raised require a resumed hearing,
    I would thereafter make my decision on whether to grant leave  for  the
    grounds to be extended as sought  by  Jackson  and  Cantor  and  decide
    whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

29. Responses have been received from the parties. For  the  appellant,  to
    the extent that Mr Nicholson has sought  to  re-open  argument  on  the
    matters on which I have already decided  there  was  no  error  of  law
    relating to the exercise of discretion by the SSHD, it was not apt  for
    him to do so. He makes the further points that: (i) the  letter  of  16
    June 2011 was not solely concerned with the apparent emphasis given  my
    SIJ Storey to the issue of British Citizenship, (ii)  the  shortcomings
    of the parents should not be held against the child with IJ Heynes  not
    seeking to conduct an assessment of the best interests and then  seeing
    whether there were factors outweighing them and (iii) the judge had not
    sought to establish the conditions the child would encounter of removed
    to Guinea.

30. The SSHD has responding in terms referring to Azimi-Moayed and others (
    decisions affecting children; onwards appeals) [2013] UKUT  00197(IAC).
    She submits that the judge has properly considered s.55 in the  context
    of Art 8.

31. The focus is on the letter of 16 June 2011. The first paragraph  is  at
    [20] supra. The second states this: " SIJ Storey errs in  stating  that
    our grounds fail to note that there is  no  British  Citizen  child  or
    settled parent in this case however our  grounds  went  to  lengths  to
    explain why the principles in ZH (Tanzania) and indeed the  obligations
    under s.55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 apply  to  both
    British Citizen children and non-  British  Citizen  children  who  are
    resident in the UK". This is followed by further reference to ZH.

32. That is the extent of the additional ground on  which  I  have  invited
    submissions. I  do  not  consider  there  is  any  arguable  basis  for
    asserting such a misconception to  SIJ  Storey  having  regard  to  the
    language of the refusal to grant permission on this ground. Turning  to
    the substance of the ground on  which  permission  was  sought,  it  is
    argued  that  there  were  no  countervailing  considerations  of   any
    substantial moment and that the factors taken into account by the judge
    were irrelevant. The judge had erred in  holding  matters  against  the
    child and in summary that he had not  considered  the  situation  of  a
    single woman with HIV returning with an illegitimate child.

33. A careful reading of the determination leads me to the  view  that  the
    grounds are no more than a disagreement and that they do  not  identify
    material error by the judge. It is clear that the judge after directing
    himself as to the law, took  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors
    including the appellant's  HIV  status  and  her  child's  illegitimacy
    before concluding what he considered the best interests were  at  [44]:
    to remain here with the appellant on the basis that if she  turned  out
    to be positive she and her mother would receive better  treatment.  The
    judge also directed himself  at  [36]  as  to  the  non-culpability  of
    children for their parent's failings.  He then made findings  what  the
    appellant would encounter on return  as  part  of  the  proportionality
    exercise. It is correct that the judge did not focus  on  the  specific
    circumstances that the child would face but this is not material having
    regard  to  the  positive  findings  regarding  re-integration  of  the
    appellant and the consequent absence of any material hardship  for  the
    child.  The conclusion reached by the judge was legally correct  and  a
    permissible one open to him on the facts.









34. I am satisfied therefore that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in
    law with regard either the  renewed  ground  or  the  ground  on  which
    permission was granted. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the
    FtT judge stands.


Signed                                  Date 26 July 2013.



Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
