
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00322/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 24 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     k b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, of Counsel instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission against a decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal M R Oliver who in a  determination  promulgated
    on 20 October 2016 dismissed his appeal against the refusal of asylum.

2.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Bramble,  for  the  Secretary
    of State,  identified,  with  clarity,  clear  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born  on  9  May  1999.   He  was
    therefore aged 17 at the date of hearing.  Mr Bramble stated  that  the
    judge had erred in law in that he had considered the claim  as  if  the
    appellant were an adult because he was not  going  to  be  returned  to
    Albania before he reached his majority.  Secondly the  judge  had  said
    that trafficking in cases of children such as the  appellant  for  non-
    sexual purposes was different from trafficking to places  such  as  the
    United Kingdom for prostitution or slavery since the trafficking  takes
    place exclusively within the victim's country of  origin.   Mr  Bramble
    stated that was an error of law and indeed there was an error of law to
    differentiate between the different types of trafficking.  Moreover, he
    accepted that the judge had erred  in  pointing  out  that  there  were
    reception arrangements for those returned from trafficking but  he  had
    not dealt with the fact that the appellant was a minor.

4.   I accept that there are errors of  law  in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge and by consent set aside the determination.   Also  by
    consent I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing
    afresh.  I consider that the terms  of  Senior  President's  Tribunal's
    directions have been met.

Directions

This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross,
Albanian interpreter, time two hours.

No findings are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
