
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00551/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th August 2015                  |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              mr Kibrom Girmay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Mohamed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant states that he is  an  Eritrean  national  born  on  15th
    January 1989.  The Respondent does not accept that stating that if  the
    Appellant is not Eritrean he is from Ethiopia.  The  Appellant's  claim
    for asylum was refused in a decision  dated  16th  December  2014.  The
    Respondent also decided on the same day to remove the Appellant  as  an
    illegal entrant. The Appellant's appeal  against  these  decisions  was
    allowed at first instance by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Iqbal
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 28th April 2015.   The  Respondent  appealed
    that decision and for the  reasons  which  I  have  set  out  below  at
    paragraph 18  I have set that decision aside and remade the decision in
    this case.  Although therefore this matter came before me initially  as
    an appeal by the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of  convenience  I  have
    continued to refer to the parties as they were known at first instance.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  17th  July  2014  claiming
    asylum on the same day after handing himself into  police  officers  at
    South Mimms  Services.   The  Appellant  left  Sudan  in  January  2014
    travelling to Libya where he resided for six  to  seven  months.   From
    Libya he caught a boat to Italy with the assistance of an agent to whom
    he paid E1,800.  His friend's sister sent him the money from abroad  to
    pay for this.  He stayed in Italy for fourteen days before  catching  a
    train to France.  From France he caught a lorry to the  United  Kingdom
    arriving on 17th July 2014.

3.   The Appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he  was  an  Eritrean
    national born in the town of Assab and  was  a  practising  Pentecostal
    Christian a religion he inherited from his parents.  When he was 3  the
    family moved from Assab to  Addis  Ababa  in  Ethiopia  as  his  father
    obtained a better job working there as an  accountant.   The  Appellant
    lived in Ethiopia from 1992 to 2000.  In 2000 his family  was  deported
    back to Eritrea following that country's conflict with Ethiopia as  his
    father had supported the Eritrean referendum.  He lived back  in  Assab
    for a further four  years  before  moving  to  Sudan  in  2004  due  to
    persecution for being a Pentecostal  Christian.   Whilst  in  Sudan  he
    worked in a private house alongside his mother who worked  as  a  cook.
    His mother died in 2007.  The Appellant also appears to have worked  in
    a food restaurant and bakery.  He left Sudan in January 2014 after nine
    years as he was being abused by a woman in the house he was working  in
    who threatened to report him as she knew he was there illegally.

The Explanation for Refusal

4.    The  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  application  because   the
    Appellant had been  asked  a  number  of  questions  to  establish  his
    nationality and identity and his responses were  either  inaccurate  or
    incorrect when compared to the background  information  about  Eritrea.
    The Appellant conversed in Amharic the recognised language of Ethiopia.
     His lack of knowledge about Eritrean national service  was  considered
    by the Respondent to be inconsistent with someone  who  was  a  genuine
    Eritrean national.  He was also unable to provide any  details  of  the
    town of Assab where he claimed to have resided for  seven  years.   His
    response was to say that he had hardly ventured out  of  the  house  he
    lived in as he was ill and had not continued his schooling  in  Eritrea
    because he had become ill.  If the Appellant had  been  as  ill  as  he
    claimed it was considered inconsistent that he had not  sought  medical
    assistance.  The  linguistic  analysis  concluded  that  the  Appellant
    belonged to an Amharic linguistic community that occurred in  Ethiopia.



5.   The Appellant was asked to take part in a direct analysis interview  on
    28th November 2014 at Waterhouse (Leeds) and the conclusion reached was
    that he was in fact an Ethiopian national from the area of Addis Ababa.
     The Appellant was  able  to  speak  Amharic  without  any  discernable
    inference  from  Tigrinya.   There  were  no  signs  of  hesitation  or
    inconsistencies observed in the  Appellant's  speech.   The  Respondent
    also rejected the Appellant's claim to believe in the Pentecostal faith
    as the Appellant was unable to provide basic information about the  key
    tenets of that religion.  The  Appellant  had  not  claimed  asylum  in
    either France or Italy as conditions for asylum seekers  he  said  were
    really bad there.  That was not  considered  a  valid  reason  for  not
    claiming.

The Determination at First Instance

6.   At paragraph 25 the Judge indicated that she had considered  the  Upper
    Tribunal's guidance in MO (illegal exit - risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG
    [2011] UKUT 190 which had considered some of  the  issues  and  changes
    since the last country guidance case  of  MA  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  was
    promulgated.  The Judge quoted from the headnote  of  MO  which  stated
    that whilst the position remained that failed asylum  seekers  as  such
    were not generally at real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on
    return, on present evidence the great majority  of  such  persons  were
    likely to be perceived as having left illegally and this fact save  for
    very limited exceptions would mean that on return  they  faced  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm.

7.   At paragraphs  27  and  28  the  Judge  considered  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's nationality.  The Appellant  was  brought  up  in  Ethiopia
    amongst Amharic speaking people which was consistent with the  findings
    of the linguistic analysis that the Appellant  spoke  a  language  that
    belonged to an Amharic linguistic community occurring in Ethiopia.  The
    Appellant only lived in Eritrea for three years as a young child before
    leaving with his family to live in Ethiopia and then  again  only  four
    years as a teenager before fleeing to Sudan.  That too  was  consistent
    with the Appellant having a limited knowledge of Eritrea in  particular
    the Assab area in which he had lived.  The Judge placed  no  weight  on
    the inaccuracies that arose in  the  interview  during  the  course  of
    questions about Eritrea and the  Appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  with
    reference to Eritrea.

8.   The Judge then proceeded to deal with  what  steps  the  Appellant  had
    taken to see whether he might be eligible  for  Ethiopian  citizenship.
    The Judge  noted  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    attended the Ethiopian  Embassy  on  8th  April  2015  to  address  the
    Respondent's concerns as to his nationality.  He had completed a number
    of forms and was invited for an interview after being asked a number of
    questions as to where he was born and raised and when he left Ethiopia.
     The Appellant was unable to provide any supporting  documentation  and
    as such the Ethiopian authorities were  unable  to  issue  him  with  a
    passport or nationality.  The embassy did not  accept  the  Appellant's
    fluency in Amharic as determinative of the Appellant's nationality.

9.   The Appellant very shortly before his hearing  at  first  instance  was
    due contacted the Ethiopian Embassy on 8th April 2015 taking with him a
    letter from his solicitors dated 1st April 2015.  At paragraph  28  the
    Judge wrote the following and for the ease of reference I have  amended
    the paragraph to make clearer what the Judge was saying:

         "At the end of the hearing I further received a  letter  dated  1st
         April 2015 [written] on behalf of the Appellant to the  Embassy  of
         the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia  which  confirmed  that
         [the Appellant's solicitors] had requested written confirmation  of
         the same, however nothing  was  received  from  [the  embassy].   I
         recalled both parties' representatives to make submissions  on  the
         matter.  I find that the lack of response from the Embassy  further
         corroborates [the Appellant's] position".

10.   The  Appellant's  claim  to  fear  persecution  due  to  his   alleged
    Pentecostal faith was dismissed  at  paragraphs  29  to  30  the  Judge
    finding the Appellant  was  not  a  practising  Pentecostal  Christian.
    However as the Appellant was 14 years old  when  he  left  Eritrea  and
    approaching the age of national service he would not have been  someone
    who would have been allowed to leave lawfully and therefore he would be
    at risk upon return for unlawful exit.  The failure to claim asylum  in
    either France  or  Italy  was  not  determinative  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility or claim.  The Judge allowed the asylum appeal  under  both
    the Refugee Convention and Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (prohibition of torture).

The Onward Appeal

11.  The Respondent appealed the  Judge's  decision  arguing  that  she  had
    failed to make findings on matters in dispute.  The Judge had not taken
    into account that the Appellant by his own account had lived over  half
    of his life in Sudan which was  not  an  Amharic  linguistic  community
    occurring in Ethiopia. Although not explicitly stated in the grounds  I
    assume the point of that submission was to raise a question  mark  over
    whether the Appellant really had lived in Sudan for the length of  time
    he claimed or whether he had in fact lived in Ethiopia speaking Amharic
    of a type spoken in that country. If that was the  intended  submission
    it was in truth no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  result.  More
    importantly  the  grounds  continued  that  the  Judge's  findings   at
    paragraph 28 that the Appellant was an Eritrean national failed to take
    into account the decisions of MA and particularly ST (Ethnic Eritrean -
    nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 52. ST gives guidance  on
    how an Appellant is expected to prove their Eritrean  nationality  when
    it is in dispute.

12.  The grounds cited paragraph 58 of the MA that an applicant  for  asylum
    must if necessary make an effort  to  procure  additional  evidence  to
    assist the decision maker.   Before  a  person  could  be  regarded  as
    stateless they should  make  an  application  for  citizenship  of  the
    country with which they were most closely connected.  In the case of ST
    Ethiopia (not referred to by the Judge in  her  determination)  it  was
    said that each claimant must demonstrate that they have done  all  they
    could to facilitate  return  as  a  national  of  Ethiopia.   A  person
    regarded as ethnic Eritrean and who left  Ethiopia  during  or  in  the
    immediate aftermath of the border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea  was
    likely to face very significant practical difficulties in  establishing
    nationality and the attendant right to return.  The First-tier  had  no
    evidence from the Ethiopian Embassy rejecting the Appellant's claim  to
    be Ethiopian simply that there had been no response.  Such  a  lack  of
    evidence did not meet the requirements laid out in MA.   The  Appellant
    had not demonstrated that he had done all  he  could  to  indicate  his
    nationality. The  First-tier  had  not  explained  adequately  why  the
    Appellant's claim to have been to the Ethiopian Embassy and  cooperated
    fully was accepted by the Judge when she had made negative  credibility
    findings against the Appellant in relation to his claim to  be  of  the
    Pentecostal faith.

13.  The Judge had misdirected herself  on  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed illegal exit from Eritrea.  In the case of MO following MA  the
    Tribunal had found a distinction for those who had left  Eritrea  after
    September 2008.  These were the restricted categories which the  First-
    tier Judge had quoted at paragraph 31 of her determination.  However as
    the Appellant had left Eritrea in 2004 the  Tribunal  was  required  to
    consider based on the overwhelmingly negative credibility findings  the
    much less restrictive findings of the Tribunal in MA.  Failure to apply
    appropriate country guidance was a clear material error of law.

14.  The Respondent's application for  permission  to  appeal  came  on  the
    papers before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 23rd June  2015.   In
    granting permission to appeal she wrote

         "It is arguable  that  the  Judge  applied  the  incorrect  country
         guidance case given the date the Appellant left  his  own  country.
         Further the Judge's findings as to the Appellant's nationality have
         not taken into account case law to be considered  when  nationality
         is in dispute".

    There was no response from the Appellant in reply to that grant.  On 30
    June 2015 the Upper Tribunal sent out  directions  to  parties  stating
    that the parties should prepare for  the  forthcoming  hearing  on  the
    basis that it would be confined to whether  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside  for  legal  error  and  if  so
    whether the decision in the appeal could be remade  without  having  to
    hear oral evidence in which eventuality  the  Tribunal  was  likely  to
    proceed immediately with a view to remaking the decision.

The Hearing Before Me

15.  When the matter came before me it was argued  by  the  Respondent  that
    there was no evidence to indicate that the Ethiopian authorities  would
    not issue a passport to the Appellant.   There  was  nothing  from  the
    Ethiopian Embassy to say one way or the other.  It was a material error
    of law for the Judge to conclude that the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    enough.

16.  In reply Counsel for the Appellant sought to  uphold  the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant could  not  prove  a  negative.
    Nothing about his claim to Eritrean nationality had  been  rejected  by
    the Judge.  The Appellant had spent three years  in  Eritrea.   Sprakab
    Reports were not to be seen as conclusive or determinative.  The  Judge
    had looked at the issue of nationality very carefully.  It  was  not  a
    correct approach to go from saying that the Appellant spoke Amharic  to
    saying that he was Ethiopian.  Every  single  step  was  taken  by  the
    Appellant to deal with the issue of his nationality.  The proof was  in
    the bundles.  There was  no  standard  in  existence  as  to  what  the
    Appellant was supposed to do to show  nationality  or  what  the  court
    expected him to do but he had done everything he possibly could.

17.  The Appellant's solicitors  had  written  a  letter  to  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy on 1st April 2015 and hat letter  was  before  the  Judge  (see
    paragraph 9 above).  The letter had given details  of  the  Appellant's
    place of birth in Assab Eritrea, details of his father and mother,  his
    father has been born in Asmara Eritrea and that  his  mother  had  been
    born in Assab Eritrea and had passed away in 2007.  The letter had said
    that  if  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  required  further  information  they
    respectfully asked the embassy  to  contact  the  solicitors.   Counsel
    indicated he did know whether the Appellant had completed a  form  when
    applying for Ethiopian nationality as no copy of any form was with  the
    papers.  I pause to note here that  paragraph  17  of  the  Appellant's
    statement had stated that he had been given a form to complete  by  the
    Ethiopian Embassy and was told to provide specific documents which  had
    to be accompanied with the form after which he was asked to attend  for
    an interview.  Whilst Counsel accepted that the Upper Tribunal decision
    of ST was the law and that it had not been brought to the attention  of
    the Judge at first instance it would not have made any difference.

18.  I indicated to the parties that I found that the failure by  the  Judge
    to analyse the case in the light of the most  recent  relevant  country
    guidance authority of ST was a material error of law.  The facts of the
    case had been found by the Judge  and  would  be  preserved.  The  case
    turned on a narrow issue namely whether the Appellant had  done  enough
    within the authority of ST to try to establish  Ethiopian  nationality.
    If he had done enough then his case would succeed but  if  he  had  not
    done enough then I could remake the decision without adjourning it  for
    further evidence pursuant to the directions sent out by  the  Principal
    Resident Judge (see paragraph 14 above).  I further held  that  nothing
    particularly useful or helpful would be achieved by remitting this case
    back to the First-tier to be decided again as I was  in  possession  of
    all of the relevant facts in the light of the Judge's findings.  What I
    had to do was (inter alia) to apply the  relevant  case  law  to  those
    findings.

19.  In conclusion Counsel  for  the  Appellant  stated  that  the  Tribunal
    should ask itself what could be gained from any further interaction  by
    the Appellant with the Ethiopian Embassy.  The Tribunal could  draw  on
    its own experience of what happened in such cases how  the  authorities
    would react to any further applications.  The Appellant had done all he
    could.

Findings

20.  In order to be eligible  for  international  protection  the  Appellant
    must have been able to discharge the obligation upon him to have made a
    proper application for citizenship of the country  with  which  he  was
    most closely connected.  In effect before the Appellant can say that he
    is stateless or a citizen of another country altogether he  must  where
    circumstances require  it  have  made  reasonable  endeavours  to  show
    whether or not he is a citizen of the country with  which  he  is  most
    closely connected.

21.  In this case  there  was  no  doubt  that  the  Appellant  was  closely
    connected to Ethiopia in the light of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings which accepted the  results  of  the  Sprakab  analysis.   The
    Appellant had lived in Sudan for a number  of  years  but  the  Sprakab
    analysis showed that the Amharic the  Appellant  spoke  belonged  to  a
    linguistic  community  occurring  in  Ethiopia.  The   Appellant   must
    therefore have lived some time in Ethiopia to acquire this language and
    that was a sufficiently close connection to trigger the requirement  to
    seek citizenship. Although the Sprakab Report and the Judge's  reliance
    on that Sprakab Report were criticised in submissions to me, there  was
    no cross-appeal against the Judge's findings on that point which I find
    were open to her on the evidence before  her.  There  was  no  contrary
    expert  evidence  for  example.  The  Appellant  had  demonstrated   in
    interview that he  had  next  to  no  knowledge  of  Eritrea.   It  was
    reasonable therefore to expect him to have made some  effort  with  the
    Ethiopian Embassy.

22.  Paragraph (5) of the Headnote to ST (reproducing paragraph 105 of  that
    determination) states:

         "(5) Judicial fact-finders will expect a person asserting arbitrary
             deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach  the  embassy
             in London with all documentation emanating from Ethiopia  that
             the person may have,  relevant  to  establishing  nationality,
             including ID card, address, place of birth, identity and place
             of birth of parents, identity and whereabouts of any relatives
             in Ethiopia and details of the person's schooling in Ethiopia.
             Failing production of Ethiopian documentation  in  respect  of
             such matters, the person should put in  writing  all  relevant
             details, to be handed to the embassy. Whilst persons  are  not
             for this purpose entitled to portray themselves to the embassy
             as Eritrean, there  is  no  need  to  suppress  details  which
             disclose an Eritrean connection".

23.  The letter written by the Appellant's solicitors  dated  1  April  2015
    was an attempt to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 105 of  ST  set
    out in the headnote.  The Respondent states that the Respondent's  case
    is that the mere fact that the Ethiopian Embassy have not answered  the
    letter or given the Appellant a decision  in  writing  means  that  the
    Appellant has not done all he can reasonably be expected to  have  done
    and that he has in  fact  no  evidence  that  his  claim  to  Ethiopian
    nationality has been refused by the Ethiopian Embassy.

24.  The Respondent makes a subsidiary point which is that as the Judge  did
    not accept the Appellant's claim to be of the  Pentecostal  faith,  she
    should not at the same time have accepted the Appellant's claim that he
    did in fact attend the Ethiopian Embassy.  The two issues  however  are
    not necessarily connected and as I have indicated I have preserved  the
    findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I therefore proceed
    on the assumption that the Appellant did indeed  attend  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy and did produce the letter to them written by his solicitors on
    1st April 2015.  The Judge had found that the lack of response from the
    embassy to the letter of 1st April and  the  attendance  on  8th  April
    confirmed the submission that the Ethiopian Embassy were  not  prepared
    to  accept  the   Appellant's   application   for   citizenship.    The
    Respondent's case is that that is not enough following the case of  ST.
    The Appellant makes a further point that he cannot be expected to prove
    a negative.  In other words if the Ethiopian Embassy does  not  respond
    to his application there is no way that he can force them to a response
    and ST cannot be interpreted as stating that.

25.  The letter from his  solicitors  refers  to  the  Appellant  living  in
    Ethiopia between 1992 and 2000 and attending elementary school  between
    1996 and 2000.  That might  have  been  sufficient  for  the  Ethiopian
    authorities to check whether there was any such record but in any event
    the Appellant  cannot  be  criticised  for  failing  to  give  relevant
    information to the Ethiopian authorities.  The letter makes clear  that
    the solicitors wanted a response from the embassy although  the  letter
    was only written on 1st April the Appellant took it in on 8th April and
    the hearing was less than three weeks' later on 28th April.  It was not
    perhaps surprising that there had been no response to  that  letter  by
    the time the Judge heard  the  matter  on  28th  April  2015.  What  is
    surprising is that given the solicitors wrote a  letter  apparently  to
    comply with ST that case was not drawn to the attention of the Judge at
    first instance.

26.  Nevertheless the question is whether the Appellant has cooperated  with
    the Ethiopian authorities in  the  documentation  process.   He  cannot
    compel the authorities to reply.  The Appellant's oral evidence was  to
    the Judge was that he was told by the  official  at  the  embassy  that
    because the Appellant could not provide any documentation  the  embassy
    was not able to issue him with a passport.  The official stated that if
    the Appellant's solicitors forwarded their letter of 1st April  to  the
    official he could reply online to them.  It  appears  however  that  no
    reply has ever been received.

27.  It is not  possible  for  the  Appellant  to  say  that  his  claim  to
    Ethiopian nationality has been rejected until such time  as  he  has  a
    decision from the Ethiopian Embassy to that effect.  It is  clear  from
    the Appellant's evidence which was accepted  by  the  Judge  that  what
    influenced the Ethiopian Embassy not to issue him with a passport there
    and then was that he had provided no documentation.  The fact that  the
    Appellant could speak Amharic was not of itself  sufficient  to  permit
    the authorities to issue him with a passport but equally it  cannot  be
    said that the  embassy  have  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    Ethiopian.  The matter has been left in  the  air.   If  the  Appellant
    wishes to show that his application for Ethiopian nationality  has  not
    been accepted he must be in a position  to  provide  evidence  to  that
    effect.  He must be able to produce a refusal from the embassy.  It was
    argued that the Appellant cannot force  the  embassy  to  do  anything.
    However until such time as the embassy  refused  this  application,  he
    cannot say that his claim to Ethiopian nationality has been rejected.

28.  I do not go behind the findings of fact of  the  First-tier  Judge  who
    accepted that the Appellant had spent some  time  in  Eritrea.  However
    beyond his birth in Eritrea and that his parents were  born  there  the
    Appellant's links to Eritrea are somewhat tenuous.  He does  not  speak
    the language Tigrinya he lived there at most for the first three  years
    of his life and thereafter between 2000 and 2004.  On the other hand he
    had lived long enough  in  Ethiopia  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the
    Ethiopian language Amharic without any  discernable  influence  on  his
    speech from Tigrinya the language of Eritrea.

29.  In order  to  establish  his  claim  to  international  protection  the
    Appellant must have done all that he could to show that he had  applied
    for Ethiopian citizenship.  The Judge accepted  that  he  had  made  an
    application and had  submitted  a  letter  from  his  solicitors.   The
    Appellant has never received a formal decision on that application.  In
    those circumstances where the application  remains  outstanding  before
    the Ethiopian authorities it cannot be  said  to  have  been  rejected.
    There may come a  time  whereby  if  no  reply  is  received  from  the
    Ethiopian authorities it can be reasonably assumed that they  will  not
    reply.  However as I have indicated the application was  only  made  on
    8th April less than three weeks before the  hearing  some  four  months
    ago.  There was no evidence that the Appellant has sought to chase  the
    Ethiopian authorities in those four months  particularly  the  Consular
    official's  indication  that  he  could  write   to   the   Appellant's
    solicitors.

30.  ST does not specifically state  that  the  person  who  approaches  the
    embassy in London should have received a reply.   That  must  be  right
    since there clearly is a risk that the embassy might never reply to  an
    application.  However in this case I do not consider that such  a  long
    period of time has elapsed since the application that one can say  that
    the embassy will  never  reply  and  will  never  formally  reject  the
    Appellant's claim.  The Appellant's evidence to the Judge was not  that
    he had received an outright rejection of his claim whether orally or in
    writing. Rather what he  had  received  was  more  in  the  way  of  an
    invitation from the embassy to submit more documentation  and  that  an
    official could write in due course to the Appellant's solicitors.  From
    the Appellant's description of the interview he had it does not  appear
    that the embassy were hostile or deliberately  obstructive,  what  they
    wanted was some documentation (and perhaps some  time  for  example  to
    investigate the Appellant's schooling) and they  might  then  be  in  a
    position to put something in writing. Were the position to  change  and
    the Appellant was able to provide some written evidence of a  rejection
    of his claim by the embassy the Respondent could be invited to look  at
    the matter again but the case at present is far from that.

31.  There was no cross-appeal against the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal to claim asylum on religious grounds.  I  find  that
    the Judge gave cogent reasons for her findings that the  Appellant  did
    not fear persecution on the basis of his  religious  faith.   What  the
    Judge did was to say on the basis of her  finding  that  the  Appellant
    could not show he was Ethiopian that the Appellant would be regarded as
    having left Eritrea illegally.   However  as  I  have  found  that  the
    Appellant has not done enough to demonstrate he is not Ethiopian it  is
    premature to consider  whether  the  Appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Eritrea and thereafter considered as a draft evader or  one  making  an
    illegal exit.  The case does not reach that far.

32.  I do not consider that at this stage the Appellant has done  enough  to
    demonstrate  that  he  has  been  arbitrarily  deprived  of   Ethiopian
    nationality which he is otherwise entitled to. I therefore dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    asylum.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.   I  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant
asylum and to remove the Appellant.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 27th day of August 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable there can be no fee award.


Signed this 27th day of August 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

