

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00037/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 21st November 2014               |On 25th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                              Mr Sadikou Djima
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Benin  date  of  birth  11th  February
       1976. He has permission[1] to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heynes) to dismiss his  appeal  against  a
       decision to refuse him leave to  enter  the  UK.  The  Appellant  had
       appealed on asylum grounds.

    2. This is now a matter with some history but since the parties  are  in
       agreement about the outcome of this appeal I need not set it  out  in
       detail. Suffice to say that the basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  to
       international protection was that he was orphaned at a young age  and
       was taken in by a Madrassa who expected him to work for  his  upkeep.
       He subsequently ran away  and  has  converted  to  Christianity.  The
       Appellant claims to today be at risk in  Benin  for  reasons  of  his
       religious belief.

    3. On appeal the Appellant relied on a medical  report  by  Dr  Ibbotson
       confirming that he has scarring to his back "typical of" having  been
       burned with a hot metal rod, and numerous scars to his legs  "typical
       of" having been kicked with hard-tipped boots and beaten with  wooden
       sticks.  He further relied  on  a  report  by  country  expert  Ticky
       Monekosso who felt able to  comment  on  the  potential  risk  to  an
       apostate from Islam in Benin.

    4. The determination deals very briefly  with  both  these  reports.  In
       respect of the medical evidence the First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that
       the report of Dr Ibbotson does not take the Appellant very far  since
       it does no more than "raise the  possibility"  that  the  scars  were
       caused in the manner  claimed.  As  for  Ms  Monekesso  the  Tribunal
       expresses "profound concerns" about her expertise, noting inter  alia
       that neither her extensive preamble or CV make any reference  to  her
       ever having been to  Benin.  The  determination  also  disparages  Ms
       Monekosso's use of grammar and English.

    5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal has  made  the
       following errors such that the decision must be set aside:

        i) The approach to the medical evidence is not consistent with  the
           Istanbul Protocol. The doctors  evidence  that  the  scars  were
           "typical of" was, in the context of that framework,  a  term  of
           art which had a meaning other than a "possibility"[2];

       ii) It is an error of fact to state that Ms Monekosso did not  claim
           to have ever been to Benin: she does, and she has, but  even  if
           she hadn't she would still have over two decades  of  experience
           researching and reporting on Benin;

      iii) There  was  a  manifest  failure  to  consider  relevant  expert
           evidence: even if two paragraphs of  the  report  were  rendered
           unintelligible to the Tribunal by typographical errors or a lack
           of proof reading, there were another 152  paragraphs  that  were
           perfectly readable and  formed  the  basis  of  a  balanced  and
           "carefully referenced" report.

       Error of Law

    6. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnycz accepted the criticisms  made  in
       the grounds of appeal had merit.  In respect of the Istanbul Protocol
       it is quite  clear  that  Dr  Ibbotson  had  regard  to  it  and  his
       categorisation of the Appellant's scars as "typical" placed them only
       one place below the most  definitive  classification  of  "diagnostic
       of".  The conclusions in the report could not safely be dismissed  on
       the ground that it added nothing to the Appellant's claim. In respect
       of Ms Monekosso, she has been to Benin on several occasions, and says
       so in her report. Further, as the grounds of appeal point out, having
       been to a country is not actually a prerequisite to  being  qualified
       to comment upon it.  There are unfortunate grammatical errors in  the
       two paragraphs cited in the determination. The meaning of the  report
       overall is however quite clear.

    7. In light of these errors the parties agreed  that  the  determination
       had to be set aside. Unfortunately the extent  of  the  fact  finding
       required in this appeal means that the matter must be remitted,  once
       again, to the First-tier Tribunal.

       Decisions

    8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.

    9. I make no direction for anonymity.

   10. The appeal is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           15th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted on the 17th March 2014 by Designated Judge French of the First-
tier Tribunal
[2] The hierarchy set out in the Istanbul Protocol and approved in, for
instance RT (medical reports - causation of scarring) Sri Lanka [2008]
UKAIT 00009, is that the clinician must evaluate the scar as one of the
following:
   a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused by the trauma
      described;
   b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, but it is non-specific and there are many other possible
      causes;
   c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, and there are few other possible causes;
   d) Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually found with this type
      of trauma, but there are other possible causes;
   e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been caused in any way
      other than that described.


