

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: AA 00527-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   08.10.2013|
|on    08.10.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |16.10.2013                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judges
                         John FREEMAN and Clive LANE

Between:
                                     UB
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Anas Ahmed Khan (counsel instructed by Thompson & Co)
For the respondent: Mr Peter Deller


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge JC Hamilton), sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  3  and  10
    February 2012, to  an asylum and  human  rights  appeal  by  an  Ahmadi
    citizen of Pakistan, born 21 March 1964: as Judge Hamilton allowed  her
    son's appeal, we shall call her 'the appellant'. There was  a  previous
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal; but the decision reached on  it  was
    set aside by a consent order in the Court of Appeal,  and  we  are  not
    concerned with it beyond that, other than to  say  that  the  anonymity
    direction given remains in force, and to  discuss  the  effect  of  the
    consent order.



 2. The terms of the consent order itself, of course  drafted  between  the
    parties,   rather   than   by   the   court,   add   nothing   to   the
    reconsideration[1] which it  directed  us  to  carry  out:  however  it
    referred to the parties' statement of reasons, and that in turn to  the
    grant of permission to appeal by Elias LJ, both  of  which  do  require
    further treatment. So that what Elias LJ had said can be  followed,  we
    need first to set out the two country  guidance  decisions  potentially
    relevant to the outcome of this case. First came MJ  and  ZM  (Ahmadis,
    risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT  00033:  to  avoid  any  possibility  of
    confusion with MN and others (Ahmadis  -  country  conditions  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389 (IAC), not published till 13 November  last
    year, we shall  refer  to  MJ  and  ZM  simply  as  'the  2008  country
    guidance'.

 3. At the date of the hearing before  Judge  Hamilton,  the  2008  country
    guidance remained in force, and Elias LJ set  out  what  happened  from
    there on:

       ... the procedural errors here mean that the case ought at  least  to
       be heard by the full court. The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have
       regard to the country guidance then in existence. It is arguable, had
       it done so, it might have influenced its factual findings. The  Upper
       Tribunal did consider the guidance then in force,  but  new  guidance
       had emerged before its decision was promulgated. The  Upper  Tribunal
       judge, in refusing leave, said that the new guideline [MN and others]
       would have made no difference to the outcome. That may be right,  and
       that was one of the reasons he refused permission to appeal ...

 4. Elias LJ nevertheless went on to say:

       ... but [the appellant] has not had the opportunity of arguing to the
       contrary so I have sufficient unease about the procedural fairness to
       grant permission to appeal. It may well  be  that  having  heard  the
       appellant the court are satisfied that there clearly was no prejudice
       to the appellant notwithstanding such errors as may have occurred.

 5. The parties however, no doubt for pragmatic reasons, preferred  not  to
    await the outcome of the consideration by the full Court of  Appeal  to
    which Elias LJ had referred the case, but to have it come  back  before
    us on the basis of the consent order. The statement of reasons ends:

       The Respondent agrees that it is arguable that there was a procedural
       error for the reasons given in the grant of permission. Therefore  it
       is agreed between the parties that the matter should  [sic]  remitted
       to the Upper Tribunal of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  for
       reconsideration.

 6. Mr Deller agrees that this can only be sensibly read  as  an  agreement
    between the parties that there had in fact been a 'procedural error' in
    what had taken place, and not just that this was arguable. However,  it
    is important to note what Elias LJ, and consequently the  parties,  and
    the consent order had been dealing with. They were concerned  with  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal, now set aside for the reasons given  by
    Elias LJ. We are not concerned with the validity of  that  decision  in
    itself, but with whether there had been a material error of  law[2]  in
    Judge Hamilton's decision in the first place.

 7. It has been settled, ever since the present country guidance  procedure
    came into being, that the following principles apply:

     a) a country guidance decision is sui generis, effectively a  decision
        on  the  factual  situation  in   a   particular   country,   which
        nevertheless has to be followed, in the absence of evidence to  the
        contrary, as if it were a decision on the law;

     b) however, it cannot, unlike a decision on a point of law, be treated
        as if it declared what the right answer had always been: a  country
        guidance decision is a decision on the state of affairs existing at
        the time it is made, and, though it has to be treated as  remaining
        authoritative till that state changes, or other  evidence  emerges,
        it cannot relate back to a previous time;

     c) so, while it may be wrong in law for a decision-maker not to follow
        a country guidance decision which has come out by the time his  own
        decision is made, it cannot be wrong for him to fail to foresee one
        which has yet to be made.

 8. In the light of those principles, we pointed out to the parties that

     a) we came to the case on the same basis as the first  Upper  Tribunal
        panel had done: in other words, there was a potential issue for  us
        as  to  whether  Judge  Hamilton  had  followed  the  2008  country
        guidance, and, if not, whether any failure to do so would have been
        likely to make a difference to the result he reached;

     b) but, on the basis of those principles, Judge Hamilton could no more
        have been wrong in law in failing to take account of MN and  others
        than the anonymous draftsman of the grounds of appeal to the  Upper
        Tribunal could have been blamed for not taking that point himself;

     c) so it seemed to us that, failing some agreement between them to the
        contrary, we could only consider the validity or otherwise of Judge
        Hamilton's decision on the basis of point (a);

     d) but the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  as  they  stood,
        unlike the grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal, took no  point
        on any failure  by  Judge  Hamilton  to  follow  the  2008  country
        guidance.

 9. We recognized ourselves that consideration of a 2012  decision  on  the
    basis of 2008 country guidance, when  (later)  2012  guidance  was  now
    available, might be regarded as a rather arid legal exercise; and so we
    gave the parties time to consider the practicalities of the  situation,
    and to reach some agreement about what should  now  be  done.  However,
    this did not prove  possible,  and  so,  the  previous  Upper  Tribunal
    decision having been set aside by the consent order, we  were  left  to
    consider the validity of the first-tier decision on general principles,
    together with anything in the consent order which bore on that issue.

10. Mr Khan took his stand firmly on the terms of the consent order: it had
    clearly been the intention of the parties,  and  so  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal that the case should be reconsidered in  the  light  of  MN  and
    others, and any attempt to do so on any other  basis  would  amount  to
    trying to get round the consent order. That of course is far  from  our
    intention, and Mr Deller disclaimed any of inviting us to do so. As  he
    accepted, we had to take it as settled that there had been a procedural
    error, requiring reconsideration by the Upper Tribunal; but  the  error
    pointed out by Elias LJ had been one on the part of the Upper Tribunal,
    and not of Judge Hamilton. Mr Khan did not seek to modify the stand  he
    had taken.

11. Conclusions     We bear in mind that, as  Elias  LJ  said  in  granting
    permission: "The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    country guidance then in existence. It is arguable, had it done so,  it
    might have influenced its factual  findings."  However,  no  point  was
    taken on the 2008 country guidance in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal; and Mr Khan chose not to apply to amend them,  even  in
    the light of what we had  pointed  out  at  8.  Instead  those  grounds
    referred to a decision applying to asylum appeals in general,  Katrinak
    [2001] EWCA Civ 832, while the grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal
    relied on MN and others.

12. Though counsel for the appellants before the Upper Tribunal referred to
    the 2008 country guidance (see paragraph 15 of the decision), the panel
    themselves said this:

    31. Whilst we are of the view that  the  judge  should  have  expressly
        referred to the latest country guidance in his  assessment  of  the
        risk on return, we are not satisfied  that  that  omission  in  the
        circumstances of this appeal amounts to an  error  of  law,  or  if
        does, that it is material. Our reason for that conclusion is  that,
        giving effect to the decision in MJ and ZM the appellant would  not
        be at risk of any form of proscribed treatment  on  return,  having
        regard to the facts found.

    32.    The argument advanced in the skeleton argument about the  extent
        to which the background evidence now suggests that MJ and ZM should
        no longer be considered as representing  the  factual  position  in
        terms of risks for Ahmadis was not pursued at  the  hearing  before
        us.

13. Whether the panel regarded what they said at 32 as reason enough not to
    consider the effect of MN and  others  in  their  decision  itself,  or
    whether they would in any case have taken  that  view  on  the  grounds
    before them  hardly  matters.  They  did  not  re-make  the  first-tier
    decision for themselves, in  which  case  they  would  have  needed  to
    consider that up-to-date country guidance; but upheld it, on the  basis
    given in their decision at paragraph 46, that it involved  no  material
    error of law on the part of Judge Hamilton. Only in  their  refusal  of
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, and  in  response  to  the
    grounds put forward for that, did they deal with the effect of  MN  and
    others at all. They did not need to do so, other than out of politeness
    to the anonymous draftsman of the grounds, and neither do we.


14. Even on the basis of Mr  Deller's  sensible  concession  (see  6),  the
    consent order, taken together with  Elias  LJ's  grant  of  permission,
    cannot be taken  as  settling  anything  but  that  there  had  been  a
    'procedural error' by the Upper Tribunal, in dealing with the effect of
    MN  for the first time in their refusal of  permission  to  appeal,  in
    answer to the point taken on it in the grounds of appeal,  but  on  the
    basis that it would have made no difference to the outcome before them,
    without however giving the appellant an opportunity of arguing  to  the
    contrary.  It  is  entirely  possible,  given  the  weight   of   paper
    applications no doubt daily before the Court of Appeal, that  what  had
    happened misled Elias LJ into the view he took on the materiality of MN
    and others, though only on the limited basis of whether the  point  was
    arguable.

15. We still consider that we have  to  deal  with  whether  or  not  Judge
    Hamilton's decision was materially wrong in law or not, on the basis of
    the country guidance as it stood at  that  time,  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal as they still stand. If  the  parties  had
    had any common intention to have us decide the appeal on the basis that
    the first-tier  decision  should  be  judged  on  the  basis  of  Judge
    Hamilton's failure to predict the outcome of MN  and  others,  then  no
    doubt they could have invited the Court of Appeal  to  make  a  consent
    order to that effect. However,  that  did  not  happen;  and  there  is
    nothing in the general, and by now well-understood principles  relating
    to country guidance cases, or elsewhere, to entitle us  to  judge  this
    one on that basis for ourselves. No doubt, as the previous  panel  said
    at 31, the judge should have referred to the current country  guidance;
    but there is nothing before us to  show  that  his  failure  to  do  so
    amounted to a material error of law.

Appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



                               -----------------------
[1]    perhaps referring to the legislation in force from 2005 - 2010
[2]    in the  sense  of  one  which  might  have  required  the  first-tier
    decision to be set aside, with a view to its being either  reconsidered
    by the First-tier Tribunal, or  re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal:  see
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 s. 12 (2)

