

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00941/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 25 April 2016                              |On 01 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    X F G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dieu instructed by Gloucester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of  China.  He  applied  for  asylum  in  the
   United Kingdom and the Respondent refused to grant asylum for the reasons
   given in a Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL) dated 19 December 2014.  The
   Respondent made a decision to remove the Appellant as an illegal  entrant
   by way  of  directions  under  paragraphs  8-10  of  schedule  2  to  the
   Immigration Act 1971. The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  and
   his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Y  J  Jones  in  a
   decision dated 17 June 2015. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal
   that decision and permission was granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Saini on renewal of the application to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
   that all the grounds as originally pleaded and emphasised on renewal were
   arguable.


   The Grounds


2. The Grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contend that the  First-
   tier Tribunal erred in finding at paragraph 43  that  there  was  no  DNA
   evidence in relation to the Appellant's parentage of his children.  It is
   submitted that the Judge appeared to doubt the parentage of the  children
   despite the fact that the Respondent had accepted that he was the  father
   of the three children and did  not  challenge  any  of  the  evidence  in
   respect of the relationship. It is said to be of particular  significance
   as the Judge specifically checked with  the  Presenting  Officer  whether
   this was in issue during the hearing. It is asserted therefore  that  the
   Judge went on a frolic of her own and this had tainted the whole approach
   to Article 8. These issues had not been raised  at  the  hearing  thereby
   failing to give the Appellant a fair trial as he had  no  opportunity  to
   address the concerns. She had made further and inconsistent and  confused
   findings as to whether or not she accepted that he was her father or not.


3. It is also concluded that the Judge made an error  of  law  in  that  she
   found that she was not satisfied that  Ms  W  (the  Appellant's  partner)
   would accompany the Appellant to China. It is submitted that this amounts
   to an error of law in circumstances where it was  the  Respondent's  case
   that they would be returned as a family unit and the  potential  for  the
   Appellant's partner and child to remain (which was highly unlikely as she
   was a failed asylum seeker) was never raised by either of the parties. It
   is asserted that the Article 8 assessment was  flawed  and  based  on  an
   incorrect assumption for which there was no evidence and was contrary  to
   the agreed position.

4. It is further submitted  that  the  Judge  incorrectly  applied  Omotunde
   (best  interests  -  Zambrano  applied  -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
   00247(IAC), a deportation case, when considering proportionality.  It  is
   further submitted that the Judge erred in law in concluding that  if  the
   children went to China it would be the choice of their mother. It is also
   asserted that the Judge failed to consider whether it was reasonable  for
   the children to live in another country or  consider  the  evidence  that
   they would be subjected to substantial fines. The Judge failed to make  a
   finding as to whether they would be able to access essential services. It
   is also asserted that the finding that the  family  would  help  is  also
   perverse and contrary  to  evidence.  It  is  contended  that  the  Judge
   appeared to have disregarded the fact that the bond between the Appellant
   and his children would be severed as a result of  the  decision  and  had
   failed to engage with this issue.  It  is  asserted  that  the  Judge  in
   finding  that  it  was  proportionate  for  the  Appellant  to  make   an
   application from China if his partner obtained status  had  misunderstood
   the basis of his Article 8 claim and that it was not a matter  raised  at
   the hearing. It is submitted that the Judge had not applied her  mind  to
   the prospects of the Appellant being permanently denied  the  opportunity
   of a relationship with his children.


5. It is submitted therefore that the whole consideration of Article  8  and
   proportionality was inadequate and amounted to an error  of  law.  It  is
   argued that all of the above failures amount to material errors of law in
   that there is a real possibility that a tribunal properly directed  would
   decide the matter differently.


6. The grounds on renewal re-emphasise the points made  in  the  grounds  to
   the First-tier Tribunal and assert that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle,
   in granting permission, was wrong to refuse to grant permission.


   The Rule 24 Response


7. The Respondent opposes the Appellant's appeal on  the  grounds  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal directed itself appropriately. It is argued that  the
   Judge addressed all the competing factors and was entitled to come to the
   conclusion she did.


   The Hearing


8. Mr Dieu relied on the initial  detailed  grounds  of  appeal  which  were
   drafted by Counsel who appeared at the hearing. He  also  relied  on  the
   second set of grounds.

9. Mr Richards relied on the Rule 24 response and asked me to find that  the
   First-tier Judge looked at matters on the basis that  the  Appellant  was
   the father and accepted that he established family life.  She  looked  at
   the situation both in terms of the Appellant going to China alone and the
   family remaining here and the children and their mother  going  to  China
   and that is what she had to do given the  facts  of  the  case  that  the
   mother was here without status and covering any eventually that she might
   acquire status in the future. Particularly in paragraph  60  and  61  she
   dealt with the situation of the children going to China and  also  at  70
   and 71 the situation of them remaining in the UK and took account of  the
   relevant evidence. She took herself through all the  competing  interests
   in s117B and reached a conclusion that was properly open  to  her.  There
   was no material error of law and it ought to stand and he invited  me  to
   dismiss the appeal.


10. Mr Dieu said that Mr Manley had dealt with the points raised.


   Discussion and Findings


11. The Appellant's  challenge  is  in  relation  to  Article  8  only.  The
   Respondent did not take issue with the Appellant's paternity of his three
   children in the RFRL or in submissions. The  First-tier  Tribunal  raised
   the issue of the paternity  of  the  children  at  paragraph  43  of  the
   decision. She considered in that paragraph, in  relation  to  the  asylum
   claim, whether there was a genuine relationship between the appellant and
   the  mother  of  his  "claimed"  children.  She  noted  that  the   birth
   certificates were in the name of both parents but that there was  no  DNA
   evidence and no statement from his partner that she would  accompany  him
   to China if he  left  the  UK.  She  noted  that  the  partner  had  made
   submissions to the Home Office, but there was no  joint  application  and
   that those submissions were outstanding. At paragraph 44, she found  that
   there was insufficient evidence before  her  to  be  satisfied  that  the
   children named on the birth certificate produced by  the  Appellant  were
   his children and even if they  were,  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
   Appellant's partner would accompany the appellant  to  China  if  he  was
   refused asylum.   She then found at paragraph 45 that it would be in  the
   best interests of the children to remain with their mother who resided at
   present in the UK and that on the evidence  before  her  it  was  unclear
   whether the Appellant resided with them.  These  findings  were  made  in
   relation to the Appellant's asylum claim.


12. She then considered the  Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR  at
   paragraphs 55 to 73 of the  decision.  At  paragraph  56  she  considered
   whether he had established family life in the United Kingdom.  She  again
   referred to the fact that there was no DNA evidence  to  prove  that  the
   Appellant was the father of the children and the fact that there  was  no
   evidence that they had been living together save for the address  on  the
   birth certificate. She nevertheless found  on  the  basis  of  the  birth
   certificates that family life existed for the purposes of Article 8.  She
   then considered the best interests of the children and concluded that  in
   the light of their ages, the eldest child being  4  and  the  youngest  9
   months old, that they had not enjoyed a substantial period  of  residence
   here. She then found that for this reason, if the children went to  China
   with the Appellant it would not breach their Article 8 rights and if they
   did not, that would be the choice of their mother and the Appellant could
   apply from China to join them. She also considered that whilst  they  may
   find it difficult to obtain medical help and education, the Appellant had
   family in China and it did not appear that the family had suffered  as  a
   result of the one child policy.  After finding that it was in the  public
   interest to remove the Appellant from the UK, she commented that it was a
   matter for his partner and him whether she and  the  children  return  to
   China.  She  stated  that  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
   proportionate for him to be removed and for him to make an application to
   join  his  partner  if  she  obtained  status,  she  had  considered  the
   importance of not burdening the children with the  culpability  of  their
   and the children could remain in the UK for  the  time  being  until  the
   parents decided whether the Appellant should apply to come  here  legally
   or return to China where both parents were found not to be at risk.


13.  I accept the Appellant's submission that the question of paternity  was
   not in issue between the parties. It was not raised in the Refusal Letter
   or in submissions. In R (on the application of Ganidalgi) v  SSHD  [2001]
   INLR 479 it was held that where a question of fact was  conceded  by  the
   Respondent, either in its decision letter or  at  a  hearing  before  the
   Tribunal, the concession must be accepted by  the  Tribunal  (subject  to
   withdrawal). In SSHD v Balasingham Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA  Civ  173  the
   Court of Appeal held that that it was going too far to say that,  if  the
   Secretary of State does not challenge an assertion of fact  made  by  the
   appellant and if the adjudicator does not raise with  the  appellant  any
   doubts about his veracity, then the adjudicator is bound to  accept  that
   assertion  as  true,  although  fairness  may   sometimes   require   the
   adjudicator to put an inconsistency to the appellant, for example  if  an
   adjudicator had in mind to go behind an express concession.  In AM  (fair
   hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) it  was  held  that  fairness  may
   require a Tribunal to canvas an issue which has not  been  ventilated  by
   the parties or their representatives, in fulfilment of each party's right
   to a fair hearing. In YHY (China) AP Petition for JR 2014 CSOH 11 it  was
   held that there was procedural unfairness amounting to an  error  of  law
   where points were taken against  the  appellant  that  were  not  in  the
   original decision and notice of the additional points had not been  given
   to the appellant. Specifically it  had  never  been  suggested  that  the
   appellant was not the father of a child but the judge found  that  to  be
   the position.


14. The Tribunal is not obliged, as a matter of natural  justice,  to  point
   out all inconsistencies in respect of which  adverse  credibility  points
   are taken in respect of matters not raised at the  hearing.  However,  in
   this case paternity was clearly not in issue and the Judge did not  reach
   her conclusion that she was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  the
   father of the children as a result of inconsistencies, but rather due  to
   the lack of DNA evidence which was point not raised either before  or  at
   the hearing by the Respondent. Further, Mr Manley asserted in his grounds
   that this was a matter that was clarified by the Judge as  not  being  in
   issue during the hearing. I conclude therefore that the Judge did err  by
   going on a frolic of her own.

15. It is asserted that this amounted to a  material  error  of  law  as  it
   tainted her whole approach to Article 8  and  that  because  it  was  not
   raised at the hearing the Appellant did not have a fair trial because  he
   had no opportunity to address the findings. I have  therefore  considered
   whether as a result of the fact that the matter was not canvassed at  the
   hearing, the hearing was rendered  unfair.  I  have  also  considered  in
   assessing whether the procedural irregularity was  material  what  effect
   the error had on the exercise of proportionality.

16. Notwithstanding the fact that she went on a frolic of her own  regarding
   the  issue  of  paternity  she  accepted,  on  the  basis  of  the  birth
   certificates, that the Appellant  had  established  family  life  in  the
   United Kingdom.  She proceeded therefore to consider the  proportionality
   of removal on the basis that the children would accompany  the  Appellant
   to China.


17. She referred to Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano  applied  -  Razgar)
   Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00247(IAC). This case was not on point  as  it  deals
   with the question of the application of the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
   Justice of the European Union in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (European  citizenship)
   [2011] EUECJ Case C-34/09 OJ 2011 C130/2 and that of the Supreme Court in
   ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4; [2011]  2  WLR  148,  in  relation  to  the
   proposed administrative removal or deportation of one or both of the non-
   national parents of an EU citizen child. That was not the situation here.




18. However, I do not consider that the mistaken reference to  Omotunde  was
   material to the proportionality exercise.  She  considered  the  relevant
   factors  relating  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children.   In   EV
   (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874  the  Court  held  at
   [34] to [38]:

      34.   In determining whether or not, in a case such  as  the  present,
      the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests  of  the
      children, it is necessary to determine the relative  strength  of  the
      factors which make it in their best interests to remain here; and also
      to take account of any factors that point the other way.


      35.   A decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
      depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of
      time that they have  been  here;  (c)  how  long  they  have  been  in
      education; (c) what stage their education has  reached;  (d)  to  what
      extent they have become distanced from the  country  to  which  it  is
      proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with  it
      may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or other
      difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g)  the  extent
      to which the course proposed will interfere with their family life  or
      their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.


      36.   In a sense the  tribunal  is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
      answer falls to be given to the question: is it in the best  interests
      of the child to remain? The longer the child has been here,  the  more
      advanced (or critical) the stage of his education, the looser his ties
      with  the  country  in  question,  and  the   more   deleterious   the
      consequences of his return, the greater the weight that falls into one
      side of the scales. If  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
      interests that he should not return, the need to maintain  immigration
      control may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
      child's best interests to remain,  but  only  on  balance  (with  some
      factors pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.


      37.   In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken  into
      account the strong  weight  to  be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
      immigration control in pursuit  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
      country and the fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
      entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents may also
      be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.

19.  There was little evidence before the Judge regarding the  children  but
   she considered the length of residence of the children,  their  age,  the
   fact that they were not yet in education and the circumstances they  were
   likely to face on return to China. It is  clear  from  the  reasoning  in
   paragraphs 59 and 61, that the First-tier Tribunal found  that  it  would
   not be contrary to the children's best interests or  disproportionate  to
   go to China with the Appellant.   Although the Judge may have found  that
   she was not satisfied of paternity, she accepted he enjoyed  family  life
   with the children, considered the best  interests  of  the  children  and
   conducted a proportionality exercise on the basis that  the  partner  and
   his children would accompany him to China.


20. However, in concluding that it would not be contrary to  the  children's
   best interest to return with their father to China, she  did  not  engage
   with the Appellant's arguments recorded in paragraph 31 of the  decision,
   that the family would be subjected to substantial fines and would have no
   access to health, education and housing unless they could pay  them.  She
   concluded at paragraph 70 that the neither parent was at risk  in  China.
   However, because she had found at paragraphs 42 to 46 that  she  was  not
   satisfied that the children were the  Appellant's  or  that  Ms  W  would
   accompany the Appellant to China if he was refused asylum,  she  had  not
   assessed the risk of return  to  the  whole  family  and  considered  the
   country guidance case of AX (family planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT
   00097 (IAC) in relation to access to education, housing and fines.  These
   matters were clearly relevant to an assessment of the best  interests  of
   the children and proportionality and they were not taken into account  by
   the First-tier Tribunal.


21. I consider that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude  that
   the Appellant's partner and children would not  necessarily  return  with
   him even though they had no status here. Whilst the  Respondent  may  not
   have argued that  the  Appellant  would  be  returned  alone,  the  Judge
   considered this scenario on the basis of the facts as she found  them  to
   be. The grounds assert that it was accepted  by  both  parties  that  the
   partner and the children  would  return  to  China  with  the  Appellant.
   However, it is not set out how or where it was agreed. Whilst the Refusal
   Letter did not take issue with the fact  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
   relationship and had three children with his  partner,  a  failed  asylum
   seeker, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  take  into  account  the
   evidence before regarding that relationship. She was clearly  aware  that
   the Appellant's partner was a failed  asylum  seeker  but  that  she  had
   further submissions outstanding for consideration before the  Respondent.
   In his interview in November 2013 in answer to question 94 he  said  that
   he had never lived at the same address as  his  partner.  She  considered
   this evidence at paragraph 42 of the decision.  The  Appellant's  partner
   did not attend to give evidence or produce a witness  statement.  In  the
   circumstances I find that she was entitled to find, in  the  alternative,
   that they would not return together.


22. However, I consider that in concluding  it  was  proportionate  for  the
   Appellant to be removed and make an application from China  to  join  his
   partner in the UK if she obtained status, the First-tier Tribunal did not
   address her mind to the  prospect  of  the  Appellant  being  permanently
   denied the opportunity of  a  relationship  with  his  children.  On  the
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant's  partner  had  no
   status, and hence any application for entry  clearance  would  have  been
   bound to fail. She had accepted that the Appellant  enjoyed  family  life
   with his children and hence the consequence of  his  removal  would  have
   meant separation from his children. Proportionality was not considered in
   this context.


23. I therefore find that  the  assessment  of  proportionality  was  flawed
   because the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  relevant  matters  into
   account and failed to give adequate reasons for her findings.


24. Having regard to Part  7.2  (a)  of  the  Practice  Statements  for  the
   Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper-Tier
   Tribunal, the extent of judicial fact finding is such  that  this  matter
   should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.






Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

I set the decision aside in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

I remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 01 July 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

