

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal   Appeal Numbers: AA/00832/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  AA/00835/2013
      AA/00836/2013
      AA/00837/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Date sent                    |
|On 17th May 2013                              |On 29th July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                            adfunmi agnes shitta
                          theresa shitta (A MINOR)
                  hephzibah oluwajomiloju shitta (A MINOR)
                          benjamin shitta (A MINOR)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M C Afzal of International Immigration Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appealed with permission against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague, who dismissed  their  appeals  against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse refugee recognition  or  leave
    to remain on humanitarian protection or human rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State was not represented at the hearing today and  no
    written representations were received.

 3. The principal appellant is an adult Nigerian  citizen,  and  the  other
    three appellants are her children:  a daughter, T, born  in  2004,  now
    nine years old but with such severe autism that she presents as a  much
    younger child; a son, born in 2007, now  six  years  old;  and  another
    daughter, born in 2011 and therefore  presently  two  years  old.   The
    principal appellant's husband, a Christian pastor,  remains  in  Lagos,
    Nigeria, where his Church is, but has visited  the  appellants  in  the
    United Kingdom several times during 2012.

 4. The appellants were in the United Kingdom in 2010, at which  time  they
    began making arrangements for the child T to go to school here and have
    support for her special needs.  The plan was for an aunt to  adopt  her
    and be her carer.  They then returned to Nigeria and did  not  come  to
    the United Kingdom again until  the  beginning  of  2012,  entering  as
    visitors  and  then  applying  for  asylum  and  leave  to  remain   on
    humanitarian protection or human rights grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State refused international protection  and  curtailed
    the existing leave so that none remained. At the same  time,  she  gave
    directions for the removal of the appellants under Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   Such  a  simultaneous
    direction is unlawful, following the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures)
    Sri Lanka [2012] UKUT 414 (IAC).

Factual matrix

 6. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the principal appellant gave a
    "generally  truthful  account  of  matters,  although  tending  to   be
    dismissive of suggestions incompatible with her wish to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom".  He accepted most of her evidence.  The following is a
    summary of the factual matrix  disclosed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination.

 7. The principal appellant is a woman of Yoruba ethnicity born in 1974  in
    Lagos, who lived there  all  her  life  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The other three appellants are her minor  children  with  her
    husband, a Christian pastor, David Shitta, who is  a  minister  of  the
    Cherubim and  Seraphim  Church  in  Lagos.   The  eldest  and  youngest
    children are daughters and the middle child is a son.

 8. The appellant is also a Christian and when in Lagos she  worshipped  at
    her husband's Church.  Her own parents live only five miles away.   The
    couple are estranged due to a  dispute  in  the  latter  half  of  2012
    concerning the perceived  necessity  for  their  daughters  to  undergo
    female genital mutilation (FGM), which the husband's parents regard  as
    essential.  FGM is unlawful in Nigeria but is still practised  in  some
    places.   The appellant and her husband oppose the  practice,  although
    he is more inclined to defer to his female relatives in this matter.

 9. The eldest daughter, T, is severely autistic and has no speech; she  is
    hyperactive.  People in Nigeria were generally unkind to T, staring  at
    her and calling her names.  About  half  of  the  congregation  of  her
    father's church shunned her  whereas  the  other  half  were  kind  and
    sympathetic.   The  appellant's  husband's   family,   who   were   not
    Christians,  interpreted  her  lack  of  speech  and  hyperactivity  as
    indicating that T  is  a  witch  and  rejected  her.   They  asked  the
    appellant to leave her husband  and  tried  to  harm  the  child.   The
    husband's family attempted to impose FGM on the child T, when  she  was
    about two years old, but due  to  her  hyperactivity,  were  unable  to
    complete the procedure.

10. From December 2005 the appellant and her children lived  with  her  own
    parents, some five or six miles away from  the  family  compound.   Her
    husband remained with his family, due to there being insufficient  room
    in the appellant's parents' house.  The children went  to  church  with
    their maternal grandparents, a church of the same  denomination.   They
    had no contact with their paternal family.  The appellant continued  to
    attend her husband's church.

11. In the light of the family difficulties, and to give T a  better  life,
    the appellant's husband suggested that she bring the  children  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant and her husband  agreed  that  he  would
    remain in Lagos, Nigeria, and continue his ministry,  but  would  visit
    his family in the United Kingdom regularly.    The  appellant  and  her
    husband hoped that the appellant's brother, who  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom, would adopt T, but the brother's wife opposed it and that part
    of their plan was unsuccessful.

12. In February 2012, the principal appellant and her minor  children  came
    to the United Kingdom.   The appellant's husband visited the family  in
    April, July and December  of  2012.   In  July  2012,  the  appellant's
    husband told her that his family wanted  the  youngest  child,  also  a
    daughter, to be returned to Nigeria for FGM to be carried  out.    They
    quarrelled.  By  the  time  he  visited  in  December  2012  they  were
    estranged and he only came to see the children.

13. Since coming to the United Kingdom, T has made some  limited  progress.
    She was able to attend school here, had a social worker, and a  charity
    (Time Out) gave the appellant four hours' respite a  week.   The  child
    was not shunned here, and some limited progress had been  made  in  her
    condition in that she has learned to say baba (father) and Bob (for Bob
    the Builder).

The First-tier Tribunal determination

14. After setting out the accepted facts, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    reasoning was as follows:

         "9.      The COIS Report states that FGM is prohibited  in  Nigeria
             and is a  criminal  offence.   The  practice  still  continues
             however  in  areas  where  the  custom   is   entrenched   and
             enforcement action is patchy.

         10.      The appellant and her husband are both opposed to  FGM  as
             are the appellant's parents.  Her husband's family  favour  it
             but it has been resisted thus far.  As the children have  been
             living only about five miles from the paternal family home  it
             does not appear that there is a risk of force being used.  The
             remedy to this situation is for the parents  to  be  resident.
             The  appearance  is  that  the  move  to  England   and   this
             application insofar as it relates to FGM is as  much  designed
             to avoid family discord as to prevent it  occurring.   When  a
             removal of children to a house five  or  six  miles  away  has
             secured their safety thus far it  is  clearly  the  case  that
             relocation in a country  as  large  as  Nigeria  would  be  as
             effective as coming to England.  Although  criminalisation  of
             FGM has failed to eradicate the practice it is  indicative  of
             the existence of State support and protection to  parents  who
             would avail themselves of it.

         11.      There are a number of organisations devoted  to  the  care
             and treatment of autism in Nigeria including two in Lagos  and
             three in  Abuja.   They  are  all  listed  in  the  RRL.   The
             appellant said that she was aware of some of them but she  had
             not sought their  assistance.   It  is  appropriate  that  the
             resources available in her own  country,  be  accessed  before
             seeking international aid.

         12.      I accept  that  autistic  children  can  be  perceived  as
             malevolent in parts of Nigeria and unkindly treated  but  that
             is not the whole picture.  The appellant herself conceded that
             something like half  of  the  very  large  population  of  her
             parent's church were kind and sympathetic in their  responses.
             The presence of several institutions directed to the treatment
             of autism  shows  that  suffers  from  the  condition  can  be
             appropriately cared for."

    The decision deals briefly with Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  also  with
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act as follows:

         "14.     The appellant and her  children  would  be  removed  as  a
             family unit so that family life is not adversely  affected  by
             the decision.  Mr Afzal argued that because the children  have
             now enrolled in school that there is a protected family  life.
             They are very young and adaptable and their time in the United
             Kingdom has  been  so  short  that  I  do  not  find  that  it
             constitutes a family life of a protected quality.   Article  8
             is not infringed.

         15.      There is a duty upon the respondent to have regard to  the
             need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  in
             the United Kingdom.  It is in the interest of  these  children
             to live with their family in the country and culture of  their
             birth".

Permission to appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Campbell  on  the
    basis  that  the  assessment  of  Article  8  and  Section  55  in  the
    determination was arguably flawed in the light of guidance given by the
    Upper Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new  rules)  [2012]  UKUT  00393  and
    Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  45,  and  also  in
    Adamally and Jaferi concerning the  s.47  point.   He  considered  that
    there  was  little  merit  in  the   appellants'   challenge   to   the
    determination in relation to asylum,  or humanitarian protection.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

16. At the hearing today I heard additional evidence  from  the  appellant,
    some of which has been included in the  summary  of  facts  above.   In
    addition, the following information was given:

        i) The appellant said that although she and her husband  were  both
           opposed to FGM his traditionalist family or at least the  senior
           members thereof were putting pressure on them.

       ii) Most of the children in the family were now either Christian  or
           Muslim.  Some of the husband's family was in Lagos and  some  in
           Ekiti State about three hours' drive away.

      iii) She did not know whether his sisters or his nieces had undergone
           FGM because she had never asked  the  question.   She  knew  the
           family but they were not cordial.  The parents  would  not  stop
           the children from doing whatever they liked, except in  relation
           to one or two traditions still considered important, such  as  a
           particular method of washing a new baby's head, and FGM  itself.
           The way  the  family  talked,  it  was  her  feeling  that  they
           considered that FGM was something anyone should do.

       iv) She accepted that FGM was illegal in Nigeria but the attitude of
           Nigerians to laws was that they existed but there was no need to
           abide by them.

17. In submissions for the appellant, Mr Afzal relied on the special  needs
    report and a school report on the  child  T  and  reminded  me  of  the
    factual matrix. He submitted that the best interests  of  the  children
    required that they remain in the United Kingdom and in particular  that
    T would be shunned on return which was inhuman and degrading treatment.
     Nigeria was not a protected environment for  her  and  she  would  not
    receive the same treatment as she was receiving in the United  Kingdom.
    The Tribunal in the First-tier had erred in failing to consider the new
    Article 8 Rules before moving to consider Article 8 outside  the  Rules
    but he could not indicate how the new Rules were likely  to  have  been
    favourable to the appellant.  I reserved my decision.

Evidence Concerning T's Difficulties

18. The Home Office bundle contains the following evidence concerning T:

     a) A letter of appointment by Southwark Health and Social Care on 21st
        December 2010;

     b) a letter of 24th December 2010 referring the child  to  the  social
        communication clinic;

     c) A statement of special educational needs prepared on  29th  October
        2010. When her needs were assessed by Southwark  she  had  not  yet
        been enrolled at any school.  Her maternal aunt was    planning  to
        take up guardianship and seek a school place for  the  child.   The
        family were staying with the aunt, who referred to herself  as  T's
        carer.  There were difficulties because T's cousins were  unwilling
        to play with her.

     d) The SEN statement recorded  that  while  in  Lagos,  T  attended  a
        special school, the Creative Children's School, from which a report
        had been made available to the Children's  Services  at  Southwark.
        She had been receiving three hours' therapy at home  before  coming
        to the United Kingdom, which, according to her mother, had  made  a
        big difference.  A report from the Country  of  Origin  Information
        Service indicated that there were a number of special  schools  for
        children with special  needs  in  Nigeria  including  for  autistic
        children and gave various internet links to the relevant schools.

     e) The child T was assessed as having many behaviours  and  tendencies
        indicating  quite  severe  difficulties,  in  particular  with  the
        development  of  speech,   language   and   communication,   social
        interaction, fine and gross motor development as well as  cognitive
        abilities.  T had no receptive or expressive language, very  little
        interest in others and in interacting (which indicated a  delay  in
        her emotional and social development),  exhibited  much  repetitive
        and self stimulating behaviour, with a lack  of  awareness  of  her
        environment and dangers around her.  T preferred to  be  alone  and
        would not share things and she did not seem to suffer pain.   There
        were suspected problems with her vision  and  hearing  as  well  as
        autistic spectrum disorder; and

     f) A letter on 4th January 2011 about admission to a  local  authority
        school.

19. The appellant and her children must have returned to Nigeria after that
    visit because their  present  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  began  in
    February 2012, on visit visas valid until 9th June 2013: that leave was
    subsequently varied so that none remained.

Country evidence

20. The respondent's Country of Origin Report of January  2013  notes  that
    according to the 2008 Nigeria Demographic  and  Health  Survey  (NDHS),
    which is the latest such survey, 30 percent of Nigerian women had  been
    subjected to FGM which was most prevalent in the southern region  among
    the Yoruba and Igbo.  Most women were subjected  to  FGM  before  their
    first birthday, although the age could vary. Nigerian law  criminalised
    the removal of any part of the sexual organ from a woman or girl except
    for medical reasons. FGM appeared to be declining. At paragraph  3.9.4,
    the respondent's January 2013 OGN says this:

         "3.9.4   FGM is a phenomenon found in large parts of  Nigeria,  but
               there is great variation in how it is practised.  There is a
               clear tendency that the  share  of  girls  and  young  women
               subjected to FGM is decreasing with every  generation.   FGM
               is practised by all larger ethnic  groups  in  Nigeria,  but
               other social factors influence the practice and cause  great
               variation within these ethnic groups.   FGM  is  a  criminal
               offence in a number of Nigerian  States,  but  no  cases  of
               legal prosecution of people  who  have  subjected  girls  or
               women to FGM have been recorded.  Projects against FGM,  run
               by both State authorities and NGOs, focus on information  to
               the general public and consciousness building.   Differences
               in the prevalence of female  circumcision  by  age  indicate
               that the practice has become less common over  time.   Women
               aged 45-49 are nearly twice as likely as women aged 15-19 to
               have  been  circumcised  (38  percent   compared   with   22
               percent)."

21. The OGN concludes:

         "3.9.6    Conclusion  Whilst  protection  and/or   assistance   are
                available from governmental  and  non-governmental  sources,
                this is limited.  Case owners will need to ensure that  each
                case is considered on its own  merits,  however  in  general
                those who are unable or, owing to fear, unwilling  to  avail
                themselves of the protection of the authorities, can  safely
                relocate to another part of Nigeria where the family members
                who are pressurising them to undergo FGM would  be  unlikely
                to trace them.  Women in this situation would if they choose
                to do so, also be able to seek protection from women's  NGOs
                in the new location."

Discussion

22.  The  proper  approach  to  Article  8  both  within  and  without  the
    Immigration Rules has been controversial.  The effect  of  both  Izuazu
    and  MF  (Nigeria)  is  that  the  decision  maker  must  always   give
    consideration to Article 8 both within and without the Rules.  However,
    since Mr Afzal has been unable to identify any  area  of  the  domestic
    Article 8 formulation within the Immigration Rules which was likely  to
    have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal, I do not  consider
    that there is any error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  dealing
    only with Article 8 outside the Rules.

23. The s.47 decision, with which the First-tier Tribunal did not  deal  in
    the determination, is unlawful.

24. The real question is whether, having regard to Article  8  and  to  the
    best interests of these very young children, pursuant to  s.55  of  the
    Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,  removal  of  these
    children and their mother to  Nigeria  breaches  the  United  Kingdom's
    international obligations.  The best interests of the  children  are  a
    primary factor but not necessarily determinative, especially where,  as
    here, they are very young and have not yet  formed  strong  connections
    outside the home.

25. Turning to Article 8 without the Rules,  the  appellants  put  that  in
    three ways:  first, in relation to the special needs of  the  child  T,
    second, in relation to the FGM risk to T and the youngest child, also a
    girl; and thirdly, in relation to private and family life generally.

26. Dealing  first  with  the  position  of  T,  the  evidence  before  the
    respondent showed that special needs support for autism  was  available
    in Nigeria.  T was receiving special education and  three  hours'  home
    support in Lagos, whereas  in  the  United  Kingdom  she  is  receiving
    education and  her  mother  gets  four  hours'  respite  support.   The
    difference does not  seem  to  be  sufficiently  grave  to  engage  the
    provisions of Article 8.   T's engagement with  the  outside  world  is
    very restricted:  she feels no pain, shows no interest  in  others,  is
    very self-absorbed, and hums to herself.  Only two  identifiable  words
    have emerged while she has been in the United Kingdom.  She will be  no
    better and no worse off in Lagos than in the United Kingdom.

27. The next question is the risk of FGM  in  Nigeria  if  the  oldest  and
    youngest daughters  return  with  the  appellant  now.   The  principal
    appellant, a Christian, is implacably opposed to  FGM  and  has  become
    estranged from her husband when he suggested it be carried out on their
    second daughter.  FGM is unlawful in Nigeria and both  of  the  child's
    parents are opposed to it, albeit the opposition of the child's  pastor
    father may be weakened by the pressure from his parents.

28. The principal appellant has the support of her parents.   The  evidence
    is that all the appellants lived with the principal appellant's parents
    just five or six miles away from her husband's family compound and  his
    family, before coming to the United Kingdom, and during that time,  the
    second, third and fourth  appellants  had  nothing  to  do  with  their
    father's  family.   The  principal  appellant  was  able  to   continue
    attending  her  husband's  church,  while  her  children  attended  her
    parents' church, until the family left Nigeria.  Her  husband's  family
    were unable to enforce FGM: after an abortive attempt to perform FGM on
    the child T when she was 2 years old, which is  now  seven  years  ago,
    their influence has been confined to social and family pressure on  the
    appellant's husband.

29. The only area where the principal appellant's evidence appeared  to  me
    to be evasive was when I asked her whether her sisters-in-law  and  her
    nieces had undergone FGM.  I do not believe that the appellant would be
    unaware of the answer to that and I consider that her answers  may  not
    have been entirely straightforward. Given that all of  her  sisters-in-
    law are either Christians or Muslims, it is reasonably likely that they
    and their daughters fall into the increasing group  of  Nigerian  women
    who have refused to cooperate with FGM.

30. The third way in which Article 8 is put is on the basis of  family  and
    private life.  The only family life experienced by  the  appellant  and
    these children is amongst themselves and with  the  children's  father.
    As to private life, the children are very young with the  exception  of
    T, who although she is older because of her poor communication presents
    as a much younger person and does not engage with the world around  her
    at all.  There is therefore no good  reason  why  they  could  not  all
    return to  Nigeria  and  either  continue  living  in  Lagos  with  the
    appellant's parents or relocate to, say, Abuja and begin  afresh,  away
    from the pressure of her husband's parents.

31. For all the above reasons this appeal is dismissed, save in relation to
    the s.47 direction.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

I  remake  the  decision  in  these  appeals,  dismissing  them  on  asylum,
humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds. The appeals  against  the
respondent's decisions  to  remove  the  appellants  pursuant  to  s.47  are
allowed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  17 September 2013              |Signed:                              |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |Judith Gleeson                       |
|                                      |Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |







