
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |
|Prepared on 8 February 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. T.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran. He entered the UK on 8  May  2009
       illegally, and claimed asylum the same day.  The  Respondent  refused
       that  claim,  and  made  a  decision  to  remove  him  to  Iran.  The
       Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was heard on 3 August
       2009, and dismissed in a decision promulgated by First Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Hands. In the course of that decision Judge Hands recorded  the
       Appellant's case as it  then  was,  and  made  a  series  of  adverse
       findings of fact, rejecting as untrue the Appellant's account of  his
       experiences.

    2. The Appellant was not removed from the UK. On 17 March 2014 he made a
       fresh claim to asylum relying upon two medical reports dated 13 March
       2014 prepared by doctors working for Freedom  from  Torture,  one  in
       relation to the scarring that could be seen upon his body, and one in
       relation to his psychiatric condition. Whilst this was accepted as  a
       fresh claim, it too was refused and a further decision to  remove  to
       Iran was made.

    3. The Appellant's appeal against the removal  decision  was  heard  and
       dismissed in a decision promulgated by First Tier Tribunal Judge Mark-
       Bell on 22 April 2015.

    4. First Tier Tribunal Judge Reid granted the  Appellant  permission  to
       appeal that decision on 22 May  2015  on  the  basis  the  Tribunal's
       approach to the medical evidence was arguably deficient.

    5. Thus the matter comes before me.

  Error of law?

    6. The parties are agreed that the Appellant denied before  Judge  Hands
       in August 2009 that he had sustained any injury during the period  of
       detention and torture by the Iranian authorities that he  claimed  to
       have experienced in September 2008 [14]. This was consistent with the
       account he had given at screening, and at full interview.

    7. The parties are also agreed that  the  report  upon  the  Appellant's
       scarring, prepared by Dr M after three consultations in  April  2013,
       recorded a series of 67 skin lesions upon his body that were at least
       six to twelve months  old.  62  of  these  67  lesions  were  "highly
       consistent" with his flesh being struck with a  slim  implement  with
       some force. The injuries would not in Dr M's opinion have occurred by
       accident, and they were not consistent with  any  pattern  of  injury
       that could have occurred from any occasion of  self  flagellation  as
       practiced by members of the Shia faith [ApB p20-].

    8. That evidence raised the question  of  when  the  injuries  that  had
       resulted in these scars were sustained. It also raised  the  question
       of why, if they had indeed been sustained in 2008 during detention as
       the Appellant now claimed, he had previously  denied  sustaining  any
       injury at all. The alternatives, as  the  Judge  clearly  recognised,
       were either  that  the  Appellant  had  deliberately  chosen  not  to
       disclose these injuries in the course of his first asylum  claim  and
       appeal hearing, or, that the injuries which had resulted in the scars
       had occurred after the Appellant's receipt of Judge Hands'  decision.
       If the latter were the case, it would give rise to the prospect  that
       these injuries had been suffered with the Appellant's consent and for
       the purpose of producing scarring upon which he could later  rely  in
       support of a fresh asylum claim.

    9. Whilst the Judge accepted Dr  Gs  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
       suffering from a profound psychological disturbance (which  he  found
       did not meet the criteria for PTSD), he was not satisfied  that  this
       was caused by any torture  experienced  in  Iran  [27].  He  was  not
       satisfied  that  if  the  Iranian  authorities  had  dealt  with  the
       Appellant so severely, they would simply have  released  him  without
       charge after only the short period of  detention  the  Appellant  had
       described [28]. He concluded that the Appellant had  been  beaten  at
       some other point in time.

   10. What the Judge did not specifically engage with was the  evidence  of
       Dr G, as to when and in what circumstances the  Appellant  had  first
       disclosed the existence of his scars. That  was  set  out  in  Dr  Gs
       report, along with details of the disclosures of anal and  oral  rape
       that were also made, and when  they  were  made.  Instead  the  Judge
       appears to have been under the impression that Dr G had not addressed
       his mind to the question of why the Appellant would not disclose such
       injuries prior to 2012, if they had been sustained as  claimed  [25].
       Dr G had recorded that he commenced consultations with the  Appellant
       in August 2010, and that by the date of his report there had been  47
       such consultations.  Dr G had said that he first suspected there  had
       been a sexual element to the  Appellant's  experiences  in  detention
       during the first consultation, but that it  had  taken  him  eighteen
       months to get the Appellant to disclose to him even the existence  of
       physical scarring, which had occurred in about February 2012 [ApB p42
       #15]. There had then  been  a  further  period  of  time  before  the
       Appellant had disclosed to him any sexual element to his experiences.
       Dr G offered the sexual element to his experiences as the explanation
       for the Appellant's failure to even disclose  his  physical  injuries
       during the course of the first asylum claim and appeal. He prayed  in
       aid the research upon delays by victims in making disclosure of rape.
       Thus Dr G did address his mind to precisely the issue that the  Judge
       felt he had failed to address. I am satisfied  that  the  failure  to
       demonstrate that this evidence  was  specifically  engaged  with  was
       sufficient in the circumstances of this rather unusual and  difficult
       appeal to render the Judge's findings of primary fact unsafe.

   11. After some considerable discussion the parties are  now  agreed  that
       the issues at the heart of  the  appeal  before  the  Judge  were  as
       follows. Did  Dr  Gs  evidence  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
       Appellant's psychological disturbance, coupled with the evidence that
       it is not unusual for victims of serious sexual abuse to be  slow  to
       disclose their experiences, provide a sound evidential basis for  the
       possibility that the Appellant had chosen not  to  disclose  injuries
       that he had in fact sustained in detention? In those circumstances is
       there a real risk that the Appellant's body did bear the  scars  that
       were observed from February 2012 onwards at the time of  the  hearing
       before Judge Hands in August 2009? In those circumstances is there  a
       real risk that the Appellant did suffer  the  ill  treatment  he  has
       described to Dr G in the course of his detention in 2008?

   12. The parties are now agreed that  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
       needed to be looked at through that lens, and they  are  also  agreed
       that it was not. The explanation for that may be found in the failure
       of those then representing the Appellant to place paragraph 15 of  Dr
       Gs report at the centre of the opening of the appeal  to  the  Judge,
       which I am satisfied did not happen, just as it was not placed at the
       heart of the grounds of appeal.

   13. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the
       appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard.  The  parties
       are now agreed that this should be the case. In the circumstances  of
       the appeal I am satisfied that  this  is  the  correct  approach.  In
       circumstances where it would appear that the  relevant  evidence  has
       not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal,  the  effect
       of that error of law  has  been  to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  the
       opportunity for his case to be properly considered by the First  Tier
       Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 25  September
       2012. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact  finding  exercise  is
       such  that  having  regard  to  the  over-riding  objective,  it   is
       appropriate that the appeal should be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 25  September
       2012. In my judgement the appeal must be remitted to the  First  Tier
       Tribunal for re-hearing with none of the findings of Judge  Mark-Bell
       preserved. The findings of fact made by Judge Hands  in  August  2009
       remain however, and they will form the starting point for  the  First
       Tier Tribunal. It will be for the First Tier Tribunal to  decide,  in
       the light of the principles set out  in  Devaseelan  whether  any  of
       those findings of fact, and if so how many, need to be revisited  and
       remade.

   14. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of the  parties  I
       make the following directions;

        i) The decision upon the appeal is set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved from the decision of Judge Mark-Bell.  The
           appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.

       ii) A Farsi interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

      iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at [ -  ]
           hearing centre after 1 March 2016.

       iv) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.

Decision


   15. The decision promulgated on 6 August 2014 did involve the  making  of
       an error of law sufficient to require it to  be  set  aside  and  the
       appeal to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is set
       aside and the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal with  the
       following directions;

        i) The decision upon the appeal is set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved from the decision of Judge Mark-Bell.  The
           appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.

       ii) A Farsi interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

      iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at [ -  ]
           hearing centre after 1 March 2016.

       iv) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 8 February 2016
