

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00103/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 20 January 2017                         |on 23 January 2017             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    N M F
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination by Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Murray,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  refusal  of
    recognition as a refugee from Sri Lanka.

 2. The first and main point in the grounds is that  the  judge  fell  into
    error by reaching her adverse credibility conclusion in advance of  and
    separately from considering  the  medical  evidence,  contrary  to  the
    principle set out in Mibanga v SSHD EWCA Civ 367.

 3. The FtT refused permission, on the view that the judge did not  proceed
    by rejecting the  appellant's  account  first,  then  disregarding  the
    medical report, but rather looked at all matters together; of necessity
    she set out conclusions in  some  form  of  order,  but  that  did  not
    necessarily mean that she decided one matter before another.

 4. On renewal of the application, the UT granted permission.

 5. In a rule 24 response dated 20 December 2016  the  respondent  conceded
    that there had been  error  of  law  such  that  a  fresh  hearing  was
    required.

 6. Representatives agreed that it was appropriate for that hearing to take
    place in the FtT.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  None  of  its  findings  are  to
    stand, other than as a record of what was said on that  occasion.   The
    nature of the case is such that it is appropriate in terms  of  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 8. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Murray.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            20 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




