
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA008422015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2016                       |On 15 June 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     n l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the  appellant  who  claims  asylum  with  his
    family.  This order prohibits the  disclosure  directly  or  indirectly
    (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of  the  appellant.   Any
    disclosure and breach of this order may amount to a contempt of  court.
    This order shall remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal
    or court.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    (DRC) who was born on [ ] 1977.  He arrived in the UK on 3 October 2013
    together with his wife and two children.  The appellant claimed  asylum
    with his family as his dependants.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim was (and is) that  he  was  involved
    with the NGO called Toges-Noires in the DRC since 2000.  As a result of
    his political activities, he claims that he was arrested  and  detained
    on two occasions in the DRC namely on 20  May  2011  and  16  September
    2013.  The latter detention, he  claimed,  arose  as  a  result  of  an
    appearance on 10 September 2013 as a panel member on [ ] Television.

 4. On 12 December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  On 19 December 2014, the Secretary of State made  a  decision
    to remove the appellant by way of directions to the DRC.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed against the latter decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a determination promulgated on 6 July 2015, Judge  Holder
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Whilst Judge  Holder  accepted  that
    the appellant had been a member of Toges-Noires since  2000  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's claim that he had been arrested  and  detained
    on two occasions, namely on 20 May 2011 and 16 September 2013  and  had
    been mistreated during that detention.  On the basis of those findings,
    Judge Holder concluded, applying the country guidance  decision  in  BM
    and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  00293
    (IAC), that  he  was  at  risk  on  return  because  of  his  political
    activities.  Judge Holder found that he  did  not  have  a  significant
    political profile in the DRC.  He was a rank  and  file  member  rather
    than a leader, office bearer or spokesperson of Toges-Noires.

 6. In addition, Judge Holder dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds in respect of the judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's claim  for  international  protection.   No  challenge  was
    brought to the decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8.

 8. The grounds seek to challenge the judge's reasoning in para 35 that led
    him to his adverse factual finding that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that he had been arrested or detained and ill-treated in  the
    DRC.  Secondly, the grounds argue that the  judge  failed  properly  to
    apply the country guidance case in BM and Others.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 17 September 2015, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  McWilliam)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on all grounds.

10. On 7 October 2015, the respondent filed a rule 24 response  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's adverse credibility finding and his conclusion  that
    the appellant did not fall within any risk category  identified  in  BM
    and Others.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. The focus of Mr Dieu's submissions, based upon the detailed grounds  of
    appeal, was upon the judge's adverse factual finding and  reasoning  in
    para 35 of his determination which I set out in full as follows:

         "35. I do not find that the Appellant received an arrest summons or
         that he was detained at all or was ill-treated by the DRC police or
         the DRC authorities, I say this given the cumulative effect of  the
         following:

         i)  it can be seen from  paragraph  5.1  and  5.2  the  Appellant's
         screening interview that  he stated that he had never been arrested
         of any offence in any country.

         I would  have  expected  the  Appellant  to  have  mentioned  being
         arrested and tortured on two occasions when answering the questions
         posed in  paragraph  5.1  and  5.2  of  the  Appellant's  screening
         interview  had  those  events  happened.   I  do  not  accept   the
         Appellant's explanation at the hearing that  he  misunderstood  the
         questions given  that  those  questions  were  straightforward  and
         understandable;

         ii)  the Appellant states that he received  an  arrest  summons  in
         respect of the first arrest.  He has not produced such  a  document
         notwithstanding he asserts that had had it in  his  possession.   I
         would have expected him to produce it or a copy  had  one  existed.
         He is still in contact with persons in the DRC;

         iii)  the documents/emails from Toges-Noires make no mention of the
         Appellant ever having been arrested, detained and tortured  in  the
         DRC.  I would have expected some mention of the alleged events  had
         they happened.

         iv)  given the above,  I  do  not  find  that  any  scar  that  the
         Appellant may have is as a consequence of torture.  There  is  n  o
         medical evidence;

         v)  there is no evidence to show that the Appellant appeared  on  a
         television programme on 10th September 2013.  I would have expected
         some evidence showing  that  the  Appellant  participated  in  that
         programme had it been the case.  The Appellant is in  contact  with
         persons in the DRC;

         vi)  I do not find it credible that the Appellant was released from
         the alleged detention commencing 16th  of  September,  2013  by  an
         unknown person as a result of a cousin (or, as he was to  state  at
         the hearing, someone associated with a woman he knew  in  the  fish
         business with whom he is still in contact).  There is  no  evidence
         from any of those persons.  I would have expected some evidence  to
         confirm the scenario had the event happened;

         vii)  I find  that  the  document  produced  relating  to  Karthick
         Eliezer and the other documentation produced by the Appellant  does
         not show that it is reasonably likely that the  Appellant  appeared
         on the asserted television programme or was the subject of  arrest,
         detention and torture; and

         viii)  the Appellant's wife states that she witnessed both  arrests
         and that she was assaulted on both occasions.  She asserts that she
         was raped on one occasion in front of her children by one of  those
         persons involved in the arrest of her husband.  She maintains  that
         she has sustained injuries to her  back  and  has  been  left  with
         scars.  There is no medical evidence submitted.

         Given my findings in i) to vii) above, I find that the  Appellant's
         wife was not assaulted as asserted or at all."

13. Mr Dieu sought to challenge the judge's reasoning in paras 35(i), (ii),
    (iii), (iv), (v) and (viii).  He raised no challenge to  the  reasoning
    in para 35(vi) and (vii).

14. In relation to the six points raised by Mr Dieu for  the  reasons  that
    follow I accept his challenge to the judge's reasoning in paras  35(i),
    (ii) and (viii) but not in respect of para 35(iii), (iv) and (v).

15. Dealing with the former  first,  in  respect  of  para  35(i)  Mr  Dieu
    submitted that the judge had failed to consider  the  entirety  of  the
    appellant's screening interview.  Although the appellant  had  said  in
    paras 5.1 and 5.2 of the screening  interview  that  he  had  not  been
    arrested, charged, convicted of any offence or been  subjected  to  any
    arrest warrant in any other country, in para 4.2 he  had  (consistently
    with his claim) twice stated that he had been arrested and tortured  in
    the DRC.  There he said, inter alia,:

         "I was tortured and arrested illegally.  Because I am a defender of
         human rights and also I was defending the TUTSI minority  tribe  in
         my country, that is why I was tortured and arrested."

16. Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had failed to consider this aspect  of
    the appellant's evidence when counting against him,  in  assessing  his
    credibility, that he had never mentioned that he had been arrested  for
    any offence in any country.

17. In my judgment, in para 35(i) the judge did fail to consider the  whole
    of the appellant's evidence, particularly in  his  screening  interview
    and answer at question 4.2 and, therefore, proceeded on the basis  that
    the appellant had never stated that he had been arrested.  That was not
    the appellant's evidence.  Indeed, the apparent conflict  between  what
    was said by the appellant in question 4.2 and then in questions 5.1 and
    5.2  was,  in  my  judgment,  have  been  relevant  in  assessing   his
    explanation (rejected by the judge) that in his answers at question 5.1
    and 5.2 the appellant had misunderstood the question in the sense  that
    he thought he was being asked about any country  other  than  the  DRC.
    That explanation might be thought to be more plausible when his  answer
    to question 4.2 is considered.

18. Secondly, as regards para 35(ii) Mr Dieu submitted that the  judge  was
    wrong to count against the appellant that he had not produced an arrest
    summons despite the fact that he once "had had it in  his  possession".
    The appellant's evidence before the judge was that he had had an arrest
    warrant in relation to his claimed first arrest in  May  2011  but  had
    handed it over to the police in the UK.  In other words, the  appellant
    was saying that he no longer had the arrest warrant to  produce  either
    as an original or a copy.

19. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had clearly been  aware  that  the
    appellant had once had an arrest warrant but since  the  appellant  was
    still in contact with persons in the DRC he was entitled to  take  into
    account that none had been produced.

20. Whilst in principle the absence of a document which an individual could
    reasonably be expected to produce is a matter which can be  taken  into
    account in assessing credibility (see, TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 40), in this case given that the appellant claimed  he  had  handed
    the relevant arrest summons to the UK police, it was not  open  to  the
    judge to take its absence into account unless he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's explanation given in his evidence that  he  had  handed  it
    over to the police.  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's evidence that he handed the document to the UK police  and,
    in those circumstances, he was, in my judgment, in error in taking into
    account against the appellant the  absence  of  that  document  at  the
    hearing.

21. Thirdly, in para 35(viii), the judge deals with the evidence  given  by
    the appellant's wife.  His conclusion is that: "given  my  findings  in
    (i) to (vii) above, I find that the appellant's wife was not  assaulted
    as asserted or at all." The assault was  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    account of what he claimed had happened to him in the DRC.

22. Mr Dieu raised two points  in  relation  to  this.   First,  the  judge
    misstates the evidence of the appellant's wife where he says  that  her
    evidence was that she was "raped  on  one  occasion  in  front  of  her
    children by one  of  those  persons  involved  in  the  arrest  of  her
    husband".  Mr Dieu pointed  out  that  in  her  witness  statement  the
    appellant's wife had not said that she had been raped.  Instead, having
    referred to her husband's arrest on the second  occasion  after  having
    taken part in the television programme she said: "this serious incident
    that could have led me to being raped in my own house and in  front  of
    my children." Secondly, and more fundamentally, Mr Dieu submitted  that
    the judge had given inadequate reasons for rejecting  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's wife simply on the basis of his reasoning that had  led
    him to reject the appellant's evidence.

23. Mr Richards submitted that  having  heard  the  appellant's  wife  give
    evidence the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  her  evidence  did  not
    displace his negative credibility finding.

24. There is no  doubt  that  the  judge  misquotes  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's wife.  In itself, that is not an error  that  goes  to  the
    substance of the judge's reasoning.  However, the appellant's wife gave
    evidence and a written statement was also provided and the  judge  does
    not given an independent  assessment  of  the  credibility  or  of  her
    veracity.  Whilst I accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge could
    take into account any view he formed of the appellant's wife in  giving
    evidence, no such view is expressed in  the  determination.   The  sole
    basis upon which her evidence is rejected is the basis upon  which,  in
    effect, the judge reject the evidence of the appellant.  The judge  was
    required to assess independently the evidence of the  appellant's  wife
    and provide adequate reasons for rejecting her evidence if that was his
    conclusion.  In failing to do so, the judge erred in law.

25. Having accepted Mr Dieu's submissions in relation to para  35(i),  (ii)
    and (viii), I deal briefly with the remainder of his challenges to para
    35(iii), (iv) and (v).

26. As regards para 35(iii) the judge was, in my judgment, entitled to take
    into account that the email dated 15 June 2015  from  the  Toges-Noires
    organisation, whilst acknowledging  the  appellant's  involvement  with
    that organisation, fails to refer to the fact (as the appellant claims)
    that he was  arrested  and  ill-treated  on  two  occasions.   Mr  Dieu
    submitted that the judge had attached "far too much significance" given
    the circumstances in which the email was written.  As I pointed out  to
    Mr Dieu that is, in  effect,  a  challenge  based  upon  irrationality.
    Although the email states that the writer may have more to  add,  I  do
    not consider that it was irrational for the judge to place weight  upon
    this letter and the absence of any mention of arrest or ill-treatment.

27. In relation to para 35(iv), in assessing the relevance of any  scarring
    on the appellant, and the only  evidence  Mr  Dieu  could  draw  to  my
    attention was in answer to question 169 of the  asylum  interview  that
    the appellant had "a scar (lower abdomen)", the judge was  entitled  to
    take into account that there was no medical  evidence  to  support  the
    cause or potential causes of the scar.

28. Finally, as regards para 35(v) Mr Dieu submitted  that  the  judge  had
    been wrong  to  state  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim that he appeared on  a  television  programme  on  10
    September 2014 and that the judge would have expected some evidence  of
    the appellant's participation if that had been the case.  Mr Dieu  drew
    my attention to a document which (and  this  was  not  disputed  by  Mr
    Richards)  demonstrated  that  two  journalists   involved   with   the
    television channel (and as I understand  it  the  programme)  had  been
    arrested shortly after the programme.  Mr Dieu submitted  that  it  was
    not proper, therefore, for the judge to criticise the appellant for not
    having obtained supporting evidence of his involvement.

29. The difficulty with Mr Dieu's submission is that the appellant  himself
    in his asylum interview, when recognising that he had  not  obtained  a
    copy of the show, accepted that: "If I needed, they could have done  it
    but I didn't ask."  The appellant's own evidence was that there was  no
    difficulty in him obtaining evidence of the  programme  (and  therefore
    his involvement) but simply that he had not tried to do so.   The  fact
    that  journalists  involved  had  been  arrested,  whilst   potentially
    creating some difficulty for the appellant, did not on his own evidence
    lead to him not producing any supporting evidence of  his  involvement.
    The judge was entitled  to  take  into  account  the  absence  of  this
    evidence in those circumstances.

30. In his submissions, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    proper conclusions and had given proper reasons for those  conclusions.
    He was entitled to reach his adverse credibility  finding  giving  each
    part of the evidence the weight to be  considered  appropriate.   There
    was no irrationality in his conclusions or in the way he reached  those
    conclusions.

31. As I have already indicated, I have concluded that there are  a  number
    of errors in the judge's reasoning in paras  35(i),  (ii)  and  (viii).
    Whilst I accept that the judge gave further  reasons  for  his  adverse
    finding, none of the reasons appears to have been conclusive.   Rather,
    the judge's ultimate finding is as a result of an accumulation of these
    reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  that  he  had  been
    arrested, detained and  ill-treated  as  he  claimed  although  it  was
    accepted that he was a member of the Toges-Noires.  Standing  back  and
    looking at the judge's reasons for his adverse finding  overall,  I  am
    not confident that the judge would have  reached  the  same  conclusion
    once the reasoning in paras 35(i), (ii) and (viii) is excised.   In  my
    judgment, the errors disclosed by those paragraphs were material to the
    judge's adverse conclusion reached in para 35.

32. In the light of that, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in
    law  in  reaching  his  adverse  findings  in  paras   33-35   of   his
    determination.  For that reason, the  decision  cannot  stand.   I  set
    aside the decision which must be remade.

33. In relation to Mr Dieu's second ground of appeal, namely that the judge
    erred in law in his application of the risk category identified in para
    3 of the head note in BM and  Others  to  the  facts,  if  the  judge's
    factual findings as to the appellant's political activities had  stood,
    I see no obvious basis upon which he could be  criticised  for  finding
    that the appellant was, in effect, a "rank and file member" and not  as
    a result at risk on return.  The difficulty is that the crucial finding
    in para 35 which supports that approach cannot stand.  As a result, any
    re-hearing of the appellant's  appeal  must  necessarily,  having  made
    appropriate factual findings, consider  the  application  of  the  risk
    categories in BM and Others "afresh".

Decision

34. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR involved the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision is set aside.

35. No challenge has been brought against the judge's decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under Art 8 and that decision stands.

36. Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding required to remake  the
    decision, taking into  account  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, this is an appropriate case to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

37. The errors of law do not affect the Judge's finding in para  32,  which
    shall stand, that the appellant has been a member of Toges-Noires since
    2000.  That apart, none of the Judge's adverse  findings  shall  stand.
    The re-hearing is to be before a judge other than Judge Lloyd or  Judge
    Waygood.



                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                         Date 15th June 2016

