
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00192/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan; Counsel, instructed by Switalskis, sols
For the Respondent:    Mr McViety; HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge
         Mozolowski made following a hearing on 7 April 2015 at Bradford.

      2. Mr McViety did not oppose the remittal of this determination  to  a
         differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The core  issue  before  the  judge  was  the  nationality  of  the
         appellant. The respondent believes that he is  Ethiopian,  and  the
         appellant asserts that he is Eritrean. He has also spent many years
         in the Sudan.

      4. Unfortunately the judge did not resolve that  issue.  She  said  in
         terms at paragraph 54 of the determination that she could not  come
         to any conclusion about the appellant's nationality.

      5. Accordingly the judge erred in law by failing to come to a decision
         on a material matter. The decision will have to be remade with  all
         issues at large.

      6. The case should be listed in the FTT at  Bradford  before  a  judge
         other than Judge Mozolowski on  the  next  available  date  with  a
         Tigrinya interpreter.


Signed   Date


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
