

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00636/2014
                                                               AA/00643/2014
                                                               AA/00645/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2014                                |On 13 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MARINA NAZIR + 2

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Halim of Counsel instructed by Virgo Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department or SSHD) appeals with permission against the  determination
      of First tier Tribunal Judge Ruth of 21  February  2014  allowing  the
      appeal of the respondents (hereafter the claimants) against a decision
      to remove them following refusal to grant them asylum.


   2. There were four grounds relied upon by the SSHD. It is appropriate  to
      take the last three first.


   3. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge made contradictory
      findings with regard to the credibility and plausibility of the claim,
      and consequently also applied too low a standard of proof. I find this
      ground is not made  out.  The  written  grounds  do  make  some  valid
      criticisms of the judge's reasoning. It is also correct, as Mr  Deller
      highlighted,  that  the  judge  appeared  to  be   saying   in   self-
      contradiction  that  whilst  he  found  the  claimants  untruthful  he
      nevertheless believed them. However, I am satisfied that,  read  as  a
      whole, the determination shows that the judge was fully aware  of  the
      fact that he had to apply a lower  standard  of  proof  and  that  the
      passages complained about were essentially meant only to differentiate
      the  lower  standard  from  the   civil   standard   of   balance   of
      probabilities. It is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  judge  meant  to
      establish credence rather than truthfulness  and  that  is  consistent
      with Karanakaran [2000} EWCA Civ 11 and other leading authorities.


   4. Ground three contends that the judge placed too great a weight on  the
      claimants' expert report when considering the risk to the  appellants.
      However, as Mr Deller conceded, it is difficult to see that the  judge
      had not considered the report and taken a  balanced  view  as  to  its
      relevance to the outstanding issues and the weight he should attach to
      it. The fact that the expert relied on quotation of his  own  material
      as set out in the COIS report can scarcely be seen as perverse  unless
      the contents of the  quotation  in  the  COIS  report  was  considered
      unsound. The respondent  does  not  suggest  that  it  was  to  be  so
      considered.


   5. The fourth ground  alleges  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in
      stating that there was no country guidance case  specifically  dealing
      with the issues when AJ(Pakistan CG (Christian Converts) [2005]  UKIAT
      00040 was in point and was still in force. That misses the point  that
      AJ was a case dealing with those converting from Islam to Christianity
      and the risk attaching to apostates. In any event, the  judge  plainly
      had regard to recent COI and the respondent did not seek to  argue  at
      any stage during the hearing that this COI should have  been  read  in
      conjunction with AJ.


   6. That brings me to  the  first  ground  which  argues  that  the  judge
      misunderstood the submissions  made  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer  (HOPO)  at  the  hearing  regarding  the  claimants'  claimed
      preaching  activities  ("He  conceded  that   the   [claimants]   were
      Pentecostal  Christians  and  that  [they],  particularly  the   first
      [claimant] had been speaking to others about  the  Pentecostal  faith"
      (para 35)). The HOPO made no such concession,  the  grounds  maintain,
      and indeed, as the judge himself recorded in the  next  paragraph,  he
      had submitted that there  were  serious  inconsistencies  between  the
      documents and the evidence given by the claimants which "continued  to
      undermine the credibility of their alleged activities in Pakistan". Mr
      Deller submitted that the  apparent  misunderstanding  of  the  HOPO's
      concession was carried through into the rest of the  determination  in
      that at para 46 the judge stated  that  the  "starting  point  for  my
      assessment...must be the acceptance by the respondent  that  they  are
      indeed Pentecostal Christians who do see evangelism  as  part  of  the
      duty of their faith..." and in a later reference in para  83  referred
      to the claimants as  having  been   "accepted"  as  being  Pentecostal
      Christians who had come to the adverse attention of a  radical  cleric
      who had issued a fatwa against them.


   7. I am grateful to both parties for their oral submissions on this point
      and to Mr Halim for an extremely well-constructed Rule 24  Reply  both
      in respect of this ground and the other three.


   8. I have decided that the fourth ground is not made out. Whilst read  in
      isolation it  is  possible  to  construe  the  judge  as  recording  a
      concession beyond that which  was  made,  I  consider  that  when  the
      determination is read as a whole and particular attention is  paid  to
      the judge's own enunciation in para 46 of the "starting point" of  his
      own assessment it is clear that all the judge was accepting  was  that
      the claimants were persons who subjectively believed  that  evangelism
      was part of the duty of their faith.  It  is  not  in  dispute,  as  I
      understand it, that this is a correct description of what the HOPO did
      in fact accept. Further, it is clear that from  para  46  onwards  the
      judge then embarks on a detailed assessment of the claimants' accounts
      which treats the issue of whether they had objectively shown that they
      had evangelised to others as  something  for  him  to  decide  on  the
      evidence: see e.g. paras 49, 52, 62-66. I consider para 63 as being of
      particular importance because it underlines the fact that this  was  a
      case in which the judge at the hearing had not only the evidence  that
      was considered by the SSHD at the time of the refusal decision but had
      the benefit of seeing the evidence of the claimants tested  in  cross-
      examination. It was clearly as a  result  of  that  process  (not  any
      concession) that he found them credible and  stated  that  "The  first
      [claimant] in particular  came  across  in  evidence  as  a  dedicated
      Pentecostal Christian who was proud of her faith and committed to it".
      I would add the point fairly raised by Mr Deller himself that  another
      aspect to this case was that the claimants were Pentecostal Christians
      and in that particular faith evangelising is incontrovertibly  a  very
      prominent part of the practice of the faith.


   9. Given that I found the last three grounds to  lack  force,  I  am  not
      persuaded that the first ground identifies any error of law  vitiating
      the judge's findings of fact. Read as a whole the judge, despite  very
      significant  misgivings  about  various  aspects  of  the   claimants'
      evidence, was  persuaded  that  these  were  outweighed  by  important
      positive factors.  The  judge  assessed  those  positive  factors  for
      himself and did not in the course  of  setting  out  his  reasons  and
      findings (starting at para 43) rely on a concession that the claimants
      had  been  accepted  as   having   preached   or   evangelised   their
      Pentecostalism to persons of other faiths.


  10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal
      are not made out. Accordingly the decision of the First tier  Tribunal
      judge must stand.




                               Signed                          Date
                                   21.05.2014




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
