
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/00399/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2017                        | On 29 January 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                             Mr mahrudden ahmady
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clapham promulgated on 3 August 2017 brought  with  the  permission  of
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted on 26 October 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  14  April  1997.
    Approximately four months before his arrival in the United  Kingdom  he
    left Afghanistan accompanied by his younger brother.  He arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 26 March 2011.  During  his  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom he sustained an injury which necessitated the amputation of one
    of his little fingers.  He says that it was, in part,  because  he  was
    recovering from this injury that he did not  claim  asylum  immediately
    upon arrival.  Nonetheless, he claimed asylum shortly thereafter  on  7
    April 2011.  A screening interview was conducted on 20 April  2011  and
    the Appellant provided a witness statement setting out the basis of his
    claim on 19 May 2011 - a day before his substantive asylum interview.


3.   On 3 June 2011 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for
    asylum for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')
    of that date. However, given that by June 2011 the Appellant  had  only
    just turned 14 years of age, he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain as an unaccompanied minor.


4.   Between August and September 2013 the Appellant visited his mother  who
    at that time was in Pakistan.


5.   Towards the end of the period of his discretionary leave the  Appellant
    made an application for further leave to remain. In support he provided
    a witness statement dated 28 May 2014 which added  further  information
    to his earlier witness statement  and  the  information  given  at  the
    interview, on the basis of matters that he had learned  from  an  older
    brother since being in the United Kingdom. The witness  statement  also
    sought in part to address  certain  aspects  of  the  2011  RFRL.   The
    Appellant also offered something by way of explanation for  not  having
    challenged the refusal of  protection  decision  of  3  June  2011:  at
    paragraph 8 he stated -

         "I did not  appeal  against  the  decision  as  I  did  not  really
         understand it.  I knew that I had been granted leave to  remain  in
         the UK and that I did not have to return  to  Afghanistan.   I  was
         very young at the time and I understand that my elder brother and a
         solicitor decided not to appeal because it  was  too  much  for  me
         especially as I was still getting treatment for my injuries  and  I
         would have to go to the hospital regularly for months."


6.   The Respondent  considered  the  Appellant's  application  for  further
    leave to remain -  including  necessarily  a  protection  claim  -  but
    refused it on 18 February 2016 for reasons set out in a  RFRL  of  that
    date.


7.   The RFRL of 2016 makes reference  to  the  earlier  refusal  letter  of
    2011, which in turn helpfully summarises the basis of  the  Appellant's
    claim.  In particular, reference is made to events in  and  around  the
    Appellant's home village which had, on  his  case,  culminated  in  the
    kidnap and murder of one of his brothers and  arrangements  being  made
    shortly afterwards for the Appellant and his younger brother  to  leave
    Afghanistan.  The Appellant claimed that the Taliban  were  responsible
    for harassment of villagers, and it was in such circumstances - and  in
    furtherance of coercive recruitment - that the Appellant's brother  who
    had been resistant to the idea of joining the Taliban had  been  killed
    to make an example of him 'pour encourager les autres'.


8.   The Appellant  appealed  the  decision  of  18  February  2016  to  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


9.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision  of  Judge
    Clapham.


10.  I have set  out  above  some  of  the  details  of  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim for protection in substantial part because the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has failed to do so.  Although sometimes short-hand
    reference to the facts of a case by, for  example,  cross-reference  to
    the key paragraphs of the RFRL, is both convenient and appropriate,  it
    is nonetheless, in my  judgment,  unsatisfactory  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in this particular case does not otherwise identify  the
    basis of the claim within the body of his decision, or engage in any of
    the facts that were said to have been the trigger for  the  Appellant's
    departure from Afghanistan - and necessarily the basis  upon  which  he
    fears to return.


11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge makes passing reference to  the  fact  of
    the RFRL of 18 February 2016 in his opening paragraphs - see  paragraph
    2.  Brief reference is also made to the 2011 RFRL. However, at no point
    does the Judge set out with anything approaching  adequate  specificity
    the details of either RFRL - whether in respect of the claimed facts of
    the Appellant's case, or in respect of  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    rejecting the case. The basis of claim is not manifest from the  First-
    tier Tribunal's Decision. In such circumstances the  reader  cannot  be
    sure that the Judge has considered the basis of claim  or  made  proper
    findings on it.


12.  In my judgment it is wholly unsatisfactory that  the  key  elements  of
    this case are not identified in the body of the Decision; far less  are
    they engaged in; and far less are there any findings of fact in respect
    of them.


13.  Instead there appears to be a general  adverse  credibility  assessment
    of the Appellant.  The Judge has set out in some detail aspects of  the
    live evidence that was heard before him.  However,  the  passages  seem
    entirely to relate to the circumstances surrounding  the  contact  that
    the Appellant had had with his mother in  2013  -  her  whereabouts  in
    Pakistan, the people with whom she had stayed in Pakistan, and the date
    upon which the Appellant had last had any  form  of  telephone  contact
    with her.  In this regard the Judge considered that the  Appellant  had
    contradicted himself between his written witness statement and his oral
    evidence as to the month in which he had last spoken to his mother; the
    Judge also observed that the Appellant's  supporting  witnesses  whilst
    consistent with the Appellant's written evidence contradicted his  oral
    evidence.


14.  The Judge took this  discrepancy  forward  to  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility - see  paragraphs  55  and  56.   Paragraph  55
    commences with the sentence "I have considerable reservations about the
    Appellant's evidence" and then identifies what is said to be the  clear
    contradiction in  respect  of  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
    mother.  Paragraph  56  engages  with  the  level  of  the  Appellant's
    understanding of the calendar months.  Little else is identified in the
    Decision, notwithstanding its 10 pages, as to why the  Appellant  might
    not be considered to be  a  credible  witness.  Moreover,  as  observed
    above, there is no specific engagement with the particular events  that
    were  said  to  have  precipitated  the  Appellant's   departure   from
    Afghanistan.


15.  Notwithstanding the Judge's focus on matters surrounding  contact  with
    the Appellant's mother and her circumstances,  the  Judge  purports  to
    answer a submission made by the Appellant's representative  as  to  the
    preference for relying upon the supporting evidence of the witnesses in
    respect of the date of last contact by saying this,

         "Whether the contact with the mother was in the January or  in  the
         June does not seem  to  me  to  be  particularly  relevant  to  the
         question of whether the Appellant would be at real risk  on  return
         to Afghanistan."  (paragraph 59).


16.  I agree that the Judge  was  entirely  correct  to  identify  that  the
    circumstances  surrounding  the  mother's  position  more  recently  in
    Pakistan, and the extent to which the Appellant had  had  contact  with
    her, was at best peripheral to the core issues  in  the  appeal.   This
    makes it all the more remarkable that the Judge should  have  seemingly
    placed substantial reliance  upon  the  evidence  in  regard  to  these
    matters in adversely determining credibility and thereby the appeal.


17.  I have already noted that the Judge has  not  set  out  in  any  detail
    anything of the Appellant's claim, but has rather made brief  reference
    to the RFRLs of both 2011 and 2016.  In respect of the  2011  decision,
    the Judge has placed particular and significant reliance  both  on  the
    unfavourable outcome  of  the  asylum  claim  and  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not appeal the asylum decision at the time.  I  note  the
    following:

         "Clearly, if the Appellant believed  that  the  Home  Officer  were
         wrong in their view the Appellant could and should have appealed at
         the relevant time but I consider that  as  the  Appellant  did  not
         appeal against the 2011 asylum decision the Appellant is in a  weak
         position now in terms of his assertion that his family was targeted
         by the Taliban." (paragraph 54);

         "I am in a position where it seems to that the Home Office  reasons
         for refusal letter of 2011 must stand." (paragraph 57);

         "However, given the findings that the Home Office made in 2011 I am
         not able to accept that this Appellant  has  a  negative  profile."
         (paragraph 60).
18.  I am troubled in particular by the Judge's phrases "I am in a  position
    where it seems to that the Home Office reasons for  refusal  letter  of
    2011 must stand", and "...given the findings that the Home Office  made
    in 2011...". In my judgment it suggests that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had  in  effect  abdicated  responsibility  for  making  his  own
    findings in the case.  He appears to have treated the 2011 decision  as
    one that stood and was binding irrespective of the Appellant's  present
    challenge to it. This was in error: it was incumbent upon the Judge  to
    engage with the findings therein 'in the round'  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence, and not to treat it as a fixed starting point.


19.  In this context it is also to be that particular issue has been  raised
    in the grounds of challenge to the Judge's approach to the  Appellant's
    decision not to pursue an appeal in 2011.


20.  Ms Easty acknowledged that the decision not to pursue an appeal may  be
    a relevant factor in an overall consideration  of  a  subsequent  case.
    However, complaint is made that in using the words  "if  the  Appellant
    believed that the Home Officer were wrong in their view  the  Appellant
    could and should have appealed", the Judge did not engage with,  and/or
    was otherwise, without  offering  reasons,  unduly  dismissive  of  the
    Appellant's evidence by way of explanation for not appealing in 2011.


21.  I accept that submission. I have reproduced at paragraph  5  above  the
    reasons for not pursuing the appeal set out in the Appellant's  witness
    statement of 28 May 2014. The Appellant also advanced  similar  reasons
    in the appeal witness statement that was before the First-tier Tribunal
    (see paragraph 2). In 2011 not only  was  the  Appellant  a  vulnerable
    person by reason of his minority, but there were good reasons to  think
    that he was a vulnerable person by reason of  his  experiences  on  his
    journey to the United Kingdom.  He had sustained a  significant  injury
    during that journey.  There is elsewhere supporting medical evidence as
    to the Appellant's mental health; the Judge does at  least  acknowledge
    that in the circumstances of  the  Appellant's  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom  and  being  here  in  uncertain  circumstances,  that  it  was
    understandable that he has mental health difficulties.  However none of
    this finds its way into  an  analysis  by  the  Judge  of  the  reasons
    advanced by the Appellant for not pursuing an appeal in 2011.


22.  I am persuaded that in such circumstances the Judge fell into error  in
    considering that the Appellant's position was weakened in any  material
    way by reason of his failure to challenge the 2011 decision.  As I say,
    in any event I am troubled  by  the  fact  that  the  Judge  thereafter
    appears to have accorded  the  2011  decision  seemingly  determinative
    weight rather than making his own findings in respect of the  incidents
    and narrative account that the Appellant had advanced both in 2011  and
    in the context of the instant appeal.   In  those  circumstances  I  am
    persuaded that there is significant material error  of  law  justifying
    the setting aside of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.
23.  Given the foregoing, it is unnecessary for me to  engage  further  with
    the other challenges to the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal.


24.  The Appellant has not had a full and fair adjudication  of  the  issues
    in his appeal, and it follows that the remedy must be  by  way  of  the
    appeal being remade before the First-tier Tribunal with all  issues  at
    large by a Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham.


25.  I am told by Ms Easty that the Appellant's younger  brother  has  since
    been successful in his own appeal. Necessarily that may be expected  to
    be a matter advanced in support of the Appellant's  case.  However,  it
    is, of course, a matter for the Respondent whether or not  to  consider
    such a circumstance prior to the rehearing of the appeal, and if so, to
    reach her own  view  as  to  how  it  should  be  factored  in  to  the
    Appellant's case. It is not a matter upon which I make  any  particular
    observation.


26.  Finally, Ms Easty has invited me formally  to  record  the  Appellant's
    attendance at the hearing today.  This is because, I am told,  that  he
    was due to report in accordance with his restrictions this morning, but
    his attendance at Field House today means that he may have  missed  his
    reporting slot.  Ms Easty seeks a formal record to show his whereabouts
    in case there should be any  issues  arising  by  reason  of  his  non-
    attendance.  In  hereby  recording  the  Appellant's  presence  here  I
    express no view as to whether that puts him  in  breach  of  any  other
    condition - it merely confirms his whereabouts at the following  times:
    the Appellant arrived at the Tribunal hearing room today shortly  after
    10 o'clock and the hearing is now being disposed of at noon.


Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.


28.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with all issues at large by  a  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clapham.


29.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.

Signed:                                 Date: 25 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
