
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00030/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 February 2016                    |On 25 April 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                     MNH
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, aged  33.  He  has  appealed
      with the permission of the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal G Jones QC, promulgated on 13 August  2015,
      dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse
      his protection claim. The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to
      Bangladesh because he is an openly gay man.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction but I make
      one in order to protect the identity of the appellant.


   3. The appellant arrived in the UK in November 2010  to  pursue  studies.
      His leave was extended until August 2014 as a Highly Skilled  Migrant.
      He visited his family in Bangladesh in February and March  2013.  When
      his leave expired the appellant made two unsuccessful applications for
      leave outside the rules.  He  was  encountered  on  12  November  2014
      attempting to marry one AY, a male. He was detained  and  served  with
      notice of liability to removal as an overstayer.  The  appellant  then
      claimed asylum. His claim was placed in  Fast  Track  procedures  then
      operating at the Harmondsworth IRC. By the time his appeal  was  heard
      he was no longer in the Detained Fast Track system.


   4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim that  he  was  gay
      and that he had had relationships with two men in Bangladesh.  It  was
      not therefore accepted that he had been attacked in Bangladesh because
      of his sexuality or that his family had harassed and  threatened  him.
      The appellant and AY were given marriage interviews and their  answers
      were regarded as inconsistent on a  number  of  points.  Applying  the
      guidance provided in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC  31,  the
      respondent's refusal letter concluded as follows:


         "67. It is not accepted that you are gay or someone  who  would  be
         treated as gay by potential persecutors in your country of origin.


         68. It is accepted from the objective  evidence  contained  in  the
         Country of Origin Information  Report  that  gay  people  who  live
         openly would be liable to persecution in  your  country  of  origin
         (Bangladesh).


         69. You claim that you would hide your sexuality on return to  your
         home country.


         70. You claim that you would do this because you would be killed if
         you were openly homosexual.


         71. Therefore, applying the test outlined in the  above  case  law,
         your claim fails to meet the  criteria  of  a  person  in  need  of
         international protection as it fails the test at the first stage in
         that it is not accepted that you are gay or somebody who  would  be
         treated as gay by potential persecutors in Bangladesh."


   5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant. The judge was  told  that
      AY had "disappeared". The judge  stated  that  he  did  not  find  the
      appellant to be a "persuasive, reliable  or  candid  witness".  As  to
      whether the appellant was gay or not, he stated as follows:


         "... I am prepared to accept that the appellant is of a  homosexual
         persuasion. That is not the same as me saying that I found  him  to
         be truthful or credible. I am saying no more than that I cannot say
         that there is not a real  risk  that  he  is  of  that  persuasion.
         Indeed, even his own counsel described his evidence as "flaky"  and
         she realistically acknowledged many  of  the  shortcomings  in  the
         appellant's evidence."


   6. There are obvious difficulties with  this  paragraph,  not  least  the
      judge's reference to a person's sexual orientation as a  "persuasion".
      More importantly for the purposes of this appeal, the judge's mode  of
      expressing himself has  resulted  in  an  at  best  ambiguous  finding
      regarding the appellant's claim that he is gay.


   7. The judge recorded that no evidence was called on the question of  how
      the appellant would behave on return to Bangladesh and, on that basis,
      he found the appellant had not discharged the  burden  of  showing  he
      would be persecuted. He went on to find in the alternative that,  even
      if the appellant would conceal his homosexuality  through  a  fear  of
      being persecuted, he would not  be  persecuted.  He  noted  that  laws
      criminalizing homosexual behaviour were  not  enforced.  Familial  and
      societal disapproval was not sufficient  to  reach  the  threshold  of
      persecution. The judge made an adverse credibility finding in  respect
      of the appellant's claim to have been attacked in Bangladesh  in  2008
      or 2009. The judge's survey of the background materials  provided  did
      not show that gay people  were  persecuted.  The  judge  accepted  the
      appellant's family wanted nothing more to do with  him.  However,  the
      appellant could live safely elsewhere in Bangladesh.


   8. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      argued the judge erred by failing to have regard  to  submissions  and
      background materials suggesting there is persecution of gay people  in
      Bangladesh. Permission was refused  as  the  grounds  were  considered
      nothing more than mere disagreement with  the  decision.  However,  in
      granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  pointed
      out that the respondent had accepted  the  appellant  could  not  live
      openly as a gay man in the refusal letter and it  was  arguable  there
      was insufficient analysis of the issue of whether the appellant  would
      live discreetly.


   9. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal on the
      basis  the  judge's  analysis  was  sufficiently  detailed   and   his
      conclusions ones which were open to him.


  10. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.
      It is not necessary to set them out. Ms Sesay relied  on  the  written
      grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal.  Ms  Isherwood  made  valiant
      efforts  to  argue  the  decision  was   sustainable,   although   she
      acknowledged there were difficulties in  so  doing  arising  from  the
      judge's failure to have regard to the respondent's concession of fact.
      The parties were in agreement  that,  if  I  found  the  decision  was
      erroneous, the appeal should be sent back for a fresh hearing.


  11. I reserved my decision on the question of whether  the  judge  made  a
      material error of law.


   Error of law


  12. Plainly the judge erred by failing to have  regard  to  the  important
      concession made by the respondent as set out in paragraph  68  of  the
      reasons for refusal letter. The respondent's primary position was that
      the appellant was not genuinely gay and he was feigning  homosexuality
      for the purposes of his asylum claim. Paragraph 68  was  therefore  an
      expression of the respondent's view if the appellant were  in  reality
      gay.  However, I do not see that as  diminishing  the  effect  of  the
      concession as to the general position  regarding  openly  gay  men  in
      Bangladesh.


  13. In HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 the Supreme  Court  gave
      definitive guidance on the correct approach to appeals  such  as  this
      one. Lord Rodger expressed it this way:


         "The approach to be followed by tribunals
         82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.


         If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on
         the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would  be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.


         If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.


         If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".


         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.


         If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.


         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him.".


  14. In this case, as mentioned above, the judge's finding on  whether  the
      appellant  was  gay  was  ambiguous.  Overall  he  made   an   adverse
      credibility finding against him. In his conclusion in paragraph 42  he
      again expressed  himself  in  ambiguous  terms  regarding  whether  he
      accepted the appellant was gay.


  15. The judge dealt with the element of how the appellant would behave  on
      return to Bangladesh solely by reference to his counsel's  failure  to
      call evidence on it. If correct, that was an  important  oversight  on
      her part but I do not believe the judge was entitled to treat such  an
      important issue in this summary manner. The appellant had  been  asked
      at his interview whether he would behave discreetly in Bangladesh and,
      if so, why. He had explained that he had returned to Bangladesh to try
      to make his family understand (QQ57-60) but  he  was  not  open  about
      himself to other  people  because  it  was  "risky".  His  answers  to
      questions about how he would behave show that he  said  he  would  not
      express his sexuality openly because of the risk that "something would
      happen" to him (QQ367-371). Even though his solicitors had not thought
      to include this part of the claim  in  his  appeal  statement  it  was
      nonetheless important evidence which needed to be  heard  and  tested.
      The judge made no finding at all on how the appellant would behave.


  16. In looking at the alternative position in which  the  appellant  would
      choose to live discreetly  through  fear  of  persecution,  the  judge
      relied on the background evidence as showing there was not a real risk
      that an openly gay man would be persecuted on that account. Of course,
      that finding is inconsistent with the respondent's concession  on  the
      point.


  17. I set aside the judge's decision because it is  vitiated  by  material
      error of law. The decision contains inadequate findings  and  reasons.
      The appeal must be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal by another
      judge.  To assist with that task I make the following directions:


                                 DIRECTIONS



      (1) The appeal will be heard de novo by any Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal except Judge G Jones QC on a  date  and  at  a  place  to  be
      notified;

      (2) There are no preserved findings of fact;

      (3) If the respondent wishes to reconsider  her  concession  regarding
      the  general  position  for  gay  men  living   in   Bangladesh,   any
      supplementary reasons for refusal  letter  should  be  served  on  the
      appellant and filed with the Tribunal no later than 28 days before the
      date of hearing in the First-tier Tribunal;

      (4) The First-tier Tribunal must make  clear  findings  of  fact  with
      respect to all relevant matters, including but not limited to:

        -    the appellant's claim that he is a gay man;

        -    that his family has disowned him and threatened  him  on  this
           account;

        -    that he had sexual relationships in Bangladesh  which  led  to
           him being attacked and that an FIR was filed;

        -    that he has lived with a male partner in the UK;

        -    that he lives openly as a gay man in the UK; and

        -    whether he would live discreetly on return to Bangladesh  and,
           if so, why;

      (5)  The  respondent  must  file  and  serve  the  marriage  interview
      transcripts and any officer's notes relating to those  interviews,  if
      not already filed and served;

      (6) If either party wishes to file additional evidence not  previously
      filed, a consolidated bundle should be prepared containing  the  fresh
      evidence and all the evidence previously filed, which bundle  must  be
      filed at the Tribunal and served on the other party no later  than  14
      days before the hearing. The appellant may wish to consider  preparing
      a supplementary witness statement to ensure that all  relevant  issues
      have been addressed; and

      (7) Unless informed to the  contrary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
      assume the grounds of appeal are limited to protection issues.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  will  be
    heard again de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               Signed                 Date 16 February 2016




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
