
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00196/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th August 2016                            |On 9th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Faryl (instructed by Immigration Advice
Service)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Notice of Decision

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  with  permission,  against  a
    decision and  reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Chambers)
    promulgated on 4th March 2015 by which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of her asylum claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Kuwait who arrived in the UK on 14th June
    2014 and claimed asylum on arrival.  The Secretary of State refused the
    claim on 12th December 2014 and it was the  refusal  of  that  decision
    which came before Judge Chambers on 18th February 2015.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that she was an  undocumented
    Bidoon from Kuwait born on 3rd December 1978.  She said that her former
    husband was also a Bidoon and she has a daughter  who  had  accompanied
    her and was her dependent born on the 9th October 2005.

 4. Her mother and father, two brother and six sisters  remain  in  Kuwait.
    Her other brother A K E accompanied her to the  UK  and  made  his  own
    separate claim for asylum.

 5. Judge Chambers heard the appeals of brother and sister consecutively on
    the same day and produced two determinations.  Both have  been  granted
    permission to appeal and similarly I heard both cases together  in  the
    Upper Tribunal in the absence of the Appellants.

 6. It was the Appellant's case that she had received a  limited  education
    in Kuwait.  She had worked there in  various  capacities  always  being
    paid in cash.  She said that she had feared the police because she  had
    not appropriate identity documents.  She claimed to have been  arrested
    in 2005 and  insulted  and  mistreated  by  the  police.   A  colleague
    intervened on her behalf and secured her release.  In 2007 she had been
    provided with a civilian ID number and with the help of  a  friend  she
    applied, using bribery, for two false passports using  which  she,  her
    brother and her child travelled to the UK.

 7. The Appellant believes that her sexual orientation is gay/cross  gender
    and that she realised she was different during  her  adolescence.   She
    said that she had had relationships with other women.  She had  married
    a male cousin because it was the custom and the culture and she married
    out of a desire to be normal.  She said that she had  been  in  contact
    with other gay women in Kuwait and  she  had  been  in  her  first  gay
    relationship for a year and a half.  She had friends of the same sexual
    orientation.  She did not tell her  family  about  being  gay  and  she
    concealed her sexual orientation in  Kuwait  because  society  and  her
    family did not accept it.

 8. The Appellant also claimed to fear her ex-husband, who she had not seen
    since 2012.  He had granted her a divorce and there was an  arrangement
    in place for him to see their daughter.  He had taken no steps to  harm
    the Appellant as they were divorced in 2009.  The  Judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim to be an undocumented Bidoon and  also  rejected  the
    other bases of her claim and dismissed the appeal.

 9. The grounds upon which permission was granted which were relied upon by
    Miss Faryl were four in total.

10. The first ground related to the Judge's findings  in  relation  to  the
    passport.  Between paragraphs 24 and 26 of the Decision and Reasons the
    Judge found the Appellant's  failure  to  verify  the  falsity  of  her
    passport which, she initially claimed was a genuine document issued  by
    the Kuwaiti authorities and the subsequent destruction of that passport
    was fatal to her claim to be an undocumented Bidoon.  It is  said  that
    the Judge erred in his evaluation of  her  credibility  on  that  basis
    alone and failed to  have  any  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  birth
    certificates, which she had  also  claimed  to  have  obtained  through
    unofficial means, were in the Respondent's possession and remain so and
    thus were available for examination.  The grounds assert the Judge made
    no further assessment of the Appellant's credibility and on the initial
    adverse credibility finding the entire judgment  was  constructed.   It
    was also said that the Judge  gave  no  reasons  why  he  rejected  the
    Appellant's  explanation  for  destroying  the  passport.    When   the
    Appellant had explained that she destroyed the passport as she had been
    advised to do to avoid being returned to Kuwait.  It was  claimed  that
    retaining the birth certificates and handing  them  to  the  Respondent
    supports her claim that she destroyed  the  passports  to  avoid  being
    returned and not because they were  genuinely  issued  documents.   The
    fact that the Judge found it unreasonable for  the  Appellant  to  have
    destroyed her passport and flushed it down the toilet was  a  selective
    and highly prejudicial summary of  her  evidence.   The  Appellant  had
    described how she was under the control  of  several  different  people
    throughout her journey and thus it was  entirely  reasonable  that  she
    would continue to follow the  agent's  instructions.   Before  me  Miss
    Faryl argued that the Appellant had maintained throughout that she  had
    obtained the passport through payment of a bribe and while she may have
    said they were genuine initially; they may well have been  genuine  but
    they were not obtained through proper  channels.   She  also  submitted
    that the Judge had not found that the Appellant's passport was  genuine
    and his findings were all based on the fact that she had destroyed  the
    passport.

11. The second ground related to the Judge's finding that the Appellant was
    not at risk from her husband.  The Appellant had said  in  her  witness
    statement that she considered herself at risk from her husband and that
    he had been to the family home threatening the Appellant  and  accusing
    her of abducting their daughter.  That evidence was disregarded by  the
    Judge and the evidence in relation to this was not challenged by way of
    cross-examination during the hearing.

12. The third ground relates to the Appellant's sexual identity.  The Judge
    erred by saying that it was a late concoction to bolster a weak  asylum
    claim when she had made the claim at the earliest opportunity.  In  her
    first asylum interview she had said there was another matter which  she
    would prefer to raise with a  female  interviewing  officer  and  as  a
    result a second interview was so arranged at which time  she  made  the
    claim.

13.  The fourth ground asserts that the Judge erred in  failing  to  assess
    the best interests of the Appellant's daughter or Article 8.

14. Defending the decision and reasons, Mr McVeety  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant had not "maintained that  the  passport  was  obtained  by  a
    bribe".  That was not what she had said at first.  Rather she had  said
    that she had paid a fee, been to the office and obtained  the  passport
    in the normal way.  The fact that she subsequently claimed she obtained
    it on payment of a bribe was a new claim.  He argued that the Judge was
    entitled to find for the reasons that he did that the Appellant  had  a
    genuinely issued passport and was thus a documented Bidoon.  He  argued
    that if she was a documented Bidoon then that was the end of  the  case
    because case law makes clear that documented Bidoons are not  at  risk.
    So far as the Appellant's sexuality is concerned Mr McVeety pointed out
    that the Judge had not just found against her on the basis  of  a  late
    disclosure but on the way in which she chose to live.  She came to  the
    UK where she could have lived openly and yet chose not to do  so.   She
    chose to live discreetly and had produced no evidence whatsoever of any
    of her claims, including medical appointments to change gender and thus
    the Judge made entirely sustainable findings open to him on  the  basis
    of the evidence.

15. With regard to Section 55 the Borders, Citizen and Immigration Act 2009
    and Article 8 Mr McVeety said this cannot possibly have amounted  to  a
    material error of law given that at the date of the hearing before  him
    the Appellant had been in the UK for only eight months.

Findings

16. The Judge set out the evidence that he heard between paragraphs  9  and
    13 of the decision.  He noted that the Appellant agreed  that  she  had
    destroyed the passports by flushing them down the toilet in the  plane.
    She had done so on the instructions of the agent.  She and her  brother
    waited four hours after landing before claiming asylum.  She reiterated
    at  the  hearing  that  the  passports  were  not  genuine  Article  17
    passports.

17. She had agreed that her daughter's birth certificate had been  produced
    to  the  Respondent.   The  agent  had  told  her  how  to  get   birth
    certificates for herself, her brother and her  daughter  and  she  paid
    bribes.  The birth certificates are not genuine.   She  never  believed
    them to be genuine.  The civilian ID card that she  had  was  different
    from a Security card which would indicate that  she  was  a  documented
    Bidoon.  She agreed in her written statement that she had said  at  the
    interview that the passports were genuine.   She  said  that  this  was
    because she was afraid and felt under pressure.  If she had  said  that
    they were false she thought she may have  been  arrested  and  she  was
    scared.  That journey was the first time she had had responsibility  to
    make decisions.

18. With regard to the Secretary of State's arguments that her lifestyle in
    Kuwait did not reflect that of an undocumented Bidoon.  She  said  that
    her jobs were not official.  She  was  paid  in  cash.   She  paid  for
    education for her daughter.  It was because she was  undocumented  that
    she had been stopped by the police.

19. She again reasserted her sexuality.  She did not  accept  that  private
    lesbian relationships were legal in Kuwait.  The  Appellant  said  that
    she felt more comfortable expressing herself in the UK and wanted to be
    advised about gender realignment.  She did not want her brother to know
    about this.  She had not told her brother anything about  how  she  had
    got the passports or the birth certificates.

20. Having set out the evidence the Judge then set out the Country Guidance
    cases in particular NM (Documented/undocumented Bidoon: Risk) Kuwait CG
    [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC).   That  case  makes  clear  that  the  crucial
    document is the security card not the "civil identification  documents"
    referred to in previous Country Guidance.  That case  also  made  clear
    that documented Bidoons were not at real risk of persecution or  breach
    of their protected human rights.  However, undocumented Bidoons were at
    such risk.

21. The Judge also reminded himself of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31 in relation to the necessity  to  decide  why  a  person
    would behave discreetly with regard to  their  sexuality.   If  it  was
    based on fear then they were entitled to succeed in their appeal.

22. In the Judge's findings he clearly recognised the difference between  a
    Security card and a  Civil  Identification  document  and  he  reminded
    himself of that at paragraph 22.  He noted at  paragraph  23  that  the
    objective information shows that undocumented Bidoons have a  very  low
    standard of living and subsist by selling fruit etc.  He then  went  on
    to note that the fact that the Appellant in this case  had  quite  well
    paid employment was inconsistent with the general  picture.   He  noted
    the Appellant explained that she had been paid in cash and was assisted
    by friends in getting employment.  However, she was well  paid  in  the
    sense that she received more money than her  husband.   She  enjoyed  a
    reasonable lifestyle and although this might  have  been  explained  by
    having connections and living on her wits, he noted that  another  view
    was the fact that she had such a  lifestyle  was  consistent  with  her
    being a documented Bidoon.

23. In the next paragraph he  pointed  out  that  the  case  the  Appellant
    presented was that she and her brother were  undocumented  Bidoons  who
    wished to escape Kuwait using false passports.  He noted  that  handing
    those false passports to the UK authorities would have proved her case.
     However, she did not do that but destroyed the  passports  by  ripping
    them up and flushed them down the  toilet  on  the  plane.   They  then
    waited in the airport until there was no prospect of the  Secretary  of
    State getting hold of  the  passports.   He  also  noted  that  in  her
    interview she claimed the passports were genuine.

24. At paragraph 26 the Judge reiterated the fact that  the  Appellant  had
    quite deliberately destroyed the documents which would have proved  the
    case one way or the other.  Destroying false passports was inconsistent
    with her claim and on the basis of her having destroyed  documents  and
    living a lifestyle inconsistent with that of an undocumented Bidoon  he
    found that she was not.  On the basis of the  evidence  the  Judge  was
    entitled to form that view.  The Appellant has changed  her  case  over
    time.  She initially said  at  interview  that  she  had  obtained  the
    passport herself by paying a fee and attending the authorities and that
    it was a genuine document.  She then claimed  that  it  was  a  genuine
    document but obtained through bribery.  In either event that would mean
    that she was a documented Bidoon and not an undocumented Bidoon.  I can
    find no material error of law in the Judge's reasoning.

25. The Judge was entitled to find based on the evidence  before  him  that
    she did not have a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis  of  a
    fear of her husband.  He noted that they were divorced and she had  not
    seen him for three years.  Although there were contact arrangements  in
    place for the husband he only exercised this about four times  a  year.
    All of this, the Judge found, illustrated a degree  of  disinterest  in
    the child and as a matter of  fact  he  had  not  sought  to  harm  the
    Appellant.  On the Appellant's own account he said the husband was  not
    in a position of authority or  influence  and  the  Appellant's  family
    remain in Kuwait, untroubled apparently  by  her  ex-husband.   All  of
    those findings were properly open to the Judge on the evidence that the
    Appellant had chosen to adduce.

26. With regard to the question of the Appellant's sexuality he noted  that
    she had presented as heterosexual when in Kuwait.  She had  claimed  to
    be in contact with her former partners in Kuwait yet  had  produced  no
    evidence.  She claimed that she had sought assistance  in  relation  to
    her sexual identity by means of referral through her GP but again there
    was  no  evidence  before  the  Judge  about  that.   Furthermore,  the
    Appellant asserted that she had chosen to keep her sexuality quiet even
    in the United Kingdom and for all of those reasons the Judge found  she
    had not established her claimed sexuality.  Once again, on the evidence
    before him it would have been difficult for the Judge to have  come  to
    any other conclusion and I find there is no material error of law there
    either.

27. Whilst it might be said that  the  Judge  was  factually  incorrect  in
    concluding that her claimed sexuality was a late concoction designed to
    bolster a weak asylum claim, that did not influence his conclusion that
    it is a false claim.  In any event, the Judge had gone on  to  consider
    as he was required to do on the  basis  of  HJ  (Iran)  how  she  would
    conduct herself.  On the basis of the way she had conducted herself  in
    the past and the way she conducted herself in the UK he found that  she
    would live discreetly as a matter of choice to avoid  embarrassment  to
    herself and her friends and family and that that was not a matter  that
    would engage the Refugee Convention.

28. Whilst it is true that the Judge spent very little time on and made  no
    considered evaluation of Section 55 or Article 8 save to agree with the
    Secretary of State's position, given the very short length of time  the
    Appellant had been in the UK and given that she  would  be  removed  to
    Kuwait, where she has family, with  her  child  there  is  no  possible
    prospect of the appeal succeeding on Article 8 grounds and thus even if
    this was an error it was not material.

29. For all of the above reasons  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

30. The First-tier Judge made an anonymity direction on the  basis  of  the
    sensitive issues raised by the Appellant and the involvement of a child
    and I also make an anonymity direction.




Signed                              Date 8th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 8th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


