
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00241/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2014                                 |On 16 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Shagufta RIAZ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pickering, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Shagufta Riaz, claims to be stateless and was born on 18
    December 1977.  The appellant claims to have been  born  in  Burma  and
    came to Pakistan at the age of 3.   It  is  accepted  that  she  is  of
    Rohingya ethnicity.  The appellant's husband and child  are  dependants
    upon her claim for asylum, which was made in April 2013, the  appellant
    having entered the United Kingdom with her family as a Tier 1  (General
    Partner); her husband had come to the  United  Kingdom  with  leave  to
    remain as a student in 2008.  His leave to remain  had  expired  on  10
    June 2013.  The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the  respondent
    on 20 December 2013 and at the same time a decision was taken to  issue
    removal directions [to Pakistan].  The appellant appealed  against  the
    removal decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dickson) which, in a
    determination promulgated on 19 February 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge had before him background material relating to the  treatment
    of the Rohingya people in Pakistan.  The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    turns, as Ms Pickering acknowledged, on the narrow basis of the judge's
    findings as to the validity of the  passports  of  the  appellant,  her
    husband and child.  The appellant asserts that  she  is  stateless  and
    that the Pakistani passports which she  and  her  family  had  used  to
    obtain visas to enter the United Kingdom and to travel here were  false
    documents which they had obtained by paying bribes.  Both the appellant
    and her husband had given evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    had attested to the "hatred" with which they, as Rohingya  people,  had
    been treated in Pakistan.

 3. The judge acknowledged that the appellant  and  her  husband  may  have
    suffered discrimination in Pakistan along with  other  Rohingyas  [52].
    However, the judge did not find the appellant and  her  husband  to  be
    credible witnesses.  He did not believe that they had suffered problems
    with the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) as alleged.  At  [53],  the
    judge found that "the appellant and her husband come from families  who
    have retained Pakistani citizenship.  I do not consider they have  ever
    come to the attention of the Pakistan authorities while they have  been
    living in Pakistan.  I do not consider they would face any difficulties
    on return apart from readjusting to life  in  Pakistan  after  spending
    time in the United Kingdom."  The judge found that the  passports  used
    by the family had been "obtained ... from  the  Pakistani  authorities,
    but they are genuine and that no bribes were paid."

 4. Ms Pickering submitted that the judge had not given adequate weight  to
    background material (e.g. UK Home Office Country of Origin  Information
    Service Report - August 2013) which indicated that "fake passports  are
    widely available" in Pakistan.  The COIS Report "the Consul General  of
    the United States in Pakistan as having indicated  in  July  2010  that
    'nearly 90% of applications for American visas made by Pakistanis  were
    refused because they were accompanied  by  false  documents  ...'"   Ms
    Pickering submitted that it was unlikely that  the  appellant  and  her
    family, as Rohingya people, would have been granted citizenship.

 5. The judge's determination contains a careful and thorough  analysis  of
    the evidence.  The judge reached findings which he supported  by  clear
    and cogent  reasons.   The  judge  accepted  that  Rohingya  people  in
    Pakistan do suffer difficulties but I find that he did not err  in  law
    by concluding that  the  evidence  "did  not  establish  that  ...  all
    Rohingyas would not be able to obtain Pakistan citizenship."  [48]   It
    was clearly open to the judge to find that the appellant had failed  to
    discharge the burden of proving that she and her family had been denied
    citizenship and that they had travelled to the United Kingdom on  false
    passports.  There is nothing in the evidence before  the  judge  or  to
    which Ms Pickering referred me which would indicate that the First-tier
    Tribunal's finding was unsustainable.  That finding is not perverse nor
    was it made contrary  to  the  weight  of  the  evidence.   Whilst  the
    evidence showed that Rohingya people do suffer from problems there  was
    no evidence to show that they were invariably excluded  from  obtaining
    citizenship and, whilst there was also evidence of a widespread use  of
    false documents in Pakistan, it was open to the judge to find that  the
    appellant's passport and those  of  her  family  members  were  genuine
    documents.  There was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  judge  ignored
    evidence which was of relevance to these findings or that he had regard
    to evidence which he should not have considered.  In the circumstances,
    I do not find that he has erred in law.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 30 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
