
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00682/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  16 June 2015                     |On 18 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         GEREMEW GOSAYE GEBRETSADIK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caswell , Counsel, instructed by Bankfield Heath
sols.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Hillis
       made following a hearing on 27 February 2015 at Bradford.

    2. The appellant makes a number of criticisms of  the  determination  in
       his grounds, in particular that the  judge's  reasoning  process  was
       flawed in concluding the appellant was Ethiopian  and  not  Eritrean,
       and that he could be returned to Greece; in  addition  he  failed  to
       deal with the refoulement issue adequately.

    3. Mr Diwncyz relied on his Rule 24 response but said that  he  did  not
       resist the application.

    4. The grounds have merit.

    5. It is not evident where the  judge's  assertion  that  the  appellant
       admitted in 2001 that he was Ethiopian comes from. It does not appear
       in the witness statement nor, according to Mr Diwncyz, the PO's notes
       of the hearing.

    6. The judge accepted that the family could not be returned to Ethiopia,
       and appears to have based his decision on  the  family  returning  to
       Greece. The appellant's wife has refugee  status  in  the  UK  as  an
       Eritrean. He did not  consider  the  appellant's  argument  that  his
       wife's grant of refugee status by the UK was not compatible with  her
       having lawful residence in another EEA state.  Moreover  he  reversed
       the  standard  of  proof  in  stating  that  the  appellant  had  not
       established that he could not be returned to Greece, when it was  for
       the respondent to do so.

    7. For the above reasons, the judge erred in law.

    8. Accordingly the decision of Judge Hillis is set aside. It  should  be
       remade by a judge other than Judge Hillis at Bradford with all issues
       at large. It might be prudent for this case to  be  listed  initially
       for a CMR, so that the respondent has an opportunity to  provide  all
       of the evidence upon which she seeks  to  rely  in  relation  to  the
       family returning to Greece.



Signed        Date


                                        Judge of the Upper Tribunal
