
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/00704/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18th January 2018                       |  On 5th February 2018           |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     B M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Aujla of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 17th August 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Afghan citizen born in 1983.  His asylum and  human
    rights application was refused on 27th April 2016.  He appealed to  the
    FTT.  His appeal was heard on 8th August 2017.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he feared persecution on the  basis  of  his
    imputed political opinion as his father had been a commander in Hizb-i-
    Islami.  The Appellant relied upon a report from Dr Giustozzi to verify
    some documents in support of his claim.  When Dr Giustozzi's researcher
    contacted the police in Afghanistan, they confirmed that a warrant  had
    been issued for his arrest and that he was  wanted  as  a  collaborator
    with Hizb-i-Islami, and also with the Taliban (something of  which  the
    Appellant had not previously been aware).

 4. The FTT found, at  paragraph  48,  that  the  Appellant's  account  "is
    totally and utterly fabricated."  The FTT found that the Appellant  was
    not wanted by the authorities in Afghanistan for  any  reason,  and  he
    would be of no adverse interest to the authorities or  anyone  else  on
    his return.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Ground 1 contends that the FTT had not acted fairly in finding that the
    verification report of Dr Giustozzi was not  truthful.   This  had  not
    been part of the Respondent's case, and  a  previous  hearing  on  16th
    January 2017 had been adjourned to enable the  Respondent  to  consider
    and respond to the verification evidence.  There was no  response.   Dr
    Guistozzi stated that the  documents  had  been  authenticated  by  his
    researcher who had visited the police.  The  FTT  recorded  that  there
    were no concerns about the integrity and profile of Dr  Guistozzi,  but
    the FTT did not have to accept the integrity of the  researcher  simply
    because he was  working  for  Dr  Guistozzi.   The  FTT  described  the
    researcher  as  not  being  subject  to  any  professional  control  or
    supervision, regardless of the level of vetting that Dr  Guistozzi  may
    have carried out.  The FTT did not accept that the  letters  issued  by
    the authorities were genuine or authentic, and this  was  in  the  main
    because  the  authentication  had  been  obtained  by  Dr   Guistozzi's
    researcher.

 7. The Appellant pointed out that the points relied on by the FTT were not
    relied on in the Respondent's refusal letter, were not raised in cross-
    examination, as it was  never  suggested  to  the  Appellant  that  the
    evidence of the expert or his researcher was untruthful, and  were  not
    relied on in submissions  made  by  Counsel  for  the  Respondent.   In
    addition  the  issues  in  relation  to  the  expert  report  and   the
    authenticity of the documents were not  raised  by  the  FTT  with  the
    Appellant or his Counsel.

 8. It was contended that it is procedurally unfair for a finder of fact to
    conclude against a  witness  on  a  point  that  was  never  put.   The
    Appellant did not have the opportunity of dealing with the FTT concerns
    about the expert report, as these concerns have never been made to  the
    Appellant either by the Respondent or the FTT.  For this reason it  was
    submitted that the FTT materially erred in law and the decision must be
    set aside.

 9. Ground 2 contends that the FTT made  errors  of  fact  in  relation  to
    undisputed evidence.  It was contended that the expert report confirmed
    that the Appellant is wanted by the police for collaboration  with  the
    Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami, that the Appellant learned of the accusation
    of collaborating with the Taliban from the expert,  that  the  expert's
    researcher provided a curriculum setting  out  his  qualifications  and
    experience, and that there is a complete  chain  of  custody  from  the
    Appellant's  solicitors  to  Dr  Guistozzi,  and  to   Dr   Giustozzi's
    researcher, to the police, and then back to the Appellant's solicitors.
     It was  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  approached  the  case  without
    reference to these key facts.

10. Ground 3 contends that the FTT misapplied the burden  and  standard  of
    proof.  The FTT made a passing reference to  the  lower  standard,  but
    failed to demonstrate its application.  It was submitted that  the  FTT
    had expressed more than just scepticism, but had expressed  incredulity
    at the Appellant's account.

11. Ground 4 contends that the FTT failed  to  make  reasoned  findings  on
    evidence, by making no separate or reasoned assessment of the  evidence
    of the Appellant's cousin.  It was submitted that it is  inadequate  to
    simply record that because the Appellant is not believed,  the  witness
    is also not believed.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrew  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  I am satisfied that it is arguable there are errors of law  in
             the decision in that the judge has  made  findings  against  a
             witness, that is Dr  Guistozzi's  agent,  without  the  points
             being put to the person concerned.  In particular I note  that
             it was not part of the Respondent's case that the verification
             report  was  not  truthful  even  after  there  had  been   an
             adjournment to allow the Respondent to respond to verification
             evidence, which she did not do.  This may have led  to  errors
             of fact and thus arguable  errors  of  law.   Further,  it  is
             arguable the judge, in his wording in the  decision,  did  not
             apply the correct standard of proof.

         3.   I do not, however, find that the judge  made  no  findings  in
             relation to the Appellant's cousin's evidence.  He  refers  to
             this at paragraph 35 of the decision."

13. Following the grant of permission,  there  was  no  response  from  the
    Respondent pursuant  to  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

14. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. I firstly heard oral submissions from Mr  Fripp  who  relied  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal,  and
    in particular Ground 1.  Mr Fripp reiterated  the  point  made  in  the
    grounds, that the Respondent had not questioned the authenticity of  Dr
    Giustozzi's verification of the police documents, and it was  confirmed
    that a warrant had been issued in respect of the Appellant.

16. It was submitted that the FTT had erred by making points in relation to
    Dr Giustozzi's evidence, which had not been made by the Respondent, and
    which had not been put to the Appellant at the hearing,  and  therefore
    the Appellant had been given no opportunity to address those points.  I
    was referred in particular to paragraphs 44-45  of  the  FTT  decision.
    The FTT had not accepted the integrity of  Dr  Giustozzi's  researcher,
    although this had never been put in issue by the  Respondent,  and  was
    not put in issue at the hearing.  Mr Fripp submitted that the FTT erred
    at paragraph 44 in stating that the researcher was not subject  to  any
    professional control or supervision, as he fell within the  bona  fides
    of Dr Giustozzi.  It was submitted that  the  finding  by  the  FTT  at
    paragraph 45 that the report by Dr Giustozzi could not be  relied  upon
    to show that  the  police  documents  were  authentic,  was  materially
    unfair.

17. Mr Fripp submitted that the finding by the FTT that the report was  not
    reliable, had coloured the perception of the FTT  in  relation  to  the
    remainder of the evidence.  Therefore  the  decision  of  the  FTT  was
    unsafe, materially wrong in law, and should be set aside.

18. Mr Walker opposed the submission that the  FTT  decision  must  be  set
    aside.  He submitted that paragraph 43 must  also  be  considered.   Mr
    Walker commented that the FTT may have been in error in making  adverse
    findings about Dr Giustozzi's  researcher,  but  pointed  out  that  in
    paragraph 43 the FTT had already expressed  serious  doubts  about  the
    authenticity and veracity of letters said to have been  issued  by  the
    police in Afghanistan.  Therefore the errors in paragraphs  44-45  were
    not material, given the findings that  the  FTT  had  already  made  at
    paragraph 43.  I was therefore asked to find that as  the  errors  were
    not material, the decision of the FTT should stand.

19. In response Mr Fripp submitted that the FTT had a duty to consider  the
    evidence in the round.  What was stated in paragraph 43 may have fallen
    away, were it not for the errors in paragraphs 44-45,  in  relation  to
    the  authentication  of  the  police  documents   by   Dr   Guistozzi's
    researcher.

20. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved  my  decision,  to  reflect
    upon the oral submissions, and to consider again the FTT decision.   Mr
    Fripp submitted that if an error of law  was  found,  as  contended  on
    behalf of the Appellant, the FTT decision should be set aside  with  no
    findings preserved.  On that issue, (if there  was  an  error  of  law,
    which was not accepted), Mr Walker agreed.



My Findings and Conclusions

21. In my view the FTT erred in law as contended in Grounds  1  and  2.   I
    accept that the Respondent's case was not that the verification  report
    of Dr Giustozzi was  not  truthful.   The  Respondent  was  granted  an
    adjournment of a previous hearing so that  the  verification  could  be
    considered.  The Respondent did not provide any response in relation to
    that evidence.

22. I am persuaded that the FTT raised issues in relation to Dr Giustozzi's
    report, and in particular his researcher, that had not formed  part  of
    the Respondent's case, and which were not raised  at  the  hearing,  so
    that the Appellant and his Counsel did  not  have  the  opportunity  to
    address  the  FTT  on  those  issues.   I  accept  that  Dr  Guitozzi's
    researcher had provided to the FTT a copy of his CV, which is at  pages
    41-42 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle,  although  there  is  no
    reference to this by the FTT.

23. It was conceded by the Respondent at the hearing before  me,  that  the
    FTT may have erred as  contended  in  Grounds  1  and  2,  but  it  was
    suggested that because of findings previously made (see  paragraph  43)
    the errors were not material.  I  find  I  am  unable  to  accept  that
    argument.  The FTT must consider all the evidence in the round.

24. I therefore conclude that the FTT materially erred in law, and I accept
    the submission made by Mr Fripp that the  finding  in  relation  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's report and authentication of documents, may  have  infected
    the view of the FTT in relation to other adverse  credibility  findings
    made against the Appellant.  Therefore I conclude that the decision  of
    the FTT is unsafe and cannot stand.

25. The decision needs to be re-made.  I have taken into account  paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  which  is  set  out
    below;

         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal."

26. It is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FTT,  as  there  was
    procedural unfairness in the conclusions reached by the FTT in relation
    to  the  authentication  of  police  documents,  and  no  findings  are
    preserved, therefore the judicial fact-finding which is necessary  will
    be considerable, and it is more appropriate for that to be carried  out
    by the FTT rather than the Upper Tribunal.

27. There will therefore be a further hearing before the FTT.  The  parties
    will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in due course.  The
    appeal is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge Aujla.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The FTT made an anonymity direction.  That direction is  continued.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.    Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   This  direction  is
made because the Appellant has made a claim for international protection.



Signed                              Date 19th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FTT.



Signed                              Date 19th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
