
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00478/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th March 2019                            |On 28th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     ZA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw of Counsel, instructed by Central
                    England Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan assessed as having been  born
    on 1st January 1999. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  20th  August
    2014.  He was then a minor and was  placed  into  the  care  of  Social
    Services.

2.   The appellant seeks to appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 2nd March 2016, refusing to grant him asylum or other  protection
    or any leave to remain under the basis of human  rights.   That  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hall on  24th  January  2017  and
    14th July 2017.  In a decision promulgated on 28th July 2017 the appeal
    was dismissed.

3.   The appellant sought to challenge that decision and  permission  to  do
    so was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on  28th  November  2017.
    Thus, the matter came before me for hearing  on  13th  August  2018  to
    determine whether or not the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    should be set aside for error of law or not.

4.   For the reasons as set out in my decision promulgated  on  28th  August
    2018, I found that there were significant errors in the approach  taken
    to the factual situation  relating  to  the  appellant  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

5.   The Judge had considered the  country  cases  of  AA  (Afghanistan)  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00016 and AK (Afghanistan) CG [2012]  UKUT  00163  and  had
    concluded that the appellant could safely return to Kabul.

6.   It was argued that the appellant's profile with the  Taliban  was  such
    as to expose him to a particular risk upon  return.   Further,  it  was
    contended that there had been no specific consideration of Rule  276ADE
    and the  analysis  as  to  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Kabul.  It was submitted that the  case  of
    AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) did not alter
    that position and required in any event a fact-sensitive analysis.

7.    At  the  resumed  hearing  Mr  Bradshaw  indicated  that   he   relied
    essentially upon the original bundle that had been  placed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in August 2018.  He invited my attention also to  a
    supplementary bundle filed under cover of letter  of  4th  March  2019.
    Most helpfully he drew  my  attention  to  the  schedule  of  essential
    passages and to his skeleton argument.

8.   He indicated it was not his intention to call  the  appellant  to  give
    any further evidence, otherwise than  to  indicate  an  update  to  the
    appellant's witness statement, namely that he had also been in  contact
    with his mother in December 2018.

9.   In terms of profile the  appellant  had  lived  with  his  parents  and
    siblings in a village in Baghlan province.

10.  His village was controlled by the Taliban.   A  paternal  uncle  was  a
    Taliban commander who forced the appellant to undergo training with the
    Taliban for two or three times a month for two or three days at a  time
    in the last year.  He was trained to use weapons but came to understand
    that he was going to become a suicide bomber.  When this was  disclosed
    to his parents they moved him out of Afghanistan.   He  fears  that  if
    returned he will be killed by the Taliban or forced to become a suicide
    bomber.  He would be regarded as having left the Taliban.   So  far  as
    his parents were concerned his father was a person who  worked  on  the
    land and did not engage in any fighting and  his  mother  also  worked.
    His father was the oldest brother in his family, some of  his  brothers
    were supporting the Taliban.

11.  The appellant explained that  he  would  be  taken  by  his  uncle  for
    training in the mountainous areas.  It was said of the  uncle  that  he
    was in charge of a group of about twenty men from  local  villages  who
    were Taliban supporters.  He had to learn about guns,  how  to  load  a
    gun, how to shoot a gun and practise shooting when  on  training.   The
    appellant said that he had an elder brother  who  was  also  a  Taliban
    member.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the appellant  to  be  credible  in
    that account.  As I have indicated there  would  seem  to  be  no  good
    reason why that credibility finding should not be preserved in fairness
    to the appellant at this resumed hearing.  The Judge went  on  to  find
    that the appellant would be at risk in his home area and  thus  it  was
    that relocation to Kabul was to be considered.

13.  The primary fear of the appellant is that  if  returned  to  Kabul  the
    Taliban will find out where he is and punish him for  his  having  left
    their organisation.

14.  In terms of his uncle as a local commander I have regard  to  the  EASO
    Country of Origin Information Report of Afghanistan, Taliban Strategies
    - Recruitment of July 2012.

15.  In terms of organisation  there  is  clearly  a  hierarchy  within  the
    Taliban structure, local commanders  are  perhaps  at  the  lower  tier
    relying on their family or  tribal  connections  to  recruit  and  find
    fighters.  It would seem that the description of  the  uncle  with  his
    twenty fighters recruited from the local village matches that  profile.
    Mr Bradshaw did not seek to argue that the uncle was any  more  than  a
    local commander. There was  nothing  to  indicate  that  he  had  wider
    influence that would extend to Kabul.  In any event, it  has  now  been
    made clear by the appellant that in the course of fighting in the local
    area that uncle, the commander, has been killed.  What is now suggested
    is that his sons, the appellant's cousins, would seek revenge  for  his
    killing.  Given, however, the fact that he was killed in combat without
    any involvement of the appellant, that fear would seem at  best  to  be
    speculative.

16.  There is nothing to indicate that any  more  influential  Taliban  body
    would have been aware of the appellant's departure.   As  a  matter  of
    common sense his departure may have been a source of  embarrassment  to
    his uncle or loss of face.  I  find  it  extremely  unlikely  in  those
    circumstances his departure would be communicated any wider.

17.  It is said that now that the appellant is in contact  with  his  mother
    there is a real risk that he will be traced through that connection but
    I do not find that to be reasonably likely in  all  the  circumstances.
    It has  been  made  clear  his  father  and  mother  were  not  Taliban
    supporters and  had  been  reluctant  from  the  outset  to  allow  the
    appellant to go with the uncle but felt that they had  no  choice.   It
    was the appellant's father who removed him to safety from the  Taliban.
    In such a situation he would  have  every  reason  not  to  tell  other
    members of the family who may still be Taliban as to the whereabouts of
    the appellant.

18.  Considerable reliance is placed upon the expert report  of  Tim  Foxley
    dated 5th August 2018.

19.   In  the  report  he  sets  out  in  general  terms  the  situation  in
    Afghanistan in general.  There is reference  to  the  Taliban  striking
    into Kabul  with  suicide  bombs  and  terror  attacks.   There  was  a
    significant spike in terror attacks in Kabul in the  first  quarter  of
    2018.  He describes Kabul as a dangerous area because of the number and
    scale of suicide attacks on the city.

20.  In terms of interest in the appellant, much would depend upon  what  he
    had done and what information was known about him.   It  was  accepted,
    particularly in paragraph 38 of the report that it was less likely that
    he would present a profile for specific targeting and  tracking  beyond
    the particular local area where he had been known.

21.  Mr Foxley touches upon whether the appellant would be  questioned  upon
    arrival at Kabul Airport but accepts that he does not have a good sense
    of the level of detail, scope, scale or intent of  that  process.   His
    report indicates that he has sought that sort of information.  He makes
    reference  to  the  Afghanistan  Analysists  Network  having   recently
    investigated the return process that the German government takes.  Such
    serves as a useful guide as to the possible process involved.   Efforts
    are made to protect the confidentiality of internal  returnees  and  on
    some occasions Afghan  police  and  people  from  the  Afghan  Interior
    Ministry's Criminal Investigation Department are present when returnees
    arrive at the airport.  Mr Foxley suggests that  if  information  about
    the appellant's background  came  to  light  he  may  be  detained  for
    additional questioning, in which case the appellant might be at risk of
    unfair detention or mistreatment.

22.  Mr Foxley comments at paragraph 44 of the report that in his  view  the
    Taliban do not generally monitor or track the arrival of failed  Afghan
    asylum seekers, at least he is not seen reporting to that effect.   The
    risk of the appellant being picked up by the Taliban simply by arriving
    at Kabul Airport is low because his personal profile is low.

23.  In terms of the wider community in Kabul,  the  appellant's  background
    is relatively low level and someone who was not a willing or pro-active
    member of the Taliban.  It is the view of Mr Foxley that  it  does  not
    seem likely that he will be at  risk  from  the  population  at  large.
    There may be risk from police and  security  forces  beyond  Kabul  but
    unless  the  appellant  is  doing  something  suspicious  any  risk  of
    targeting will be low.

24.  Mr Bradshaw submits that the  appellant  may  come  into  contact  with
    third parties either upon arrival, or by random checkpoint,  or  indeed
    in applying for employment in which case he may be requested to outline
    his background.  He submits that it would not be right  to  expect  the
    appellant to lie about  his  family's  and  his  involvement  with  the
    Taliban.

25.  It seems to me  that  whether  the  appellant  has  such  contacts  and
    whether such questions are asked of him is speculative.  As the reports
    indicate there has been a very large  influx  of  people  from  outside
    Kabul coming into Kabul over the past years, indeed the  suggestion  is
    that there were 3,000,000 people within Kabul at the start of 2015, the
    population has risen sharply since then.  It  is  estimated  that  some
    570,000 people may be coming into Kabul  in  2019.   Those  people  are
    coming from all backgrounds and  areas.   It  is  a  cosmopolitan  city
    rather than a local  community.   In  any  event,  if  questioned,  the
    applicant would truthfully say that his parents were not supporters  of
    the Taliban nor that he was and that he left to seek asylum  elsewhere.
    Mr Bradshaw seeks to suggest that, given the influx in the  population,
    that many people find themselves  forced  to  look  outside  Kabul  for
    support and in those circumstances the risk of encounter with others is
    increased.

26.  The appellant  was  not  a  Taliban  fighter,  nor  was  he  a  willing
    participant in the training.  It seems to  me  that  if  he  can  quite
    truthfully give an account of himself it would not engage the hostility
    or disapproval of others.

27.  A further suggestion is that  he  would  become  somebody  of  interest
    because of his westernised habits.  That  is  a  matter  that  was  not
    supported by the Tribunal in AS and as such has not been pursued in the
    appeal before me.

28.  To be recognised as a  refugee  as  defined  in  Regulation  2  of  the
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 as a person who falls within Article 1A  of  the  1951
    Geneva Convention. It is for the appellant to show that he  is  outside
    his country of nationality, has a well-founded fear of persecution  for
    a Convention reason  and  is  unable  owing  to  such  fear  to  secure
    protection within his country of  nationality.   Alternatively,  to  be
    eligible for  humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules that there were  substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that if he was removed from the United Kingdom he  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm and is unable  or  owing  to  such  risk
    unwilling to avail himself of the protection of the country of return.

29.  For the reasons  which  I  have  set  out  above,  I  do  not  find  it
    reasonably likely that if returned to  Kabul  the  appellant  would  be
    actively sought out either by the Taliban or by the Taliban members  of
    his family, nor do I find that his low profile such as to expose him to
    a real risk of suffering serious harm or detention.

30.  It was also  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  he  is  a
    vulnerable person, that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration into society even upon a return to Kabul.   In  those
    circumstances it is contended that he  satisfies  the  requirements  in
    Appendix FM in relation  to  family  life  or  paragraph  276ADE(1)  in
    relation to private life.

31.  A starting point for such consideration lies, it is submitted,  in  the
    statement of [P] who is a personal advisor working in  the  Asylum  and
    Leaving Care Team of Warwickshire County Council.  She has set out  her
    experiences of the appellant in a letter dated 3rd  August  2018.   She
    has worked with the appellant since April 2017.  He lives in one of the
    asylum team's rented houses which he shares with another.

32.  He is  described  as  polite  with  excellent  spoken  English  and  he
    presents as a British teenager in his appearance and beliefs.   He  was
    very frustrated and upset upon receiving the negative decision  in  his
    asylum claim.  He is worried about returning to Kabul, that he  has  no
    network support there.  He fears being homeless and without any  source
    of income.  Stress has become a factor in his health problems.

33.  Although he has held the tenancy in the property for  a  year,  he  has
    been close to eviction because of a  number  of  incidents  which,  she
    would suggest, shows his naivety and vulnerability to  exploitation  by
    others.  He felt pressured to allow older Afghan males to stay  in  his
    home and invited people to share a meal and conversation.   This  began
    to spiral out of control with unknown people  arriving  at  his  house,
    being antisocial and his feeling unable to know how to deal with  them.
    He felt unable to cope with the problem on his own  or  confront  other
    members of the Afghan community who might have been taking advantage of
    him.  He required the intervention of Social Services to put an end  to
    that problem.

34.  The appellant wants to train as a car mechanic and  set  up  eventually
    his own business. Although there are courses and apprenticeships  which
    he can take in the area in which he now lives, he does not believe that
    such opportunities would exist for him in Kabul.   He  feels  safe  and
    settled in the United Kingdom and fears to return to Kabul.

35.  Mr Foxley in his  report  comments  that  unsupported  youths  and  men
    without regular employment or reliable accommodation are at the risk of
    exploitation, be it insurgent, sexual, criminal or narcotic.  There was
    no  unemployment  benefit  per  se.  Insecurity   and   employment   in
    Afghanistan is forcing Afghans into the capital looking for  work.   It
    is the view of Mr Foxley that the appellant would be at risk of a range
    of predatory exploiters  given  his  youth,  inexperience  and  limited
    education.  He points to the appellant's lack of ties  and  the  street
    survival knowledge about living in Kabul and perceptions that he is  an
    outsider sympathetic to the west.  As I have indicated,  the  issue  of
    westernisation has been dealt with comprehensively by the  Tribunal  in
    AS.

36.  Mr Foxley suggests  that  there  would  be  difficulties  for  overland
    travel  in  or  around  the   province,   particularly   with   Taliban
    checkpoints.  Moving  to  Kabul  would  require  money,  resources  and
    information.  It is suggested that lack of housing, access to food  and
    unemployment are the key challenges to those who come to Kabul.

37.  He makes reference to the Gladwell and Elwyn's study  of  young  Afghan
    seekers in the UK and their return,  the  report  "Broken  Futures"  of
    October 2012.  Such highlights problems of reintegration on the part of
    returnees and difficulties in  being  accepted  back  as  part  of  the
    community.

38.  He stresses the  issues  of  trust  as  being  important  to  establish
    identity and find common acquaintances or family members and indeed  to
    find employment or support.

39.  He quotes the Gladwell and Elwyn report of the young people who  return
    being reluctant to share their stories or to reveal their true selves.

40.  It is said that  reintegration  is  a  significant  problem  for  young
    returnees, particularly if they have been out of Afghanistan for a long
    period and have been in the UK care system.  The practicalities of life
    arise such  as  choosing  where  to  live,  finding  accommodation  and
    sourcing money and financing needs.  It is said  that  two-thirds  have
    not been able to remain in Kabul and have moved on to other  provinces.
    The natural difficulties have been the key feature of the  majority  of
    young returnees.

41.  This is based on the report "After Return" documenting  experiences  of
    young people forced to  be  removed  to  Afghanistan,  Refugee  Support
    Network April 2016.

42.  Thus,  the  ability  to  relocate  within  Kabul  city  area  would  be
    problematic according to Mr Foxley because of the combination of youth,
    inexperience and lack of employment and lack of experience of operating
    in Afghanistan as an independent adult.  He said that the World  Bank's
    assessment of housing and accommodation made in 2008  was  still  valid
    today. Although informal settlements provide shelter  for  80%  of  the
    population and covers 69% of the residential land and much of  that  is
    self-constructed and in poor conditions.  Indeed an Afghan report  from
    2015 described 86% of Afghanistan's urban housing as  slums.   Most  of
    accommodation indicated are informal constructs often without  official
    permission.

43.  Mr Foxley also highlights the security situation in Kabul  particularly
    the incursions by the Taliban and the random suicide bombings.

44.  In terms of the Gladwell report, it is clear that the  Tribunal  in  AS
    had regard to such reports.  There is a detailed schedule  attached  to
    the decision showing the wide range of  reports  that  were  considered
    including that also of Dr Giustozzi of 20th July 2017.  There are  many
    reports that are considered as recently as October 2017.

45.  Further, by way of general background,  reliance  is  placed  upon  the
    report of the UNHCR of 29th August 2018  which  sets  out  the  general
    situation in Afghanistan and of asylum seekers in particular.

46.  The report highlights tha,t in assessing the  reasonableness  of  Kabul
    as internal relocation, it must be shown that an appellant  would  have
    access to shelter,  essential  services  including  water,  sanitation,
    healthcare and education and livelihood  opportunities  or  proven  and
    sustainable support to enable access to an adequate standard of living.

47.  The report speaks of the fact that in 2016 more than 1,000,000  Afghans
    returned from Iran and Pakistan, followed by an additional  620,000  in
    2017.  The enormous surge has resulted in extreme stress on the already
    overstretched absorption capacity in the city and district  areas.   It
    is said that there are limited job opportunities, no social  protection
    nets  and  poor  shelter  and  accommodation.   It  is  said  that  the
    population growth in Kabul is outpacing the city's capacity to  provide
    necessary infrastructures, service and jobs to  citizens.   The  report
    also highlights the incidence  of  violence  in  Kabul,  reporting  993
    civilian casualties (321 killed and  672  injured)  in  Kabul  province
    during the first six months of 2018.  It is said  that  the  number  of
    civilian casualties in Kabul city caused by suicide and complex attacks
    in 2017 represented 70% of all civilian casualties  in  Afghanistan  in
    2017 caused by such attacks.

48.  Reliance is  also  placed  upon  the  United  Nations  Office  for  the
    Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs   (OCHA)   2019   "Afghanistan
    Humanitarian Needs Overview" of 6th December 2018.

49.  That is in substance a general report over the  province  as  a  whole.
    In terms of the figure of 670,000 cited, it is far  from  clear  as  to
    whether that represents returns to the  country  of  Afghanistan  as  a
    whole or to Kabul in particular.   The  report  seems  to  suggest  the
    latter.

50.  In terms  of  the  outlook  for  2019  and  beyond,  it  is  said  that
    approximately 54% of the Afghan people  live  below  the  poverty  line
    while a projected 480,000 to 600,000 young people are expected to enter
    the labour market each year until 2025.  It is said that around 500,000
    young males are  already  unemployed  and  71%  of  young  people  cite
    unemployment as the biggest problem that they face. This seems to be  a
    general comment rather than particularly focused upon Kabul.

51.  Finally, there is the Norwegian Refugee  Council  (NRC)  "Returning  to
    What?  The  challenges  displaced  Afghans  face  in  security  durable
    solutions", 27th November 2018.  Again, that seemed  to  be  a  generic
    report covering Afghanistan  as  a  whole.    It  speaks  of  displaced
    Afghans being less likely to be accessing education and gaining  access
    to livelihood  opportunities.   Displaced  households  frequently  find
    themselves in debt.

52.  The starting point for such  considerations  clearly  is  to  recognise
    that the Tribunal in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  [2018]  sought  to  give
    guidance having had regard to a very wide range of reports  as  can  be
    seen in the schedule.

53.  It was the general conclusion of the Tribunal that,  having  regard  to
    the security and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul  it  would  not,  in
    general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a  single  adult  male  in
    good health to relocate to Kabul, even if he does not have any specific
    connections or support network in Kabul.

54.  The Tribunal  emphasised  that  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    individual must be taken into account in the context of  conditions  in
    the place of relocation, including age, nature and quality  of  support
    network, connections with Kabul, physical and mental health,  language,
    education and vocational skills to determine  whether  a  person  falls
    within the general proposition as advanced.

55.  It is recognised  that  a  person  with  support  network  or  specific
    connections in Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous position on
    return.

56.  In terms of the security incidents, it  is  recognised  that  they  are
    increasing  but  it  was  not  considered  that  the  current  security
    situation in Kabul was at such a level as to render internal relocation
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.

57.  It is particularly  noteworthy  that  the  Tribunal  received  a  large
    number of reports, in particular  reports  from  Dr  Giustozzi  and  Dr
    Schuster concerning matters  such  as  healthcare  and  employment  and
    socioeconomic conditions.  The high unemployment rate was noted and  as
    to the low skilled and informal, the job market was very competitive.

58.  It was noted that there was  to  some  extent  a  disagreement  between
    experts on a number of matters.  Dr Schuster, for  example,  considered
    that it was impossible for a person to get work even as a day  labourer
    without  significant  network  or  contacts  in   Kabul,   whereas   Dr
    Giustozzi's evidence was that a person does not need any references  or
    network to obtain unskilled labouring work.  Although they may be asked
    their name or where they are from there would be no further  checks  on
    that information or that person for such work.

59.  In terms of any support that might be available that was considered  at
    paragraphs 155 onwards.  There were different procedures and assistance
    packages in place depending whether a person is  voluntarily  returning
    to Afghanistan or being forcibly returned.  It is  said  that  IOM  had
    assisted over 15,041 voluntary returnees from Europe since 2003 and  in
    2016 6,711 people  voluntarily  returned  to  Afghanistan  from  Europe
    through the Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration Programme.  The
    programme has preparation, return, reception and reintegration  as  its
    main components.  In certain cases a quantity of  cash  would  be  made
    available.  IOM was able to  give  clothing  and  assist  with  airport
    facilities and counselling which extended to advice as to  housing  and
    employment.

60.  Outside of IOM  there  was  evidence  of  other  smaller  organisations
    offering assistance to returnees.

61.  Consideration was also given in the decision to the  views  of  certain
    individuals who had been returned.  In 2017  the  UNHCR  had  published
    "Tough choices for Afghan refugees returning home  after  exile"  which
    detailed results of a survey of 4,285 people by face to face  interview
    on the point  of  arrival  and  telephone  interview  with  some  1,300
    returnees three months thereafter.  A large proportion said  that  they
    were warmly received by communities on return and that  they  felt  the
    right decision to return.

62.  At paragraph 167 of the decision in AS was the Refugee Support  Network
    who monitored 25 care leavers on return to Kabul.  It  was  their  view
    that they had found a range of interconnected difficulties  on  return,
    particularly with relationships, insecurity, education, work and mental
    health.  The Humanitarian Needs Overview 2018 considered that those who
    returned  were  dependent  on  improvised   family   arrangements   and
    international  humanitarian  support  to  survive.   Thus,  there   was
    presented before the Tribunal a wide range of views on  the  experience
    of returnees.

63   The Tribunal in paragraph 202 took as a starting  point  the  views  of
    UNHCR  in  determining  the  reasonableness  of  a  place  of  internal
    relocation, the passage in the report to  which  I  have  already  made
    reference.  It was noted by the Tribunal there was a variety  types  of
    shelter in use in Kabul city .It did not find evidence as to widespread
    homelessness or destitution and noted the  large  numbers  of  informal
    settlements.

64.  The Tribunal came to the conclusion in paragraph 219  of  the  judgment
    "we do not find that a single male returning to Kabul would  be  unable
    to find  some  sort  of  accommodation  which  is  comparable  to  that
    available for the majority of the population  in  Kabul,  even  without
    support from a network in the city".  Nor did it  find  that  a  single
    male returning to Kabul would face accommodation conditions which  were
    materially worse than that available in  other  parts  of  Afghanistan.
    The  Tribunal  attached  weight  to  the  fact  that  Kabul  remains  a
    destination of choice for returnees given that it has greater  economic
    prospect than other areas.  The Tribunal took into account the possible
    assistance on return for those who are returned and  found  that  there
    was evidence of a basic  level  of  support  which  includes  temporary
    accommodation and travel expenses and other cash on return.

65.  Although the economic conditions  in  Kabul  were  poor,  the  Tribunal
    found that there were livelihood opportunities available for single men
    in good health on return and that there was  no  real  likelihood  that
    they would be forced to return to crime or  be  subject  to  exploitive
    work or join an armed AGE.  The ability to speak a  local  language  in
    Kabul also was an advantage.

66.  The issue  of  reasonableness  of  relocation  was  summarised  by  the
    Tribunal in AS in paragraph 249 in this way:

              "The next issue is then whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
         appellant to internally relocate to  Kabul.   The  appellant  is  a
         healthy adult male who has  spent  the  majority  of  his  life  in
         Afghanistan, going to school  there  and  arriving  in  the  United
         Kingdom at the age of 22.  He speaks Pashto and has no specific  or
         identified vulnerabilities.  He has been out of Afghanistan now for
         nine and a half years but left when he was an adult.  The appellant
         states that he has  no  contact  with  his  family  in  Afghanistan
         (mother, brother or uncle) and it is unknown as to whether he would
         be able to re-establish contact with them on return if he chose  to
         do so.  In those circumstances, based on  our  general  conclusions
         set out above, we do not find that  it  would  be  unreasonable  or
         unduly harsh for the appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.  He
         would be returning to living and humanitarian conditions  in  Kabul
         which affect the majority of the population and where he could live
         a relatively normal life without undue hardship.  Whilst we  accept
         that conditions and prospects in Kabul,  and  also  in  Afghanistan
         generally, are very poor, there is no reason  that  this  appellant
         would be any less able than any other  to  bear  those  conditions,
         even taking into account past treatment  in  his  home  area.   The
         current security situation in  Kabul  is  not  such  as  to  render
         internal relocation there unreasonably or unduly harsh".


67.  The appellant in this case of course left Afghanistan as a  minor  when
    aged 15 and not as an adult.  He will be returning aged 20.

68.  He experienced training in combat in the mountainous area of  his  home
    in the process of leaving Afghanistan and has stood on  his  own  feet.
    He has shown resilience and resolve.  It  is  clear  that  he  has  had
    difficulties to cope with, in terms of managing the people  who  sought
    to take advantage of his generosity. He  has  had  assistance  and  has
    overcome such difficulties. He  has  grown  up  and  learnt  by  life's
    experience to cope.  That he is stressed and unhappy with his situation
    and the uncertainties in which he is living is entirely understandable,
    but there is nothing in the letter from [P] to indicate any  underlying
    mental health or health difficulties.

69.  In terms of the living conditions in Kabul little has been advanced  in
    this hearing to indicate that there  has  been  any  marked  difference
    since AS was promulgated.  As I have indicated, the Tribunal has  taken
    the widest possible regard of the material,  much  of  which  has  been
    presented before  me  today.   Although  the  appellant  has  no  prior
    connections with Kabul he has at least  established  contact  with  his
    family, particularly his mother, in a province which  is  not  too  far
    away from the city itself.  Such contact. provides  some  encouragement
    and support, though whether that support is of a  financial  nature  is
    far from clear.  However, it is to be noted that despite  their  modest
    circumstances the appellant's parents were able to finance his  leaving
    Afghanistan.  In the circumstances it is not  possible  to  ignore  the
    possibility of some family support to the appellant in Afghanistan.

70.  It is right to  note  that  AS  was  focusing  perhaps  more  upon  the
    principles of reasonableness of relocation as set out  in  the  leading
    case of Januzi rather than the considerations which apply to 276ADE.

71.  In that connection my attention was drawn to the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932.

72.  Consideration was given particularly to paragraph 276ADE in  the  light
    of Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC).  The
    court commented upon the passage in the judgment  of  Treebhawon  which
    indicated:

          "The other limb of the test, 'very significant obstacles',  erects
         a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere hardship,  mere
         difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or  inconvenience,  even
         where multiplied, will generally be insufficient in this context".


73.  The Court of Appeal in paragraph 9 of its judgment found  that  not  to
    be particularly helpful gloss to the  Rule.   It  recognised  that  the
    words "very significant" connotated an "elevated" threshold but did not
    find that the gloss was particularly helpful.  Rather, the Secretary of
    State or the Tribunal in any given case was to assess the obstacles  to
    integration and to determine whether they  could  be  characterised  as
    hardship or difficulty and to decide whether to regard  them  as  "very
    significant".

74.  The factual basis of the  case  may  not  necessarily  be  particularly
    helpful as it was an appellant from Pakistan who had lost  all  contact
    with her community.  It was noted in that connection that the appellant
    in that case was  a  healthy  female  and  well  aware  of  the  common
    language, customs and culture. The reasoning of the Secretary of  State
    was upheld in that decision.

75.  The basis of consideration of reasonableness under the case  of  Januzi
    was of course based upon the need for economic and social  survival  of
    an individual. It would  be  unreasonable to expect  an  individual  to
    return to the situation  of  likely  destitution  or  humiliation.   In
    general terms, it was the finding of the Tribunal in AS  that  a  young
    healthy  male  going  to  Kabul  would  be  likely  to  find  work  and
    accommodation and to survive economically.

76.  If that be the case it is unlikely that the ambit of 276ADE lowers  the
    threshold to that consideration.

77.   As  the  reports  make  clear,  the   difficulties   with   work   and
    accommodation  apply  throughout  Afghanistan  as  does  the  level  of
    poverty.  The appellant grew up in that environment.  Although  he  now
    enjoys a perhaps more comfortable lifestyle  such does not  necessarily
    follow that he would be unable to cope with the nature and standard  of
    life in Afghanistan were he to return.  Like others he  would  have  to
    compete in the labour market and seek his accommodation.   His  contact
    with  family  could  provide  that  necessary  advice   and   financial
    assistance that he needs to establish himself.  It has  been  indicated
    he has shown resilience in leaving Afghanistan and restarting his  life
    in the United Kingdom.  He is now  a  young  adult  and  hopefully  has
    gained wisdom and life  experience.  There  is  no  indication  of  any
    personality disorder or  underlying  psychological  difficulties  which
    would render his contact with others or his ability to work  difficult.



78.  Even being aware  to  consider  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
    appellant, it is difficult to see  any  real  distinction  between  his
    situation and that of the appellant before AS, otherwise  than  of  his
    age.  I bear in mind that in return there is the  assistance  of  other
    organisations to help that  transition.   It  seems  to  me  to  be  an
    important matter to bear in mind  in  answering  the  question  whether
    there are very significant obstacles to integration.   I  do  not  find
    there to be so, I find that his return  to  Kabul  is  also  reasonable
    within the ambit of Januzi.

79.  In the circumstances therefore, I do not find that the appellant is  at
    risk of serious harm either under asylum or humanitarian protection  or
    that his Article 8 rights will be breached by any removal that is made.



Notice of Decision

80.  The appeal is refused both as to asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights particularly as to 276ADE and Article 8 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        [pic]                          Date 25 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
