

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00714/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 May 2017                                |On 22 May 2017               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                     D P
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer



                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, aged 29. He has appealed with
      the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal M B Hussain, dismissing his appeal  against
      a decision of the respondent to refuse his protection and human rights
      claims. The appellant, who is Tamil, claimed to have been detained and
      tortured in Sri Lanka on account of  his  perceived  support  for  the
      LTTE.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I  continue  that
      direction in order to protect the identity of the appellant.


   3. The appeal was  heard  at  Hatton  Cross  on  14  November  2016.  The
      appellant was represented  by  counsel  and  gave  oral  evidence.  He
      supported his appeal with medical evidence showing he had  scars  said
      to be 'diagnostic' of the being beaten on his back. He  also  produced
      copies of a summons, an information provided to a  magistrate  and  an
      arrest warrant, all said to relate to his detention in  November  2013
      and the prosecution initiated by the Terrorist Investigation  Division
      (TID) Colombo. The respondent,  in  arguing  the  documents  were  not
      reliable, relied on a document verification report  stating  that  the
      TID had confirmed the reference number on the documents did not relate
      to any case of theirs. The appellant responded by providing  a  letter
      by Mr B R P Jayasinghe, an attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka, who confirmed
      that his investigations showed  that  the  documents  were  copies  of
      originals held by the court.


   4. Judge Hussain identified the determinative  issue  in  the  appeal  as
      being whether the appellant's account of his detention and torture  in
      November 2013, while  on  holiday  in  Sri  Lanka,  was  credible.  He
      concluded the appellant was not credible and therefore  dismissed  the
      appeal. His reasons can be summarised as follows:

    . The appellant's account of being taken to court two  weeks  after  his
      detention was inconsistent with the court documents, which  showed  he
      was produced at court the day after his arrest;
    . The appellant said he was released on bail to return  to  court  on  9
      December 2013 but the letter from his  father  said  the  police  came
      looking for him on 8 December 2013;
    . If the appellant's father told the police that the appellant had  left
      the country, it was unclear why a summons would be issued;
    . It was surprising that a summons  was  issued  instead  of  an  arrest
      warrant given the appellant had breached his bail;
    . Despite the fact the appellant's friend had informed  the  authorities
      that the appellant had been involved in terrorist activity, he was not
      interrogated about that matter but was asked why his  arrival  in  Sri
      Lanka coincided with the Commonwealth summit;
    . Arguments to the effect that the document verification  report  should
      not be relied on because the TID had an incentive to lie to ensure the
      appellant returned to Sri Lanka were "entirely speculative";
    . The appellant's credibility was damaged by the lateness of the  asylum
      claim; and
    . The usefulness of the medical report was undermined by  the  fact  the
      expert had not dealt adequately with the  likelihood  the  appellant's
      injuries were self-inflicted.

   5. At paragraph 53 the Judge accepted the appellant may have  taken  part
      in Tamil social welfare events but he considered those activities were
      unlikely to bring him to the adverse attention of the authorities.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Ford. She found it was  arguable  that  Judge  Hussain  had  erred  in
      relying on the document verification  report  given  the  respondent's
      actions in approaching the TID were in breach of  Article  30  of  the
      Council Directive on  Asylum  Procedures  (2013/32/EU).  It  was  also
      arguable that Judge Hussain erred in failing to make any  findings  in
      relation to the appellant's claim to have been detained  in  2007,  in
      failing to make any findings on the evidence countering  the  document
      verification report and in misunderstanding the  dates  given  by  the
      appellant's father in his letter.


   7. The respondent filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.


   8. I heard submissions from the representatives on whether the Judge made
      a material error of law. Mr Murphy developed the points  made  in  the
      grounds seeking permission to appeal. I have recorded his arguments in
      full in the record  of  proceedings.  Mr  Staunton,  having  heard  Mr
      Murphy's  arguments,  agreed  that  the  decision  of  Judge   Hussain
      contained a material error of  law  and  should  be  set  aside.  Both
      representatives agreed that the appropriate course was  to  remit  the
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again with  no  findings
      preserved.

   9. I set aside the decision of Judge Hussain for the following reasons.

  10. It is clear that this experienced Judge directed himself correctly  as
      to the burden and  standard  of  proof  and  that,  having  heard  the
      appellant give evidence, he did not believe his account, even  to  the
      lower standard of proof. The Upper Tribunal is, in general,  reluctant
      to interfere with a judicial assessment of  credibility.  However,  in
      the case before me, I find the Judge has  erred  by  failing  to  have
      regard to significant arguments made to him  and  to  have  regard  to
      important parts of the evidence. Alternatively, if it is the case that
      the Judge had regard to them  but  rejected  them,  then  there  is  a
      failure to give reasons for his decision to do so.

  11. As noted, the appellant supported his account of  being  detained  and
      tortured with court documents and  a  medical  report.  Permission  to
      appeal was not granted on the  point  that  the  Judge  did  not  give
      adequate consideration to the medical evidence.  In  relation  to  the
      court documents, the Judge rejected them as  unreliable,  setting  out
      his reasons in paragraph 50. In essence, he accepted  the  information
      contained in the document verification  report  showed  there  was  no
      court case.

  12. It is clear that counsel for the appellant objected to the report.  In
      his skeleton argument  he  argued  that  the  TID  would  be  able  to
      establish the appellant's name from the  court  reference  number  and
      would recognise from the source of the enquiry  that  he  was  seeking
      asylum in the UK.  This would place the UK in breach of Article 30  of
      Directive 2013/32/EU. This states as follows:

         "For the purposes of  examining  individual  cases,  Member  States
         shall not:
   a)   disclose   information   regarding   individual   applications   for
      international protection, or the fact that  an  application  has  been
      made, to the alleged actor(s) of persecution or serious harm;
   b) obtain any information from the alleged  actor(s)  of  persecution  or
      serious harm in a manner that would  result  in  such  actor(s)  being
      directly informed of the fact that an application has been made by the
      applicant in question, and would jeopardise the physical integrity  of
      the applicant or his or her dependants, or the liberty and security of
      his or her family members still living in the country of origin."

  13. I do not need to make any finding as to whether  the  actions  of  the
      Home Office in obtaining a verification report breached Article 30.  I
      am aware that a panel of Upper Tribunal Judges  has  heard  an  appeal
      with full argument  on  exactly  this  point  and  their  decision  is
      awaited. It would therefore be unwise to issue any opinion now but, in
      any event, it is clear in the circumstances  of  this  case  that  the
      Judge's approach to the report was  erroneous.  It  may  be  that  the
      evidence should have been  disregarded  as  having  been  obtained  in
      breach of Article 30. Certainly, caution was required as  regards  the
      reliability of information obtained  from  the  TID,  an  organisation
      which is known to use torture and ill-treatment during interrogations.




  14. The arguments made to the Judge about the TID being likely to  lie  in
      order to ensure the appellant is returned may  well  have  involved  a
      large degree of  speculation.  Assessing  future  risk  almost  always
      involves speculating but  the  point  is  that  the  process  must  be
      rational,  informed  and  balanced,  involving  consideration  of  the
      evidence adduced by both parties. There does not appear to  have  been
      any attempt by the Judge to assess critically the evidential value  of
      the report despite the paucity of information contained in it.

  15. More significantly, in my  judgment,  the  Judge  does  not  give  any
      reasons for rejecting the evidence of Mr Jayasinghe which  would  tend
      to  show  the  documents  were  genuine.  The  appellant's  solicitors
      provided copies of their letter of enquiry and Mr Jayasinghe  provided
      copies of his credentials. Copies of the  covering  emails  were  also
      provided. As noted, the evidence  supported  the  appellant's  account
      that there was a genuine case against him. The Judge did not  have  to
      accept this evidence but, if he rejected it, he was required  to  give
      cogent reasons for doing so. There is no mention of the letter in  the
      decision.

  16. Counsel for the appellant reminded the Judge of the guidance given  by
      the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1011.  A
      similar point was made  at  paragraphs  41  and  42  of  Fulford  LJ's
      judgment in that case.

  17. In short, the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for relying on the
      document verification report and he failed to assess the  evidence  in
      the round. In particular, he failed to have regard to  evidence  which
      potentially showed the appellant's documents were genuine.

  18. The errors are such that the Judge's decision and his findings  cannot
      stand and the decision is set aside.

  19. The parties were not prepared for the appeal to  be  re-heard  at  the
      same hearing. No interpreter had been provided. As a fresh hearing  is
      necessary, I agree with the representatives that the  appeal  must  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in line with paragraph 7.2 of  the
      Practice Direction.

  20. The appeal must be heard de novo by a different Judge  of  the  First-
      tier  Tribunal.  To  assist  with  that  task  I  make  the  following
      directions:






                                 DIRECTIONS


      (1) The appeal will be heard by any Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      except Judge M B Hussain on a date and at a place to be notified;
      (2) None of the findings made by Judge Hussain are preserved;
      (3) A Tamil  interpreter  will  be  provided  unless  the  appellant's
      solicitors inform the Tribunal that one is not required;
      (4) If either party wishes to file additional evidence not  previously
      filed, a consolidated bundle should be prepared containing  the  fresh
      evidence and all the evidence previously filed, which bundle  must  be
      filed at the Tribunal and served on the other party no later  than  14
      days before the hearing.
      (5) The Tribunal will assess the  medical  report  in  line  with  the
      guidance in KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017 EWCA Civ 119.
      (6) The Tribunal will make full  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
      activities in the UK in the light of the judgment in UB (Sri Lanka)  v
      SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85.
      (7) The Tribunal will decide whether to make a fee award.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  will  be
    heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

     An anonymity direction has been made.



                               Signed                 Date 16 May 2017




                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Froom


