

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA/00329/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 19th June 2017                  |On 6th July 2017                        |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Ms Isherwood,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Richardson, Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan born in 1996. On  the  29th
    March  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  McIntosh)  allowed  his
    protection appeal. The Respondent now has permission to appeal  against
    that decision.


 2. The central submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department is that the determination is flawed for a lack of clear
    reasoning, and a failure to make findings on a central matter in issue,
    namely whether the Appellant would in fact be at risk of  serious  harm
    in Afghanistan and if so from  whom.  Notwithstanding  the  submissions
    very well made by Mr Richardson, I am satisfied that  the  grounds  are
    made out and that the determination must be set aside.

 3. There can be little doubt that the Respondent had good reasons  not  to
    want to return to Afghanistan, a country that he had left when he was a
    small child. He had been living with his family in Pakistan for most of
    his life. He knew no-one in Kabul. He was, and is still, very young. He
    was afraid of going to live in that strange and dangerous city with no-
    one to support or protect him. He also advanced several reasons why  he
    would face a risk of harm in Pakistan.  In respect of  the  latter  the
    Judge rejected - without any good reason it must be said - the  account
    of attempted radicalisation and a fear of jihadi  militants  there.  In
    respect of Afghanistan,  however,  the  Tribunal  obviously  had  great
    concerns about the Respondent. It notes at paragraph  45  the  somewhat
    unusual factual matrix in this case, that the Respondent  faces  return
    "to a country with which he has no  independent  association".  In  the
    closing sentence of paragraph 45 the Tribunal accepts the evidence that
    it  would  be  unduly  harsh  upon  the  Respondent  to  send  him   to
    Afghanistan.   The next sentence, at  the  beginning  of  paragraph  46
    reads: "I find these factors would place the appellant [the  Respondent
    before me] at risk". It is not clear whether  the  Tribunal  meant  the
    factors already set out, or the findings  that  follow.  Mr  Richardson
    thought it might be both. The findings that follow are:

         "Although an adult, his knowledge of  Afghanistan  is  limited,  he
         would be recognised as an individual as a returnee with no  family,
         leaving him vulnerable to those that would seek  to  exploit  young
         men. In areas where the high level of civilian fighting  (sic)  The
         objective evidence notes that comments from the Afghan Minister for
         Refugees and Repatriation, Mr Hussain  Alami  Balkhi,  in  February
         2015, it noted that the security situation in Afghanistan  was  not
         stable, and that 80 per  cent  of  the  country  was  insecure  and
         unsafe. Taking that factor into  consideration  together  with  the
         particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant  who  had  not   been
         residence in Afghanistan for a considerable period of his life, who
         is alone and would be vulnerable".


 4. Neither writing nor reasoning is easy to follow.   On one  reading  the
    Tribunal has  found  there  to  be  a  risk  of  serious  harm  because
    conditions in Kabul would be unduly harsh. If that was  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion, that was an impermissible conflation of two distinct tests.
    On an alternative reading the Tribunal finds there  to  be  a  risk  of
    serious harm in the city from "those who seek to  exploit  young  men".
    Whilst this may, in the final analysis, be a  finding  that  proves  to
    have some substance, it is  difficult  to  see  on  the  face  of  this
    determination why it was found to be the case here. The  Tribunal  does
    not identify, for instance with reference  to  any  country  background
    material or country guidance,  who those agents of persecution might be
    or why the Respondent might be especially vulnerable. The Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is justified in her complaint  that  upon
    reading this determination she is left unsure  about  what  the  feared
    harm is and why the burden of proof was found  to  be  made  out.   The
    ambiguity in the findings is underlined by the fact that a  finding  of
    risk would obviate the need for a finding  that  it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh".


 5. I am satisfied  that  the  determination  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  As  I  observe  above  the  findings  on  Pakistan  are   as
    inadequately reasoned as those on Afghanistan. It is in  the  interests
    of justice that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing.


    Anonymity


 6. This case involves a claim for international  protection.  I  have  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:  Anonymity  Orders.  I
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and the decision is set aside.

 8. The matter is to be re-determined in the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. There is a direction for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              19th June 2017


