

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00815/2013
                                                               AA/00817/2013
                                                               AA/00818/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                   R M J A
                                     J A
                                    N D A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Hands dismissing this  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

2) The first appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast and  the  other  two
   appellants are her children.  The first appellant claims to have  entered
   the UK clandestinely in November 2004.  She claimed asylum  in  2008  but
   her claim was not refused by the respondent until January 2013.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the  first  appellant's
   asylum  claim  to  be  credible.   This  part  of  the  decision  is  not
   challenged.

4) The application for permission to appeal addresses the  circumstances  of
   the second appellant, who is the first appellant's daughter and was  born
   in the UK in October 2005.  By  the  time  of  the  refusal  decision  of
   January 2013 and the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  in  February
   2013, the second appellant had been in the UK for more than 7 years.

5) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that arguably the Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal had not properly applied paragraph 276ADE of  the
   Immigration Rules and had not followed the proper approach in relation to
   Article 8.  It was further arguable that the judge  had  not  had  proper
   regard to the delay in deciding the first  appellant's  asylum  claim  in
   terms of EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41.

6) The operative paragraphs of the determination by the Judge of the  First-
   tier Tribunal read as follows:

    " 47.  Mr Selway in his submission stated the delay by  the  respondent
    in reaching a decision in this matter had enabled the appellant and her
    family to establish a life in this country.  Her daughter, born in 2005
    started school in 2008 and had now been resident in this country for  8
    years, thereby falling within the free standing exception that a person
    in an existing parental relationship with the child who had lived  here
    for 7 years immediately preceding the application.   The  "application"
    in this case was made when the  appellant  claimed  asylum  in  January
    2008, before the child started school.   At  that  time  the  exception
    applied but since the introduction of  Immigration  Rule  276ADE,  this
    exception no longer applies.  If, as I am entitled to do, I look at the
    rules and regulations and the position of the appellant as at the  date
    of the hearing, the exception does not apply and I have to look at  the
    terms of the Rules.  In respect of the appellant and her younger  child
    in the United Kingdom, she could not be granted leave to remain because
    of her private life in the United Kingdom.


    48.    In respect of her elder child in the United  Kingdom,  she  does
    fall within part (iv) of the Rule and the question is one of whether it
    would be reasonable to expect her daughter to leave the United Kingdom.
     Whilst the sins of their parents should not adversely affect children,
    it is a matter of fact that the appellant gave birth  to  her  daughter
    whilst she was present in this country illegally.  She waited  for  two
    years before claiming asylum and lived here with her daughter illegally
    during that time.  She then, through her representatives,  delayed  the
    making of a decision by the respondent for a further two years and  has
    therefore contributed significantly to the delay in the removal of  her
    and her children to the Ivory Coast.  The background material  provided
    by the respondent indicates that state funded and private education  is
    available in the Ivory Coast.  There is also education  at  a  tertiary
    level available.  The appellant's daughter would be  able  to  continue
    with her education there.  The appellant's daughter, according  to  the
    respondent in their refusal letter speaks French fluently and this  has
    not been disputed.  French is the main language of the Ivory Coast  and
    she would, therefore, have no linguistic difficulties.  The child  will
    be returned with her mother and her brother.  She has siblings  in  the
    Ivory Coast as well as a maternal grandmother and at least  one  cousin
    of her mother.  She has more members of her wider family in  the  Ivory
    Coast than she has in the United Kingdom.  There is no legitimate basis
    for the appellant remaining in the United Kingdom and therefore  it  is
    in the best interests of her daughter to travel with her to  the  Ivory
    Coast where she would be able to integrate into her  wider  family  and
    form new friendships with children there."


7) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal misdirected herself as  to  the  law
   on several points at paragraph 47 of the determination.  The  "exception"
   on which Mr Selway sought to rely  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal does not appear  to  have  had  any  regard  to  this
   provision whatsoever.  She  erroneously  refers  to  an  "exception"  not
   applying at the date of the hearing.  In this regard the judge has failed
   to have regard to a relevant provision of the Immigration Rules and  this
   constitutes an error of law.

8) The judge appears to have been under the misapprehension  that  paragraph
   EX.1 of Appendix FM, if this was the "exception" to which she intended to
   refer, has in some sense been superseded by paragraph  297ADE.   This  is
   clearly erroneous and constitutes an error of law.

9) Both the respondent, in a letter dated 18 February 2013,  and  the  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal have considered the appellants' position under
   paragraph 276ADE.  The judge accepted  that  the  second  appellant  fell
   within sub-paragraph (iv) of paragraph 276ADE because she  is  under  the
   age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  7
   years.  In terms of paragraph  276ADE  this  made  the  second  appellant
   eligible for leave to remain.   The  judge  then  proceeded  to  consider
   whether it was reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the  UK
   with her mother and brother.  Before addressing this issue, however,  the
   judge should have considered the possible relevance of  the  of  Appendix
   FM, in particular EX.1.

10) For the respondent Mr Mangion acknowledged  at  the  hearing  before  me
   that paragraph 47 of the  determination  was  difficult  to  follow.   He
   nevertheless submitted that the test of reasonableness considered by  the
   judge in paragraph 48 in relation to paragraph  276ADE  was  relevant  to
   EX.1 of Appendix FM.  In relation to delay he pointed out that there  was
   a delay of two years after the birth of the second  appellant  before  an
   asylum claim was made.  While delay on the part of the  respondent  would
   not diminish the value of private life, equally it would  not  enhance  a
   claim made on the grounds of private life where that claim was weak.

11) Mr Mangion's argument in relation to paragraph EX.1  would  be  stronger
   had the judge addressed her mind at any point to the terms of Appendix FM
   and, in particular, to paragraph EX.1.  As she did not do so,  her  error
   is not cured by reading into the determination matters  which  the  judge
   did not address.

12) For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  her  consideration  of  family  life
   under paragraph  276ADE  and  Appendix  FM.   Accordingly,  her  decision
   insofar as it relates to family life is set aside and will be re-made.

13) In his submission before me Mr Selway  referred  to  paragraph  EX.1  as
   being a free-standing provision but this is not correct.  Paragraph  EX.1
   must read alongside the further provisions of Appendix  FM  which  appear
   under the heading "Family life as a parent of a child in the UK."   Under
   this heading the relevant provision is section  R-LTRPT.1.1,  which  sets
   out the requirements for limited leave  to  remain  as  a  parent.   This
   provision was considered by the respondent in the  original  reasons  for
   refusal letter of 11 January 2013.   The  first  requirement  under  this
   provision is that the applicant and the child must be in the UK.  This is
   satisfied.

14) The second requirement is that the applicant  must  have  made  a  valid
   application for limited leave to remain as a parent.   This  requirement,
   however, does not apply to these appeals in terms of paragraph GEN.1.9 of
   Appendix FM as the appellants have raised Article  8  in  the  course  of
   these proceedings.

15)  The  third  requirement  of  R-LTRPT.1.1  refers  to  the   eligibility
   requirements at section  E-LTRPT.   These  are  not  met  as  the  second
   appellant is not  a  British  citizen  or  settled  in  the  UK.   As  an
   alternative, the fourth requirement applies  where  an  appellant  cannot
   meet all the requirements of section  E-LTRPT.   The  fourth  requirement
   states that the suitability requirements of section S-LTR must be met and
   also paragraph EX.1.

16) In relation to the first appellant it has not been alleged that  any  of
   the suitability requirements in S-LTR have not been met.   The  appellant
   used a false passport to enter the UK but this is  not  relevant  to  the
   suitability requirements under S-LTR.2.2.  Accordingly the application of
   paragraph EX.1 can be considered.

17) Paragraph EX.1 will apply if the  first  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
   subsisting parental relationship with a child who is under the age of 18,
   is in the UK, and has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least  the  7
   years immediately preceding the date of application.  It is not  disputed
   that these requirements are satisfied  in  respect  of  the  relationship
   between the first  appellant  and  the  second  appellant.   The  further
   requirement is that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
   leave the UK.

18) Mr Mangion submitted that the view taken by the Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal in  respect  of  the  reasonableness  of  requiring  the  second
   appellant to leave the UK was  properly  considered  in  the  context  of
   paragraph 276ADE.  I have two difficulties with this  submission.   First
   of all, as already stated, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  was  not
   directing her mind at all to the application of EX.1 in  considering  the
   issue of reasonableness.  Secondly, the reason she gives are redolent  of
   her disapproval, seemingly on moral grounds,  of  the  behaviour  of  the
   first appellant and relative to this she attaches little  weight  to  the
   circumstances of the second  appellant,  whose  best  interests  she  was
   obliged to consider as a primary consideration.  Thus at paragraph 48 the
   judge records that the second appellant speaks French and could  continue
   her education in Ivory Coast, where she has family members and where  she
   would be accompanied by her mother and her brother.  The judge  does  not
   appear to consider at all the weight which should be given to the  second
   appellant having lived the entire 8 years and more of her life in the  UK
   and to her attendance at school in the UK, as well as the friendships and
   relationships she will  have  formed  here.   The  judge's  reasoning  in
   relation to the reasonableness of expecting the second appellant to leave
   the UK is inadequate, not just specifically in relation to the failure to
   consider paragraph EX.1 but also in terms of the way  those  reasons  are
   themselves expressed.

19) In my view the length of time the second appellant has been in  the  UK,
   taken into conjunction with her age and her education, are matters to  be
   given considerable weight in the balancing process.  As the Judge of  the
   First-tier Tribunal stated, but then seemingly  disregarded,  the  second
   appellant should not be held to blame for any misbehaviour by her mother.
    The evidence indicates that the second appellant is entirely settled, in
   the ordinary meaning of that word, in the UK and living as normal a  life
   as any other child born in the UK of  the  same  age.   I  would  require
   strong reasons indeed to be satisfied that it was reasonable to expect  a
   child in  these  circumstances,  who  satisfies  in  her  own  right  the
   requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv), to leave  the  UK.   I  am  not  so
   satisfied in relation to the second appellant.

20) The position is that the appeal by the second appellant  succeeds  under
   paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal by the  first
   appellant succeeds under section  R-LTRPT1.1  read  in  conjunction  with
   paragraph EX.1.1.

21) The third  appellant  will  not  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  (iv)
   because he was born more recently, in 2010, and has not lived in  the  UK
   for at least 7 years.  I ought first to consider whether he satisfies the
   requirements for leave to remain as a child in section R-LTRC of Appendix
   FM.  In this regard, however, I have been given no evidence to show  that
   the maintenance  and  accommodation  requirements  of  this  section  are
   satisfied.  Turning to Article 8, it is clearly in the best interests  of
   the third appellant that he should remain  in  a  family  unit  with  his
   mother and older sister.  As I have  found  that  they  are  entitled  to
   remain under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM, I have  little  difficulty
   in finding that it would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
   family life of the younger child to separate  him  from  his  mother  and
   sister.  Accordingly all three appeals will succeed.

Conclusions

22) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

23) I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing them.

Anonymity

24) The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the
   Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   I  continue  that
   order (pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008.


Fee Award                 Note:  This  is  not  part  of  the  determination



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

