
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00090/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated |
|On 10 November 2014                         |On 20 November 2014       |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               AM (SRI LANKA)
                         (ANONIMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Afako  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  5
         August 2014) dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  by  the
         respondent to refuse to recognise him as a refugee, or as otherwise
         requiring international or human rights protection.

      2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He  first  came  to  the
         United Kingdom on 6 September 2008 as a visitor.   He  returned  to
         Sri Lanka on 15 December 2008, and  re-entered  the  country  on  6
         January 2009 within the currency of his six month visit  visa.   He
         claimed asylum on re-entry, and his application  was  refused.   In
         April 2009 Judge Del Fabbro promulgated a determination  dismissing
         his appeal.  In 2011 the appellant instituted judicial proceedings,
         relying on new evidence.  This included a psychiatric  report  from
         Dr Raj Persaud and statements  from  relatives  in  Sri  Lanka  and
         elsewhere  supportive  of  his  claim  of  past   persecution   and
         continuing adverse interest.  The judicial review proceedings  were
         later withdrawn, as the respondent agreed to give consideration  to
         the new evidence within the context of a fresh consideration of his
         asylum claim.

      3. On 12 December 2013 the Secretary of State  gave  her  reasons  for
         rejecting the appellant's claim that he had a well-founded fear  of
         being detained and tortured upon his return to Sri Lanka because of
         his past involvement with the LTTE.

      4. The respondent listed in paragraph 8 the documents which  had  been
         generated in 2011, and which were relied upon  in  support  of  the
         fresh claim.  The respondent went  on  to  quote  extensively  from
         Judge Del Fabbro's determination, in which he gave detailed reasons
         for finding that  the  appellant's  claim  of  being  detained  and
         tortured on his brief return to Sri Lanka at the end  of  2008  was
         not credible.

      5. Judge Del Fabbro held that if the appellant had been involved  with
         the LTTE, his limited activities for  the  LTTE,  undertaken  under
         duress, had ceased years ago.  The appellant confirmed that he  had
         not been involved with  the  LTTE  from  at  least  the  year  2000
         onwards.  He had been able to live and work in the  most  difficult
         of  areas  for  many  years,   based   on   the   credentials   and
         identification documents that had been issued  to  him.   The  very
         same documents had been produced in the appeal  before  the  judge.
         The  appellant  had  never  been  required  to  register  with  the
         authorities, and he had never been required to sign a  register  in
         relation to his whereabouts.  The fact that he was able to obtain a
         passport in order to travel to  India  in  order  to  seek  medical
         assistance from his daughter and thereafter to travel to the United
         Kingdom to attend his brother's funeral without  any  hindrance  by
         the  authorities  indicated  that  he  was  no  interest  to   them
         whatsoever.  The fact that the appellant had injuries to  his  back
         which might be consistent with  burn  marks  did  not  provide  the
         necessary confirmatory evidence to  support  the  account  of  ill-
         treatment.  In any event, the authorities' release of the appellant
         on the payment of a bribe indicated that there could not have  been
         any serious, ongoing interest in him.  It was noteworthy  that  the
         appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka within days of being released
         and without returning to his home in Jaffa.  He was able to  obtain
         and bring with him to the  UK  relevant  documents,  including  his
         passport and other personal documents which would assist him in his
         claim for asylum and which were deployed to that effect on  arrival
         in the United Kingdom.  The judge found  there  must  have  been  a
         degree of pre-planning and organisation  which,  on  the  facts  as
         presented by the appellant, there would have been no opportunity to
         undertake given his purported fear of the authorities.

      6. The respondent addressed the supporting letters  from  his  sister,
         father-in-law and brother in paragraph 18 of the RFRL.  His brother
         and sister claimed that he was arrested in 1996  and  2008  and  on
         each occasion they sent money to his father-in-law  to  secure  his
         release.  He had previously stated that it was his wife and brother
         who had secured his release in 1996 and that it was his uncle and a
         friend who secured  his  release  through  a  bribe  in  2008.   He
         provided no reasonable explanation for this inconsistency.  In  any
         event, the letters were self-serving and not independent.

      7. The respondent addressed the wife's 2011 statement in paragraph 19.
          She claimed she was visited by the authorities on 3 February  2011
         and ordered to report weekly at a local police station until he was
         arrested.  She claimed that her attorney was aware of this, but she
         had  not  provided  any  supporting  evidence  of  these  reporting
         conditions.  It was noted that his solicitors provided a copy of  a
         letter they sent to his wife's attorney on 24 September 2011 asking
         him to provide  any  evidence  relating  to  his  wife's  reporting
         conditions.  It was noted that no response had been submitted,  and
         more than two years had passed since the letter was sent.   It  was
         therefore considered that little  weight  could  be  given  to  his
         wife's claim relating to police reporting conditions.

      8. The respondent concluded that, taking  into  account  the  previous
         adverse credibility findings, the provenance and reliability of the
         new documents, the objective evidence and the principles of Tanveer
         Ahmed, the new documents did not establish the appellant was  at  a
         real risk of being subjected to treatment amounting to  persecution
         or serious harm in breach of the Refugee Convention.

      9. The respondent went  on  to  address  in  considerable  detail  the
         scarring report from Dr Josse, and Dr Persaud's psychiatric  report
         of November 2011.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  Dr  Persaud  had
         accepted that his separation from his family  and  the  deaths  and
         carnage he had witnessed during the  civil  war  (as  an  ambulance
         driver) could  be  a  contributing  factor  to  his  mental  health
         problems.  Furthermore, Dr Persaud did not engage with the findings
         of Judge Del Fabbro who found his account  of  being  detained  and
         tortured not to be credible.

     10. On the issue of risk on return,  the  respondent  referred  to  the
         country guidance case of GJ and Others and said the  appellant  had
         not established that he was, or perceived to be, a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state;  or  that  he  had  had
         significant  role  in  either  post-conflict  separatism  within  a
         disapora or the renewal of hostilities within Sri  Lanka;  or  that
         his name  appeared  on  a  computerised  stop-list  of  individuals
         against whom there was an extant court order or arrest warrant;  or
         that his name appeared on  a  computerised  intelligence-led  watch
         list which could lead  to  him  being  monitored  and  subsequently
         identified as a Tamil activist working to destabilise  the  unitary
         Sri Lankan state or provide the internal armed conflict.

    The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

     11. At the hearing before Judge Afako,  Mr  Sowerby,  Counsel  for  the
         appellant, indicated at the outset that he  was  not  intending  to
         call the appellant as the medical advice was that he was not fit to
         give evidence.  But he  called  the  appellant's  brother  to  give
         evidence, and he adopted his recent  witness  statement  which  was
         primarily concerned  with  the  topic  of  the  appellant's  mental
         health.  He was not cross-examined.  In his submissions, Mr Sowerby
         accepted that the appellant's involvement with the LTTE  was  at  a
         low level, relating to his work in Jaffna Hospital.   He  submitted
         that the appellant's circumstances were  similar  to  that  of  the
         third appellant in GJ.  Although he had been receiving  medication,
         his condition had not improved.  He would be returned in a  fragile
         mental state and would lack assistance in Sri Lanka.   His  account
         of past persecution was consistent with independent evidence of the
         notorious white van abductions in former LTTE areas.

     12. In his subsequent determination, the judge  gave  his  reasons  for
         rejecting the appellant's  claim  at  paragraphs  17  onwards.   At
         paragraph 28 he concluded he was unable to find any good grounds to
         depart from the conclusion of Judge Del Fabbro.  The appellant  was
         not re-interviewed and he had not given evidence, managing only  to
         speak to his doctors.  The new case therefore rested on the  latest
         medical appraisals, the letter from the appellant's wife as well as
         his brother's evidence.  None of these added in content to the 2009
         narrative which  was  rejected  by  the  learned  judge.   The  key
         difficulty with  the  medical  reports  was  they  did  not  engage
         seriously with the previous judicial rejection of  the  appellant's
         case and they had not provided a sufficient basis for reaching  new
         conclusions.  In any event,  the  key  consideration  was  risk  on
         return, which he had assessed in the light of the  latest  guidance
         and information.  The appellant's historical claim was not credible
         and did not indicate on the lower standard of proof  the  appellant
         would face persecution or serious ill-treatment if returned to  Sri
         Lanka.

     13. The judge went on to dismiss the  claim  on  refugee,  humanitarian
         protection, and  human  rights  grounds.   He  understood  from  Mr
         Sowerby that the appellant was not pursuing a  discrete  Article  8
         claim based on the risk of  suicide  or  on  the  strength  of  his
         connections to this country.  The appellant was estranged from  his
         sister, and his brother lived in Switzerland.

    The Application for Permission to Appeal

     14. Charlotte Bayati of Counsel settled a very lengthy application  for
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  She  argued  that  the
         judge had made serious factual errors which rendered  his  findings
         on the asylum and Article 3  ECHR  appeal  unsafe,  such  that  the
         determination should be set aside.  There was no appeal against the
         rejection of the appellant's claim under Article 8.

     15. On 29 September 2012 Judge McDade granted permission to appeal  for
         the following reasons:

             The grounds of application for permission to appeal,  although
             long, are detailed and concerning.  They assert the judge  has
             misapprehended the evidence presented on a number of occasions
             in a number of different  areas  and  has  misapprehended  the
             evidence that he believed was before the original  judge  when
             that judge made his adverse findings  against  the  appellant.
             These grounds are arguable.  There is  an  arguable  error  of
             law.

    The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

     16. At the hearing before me, Ms Allen confirmed that  the  essence  of
         the error of law challenge was that the  judge  had  made  material
         errors of fact as to the  documents  that  were  before  Judge  Del
         Fabbro, and had thus  not  properly  taken  into  account  the  new
         evidence which was probative of the core claim of past  persecution
         and the authorities' ongoing adverse interest in the appellant.  On
         behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Armstrong accepted that  there
         were some factual errors, but he submitted they were not material.

    Discussion

     17. Having reviewed the documentary evidence with the assistance of the
         parties, I have been able to identify the following factual  errors
         in the determination.

     18. At the end of paragraph [22}, the judge noted that Dr  Persaud  did
         not list among the documents that he had seen the determination  of
         Judge Del Fabbro.  He said it appeared that  he  did  not  have  it
         before him, as he had made no reference to it.  In fact, Dr Persaud
         had seen the determination of Judge Del Fabbro, although he did not
         explicitly comment on its contents.

     19. In  paragraph  [25],  after  commenting  on  the  recent  documents
         provided by the appellant's wife, the judge said at the end of this
         paragraph that the wife had provided  letters  in  support  of  her
         husband's initial application,  which  formed  part  of  Judge  Del
         Fabbro's appraisal.  That was not in fact the case.   Before  Judge
         Del  Fabbro,  the  appellant  simply  relayed  what  his  wife  had
         allegedly told him had happened in Sri Lanka in  his  absence.   He
         did not rely on a letter in support from his wife.

     20.  In  paragraph  [26],  the  judge  incorrectly  asserted  that  the
         appellant's brother had also provided a witness statement  back  in
         2009 in support of his brother's case, and that this statement  was
         considered by Judge Del Fabbro.  He says that this evidence did not
         add any significant weight to the case that was rejected  by  Judge
         Del Fabbro.  In fact, although in his recent witness statement  the
         appellant's brother referred to making a previous witness statement
         in 2009, the information he gave in this statement  was  incorrect.
         He had actually provided a witness statement in 2011, not in  2009.
         So Judge Del Fabbro did not  have  a  witness  statement  from  the
         appellant's brother when  determining  the  appellant's  appeal  in
         2009.

     21. Ms Allen also sought to persuade me that the judge had misquoted Dr
         Persaud at the end of paragraph [21] where the judge attributed  to
         Dr Persaud the following:

             Drawing  from  other  medical  reports,  he  noted  that   the
             appellant was 'possibly at suicide risk.

     22. Having examined the relevant passage in Dr Persaud's report  of  22
         April 2014, I do not consider that the attribution  was  inaccurate
         or unfair.  The gist of Dr Persaud's  observation  was  that  other
         medical professionals  agreed  with  him  that  the  appellant  was
         possibly  at  suicide  risk,  and  suffered  from  a   recognisable
         psychiatric disorder: see the appellant's bundle at page 18F.

     23. Addressing the mistakes of fact that have been established, the key
         question is whether they are material.  I do not consider the error
         in paragraph [22] is material as it is undeniably the case that  Dr
         Persaud does not specifically comment on the determination of Judge
         Del  Fabbro.   In  fairness  to  Dr  Persaud,  he  recognises  that
         credibility is not a matter for him, and this probably explains why
         he does not comment specifically on the determination.  But even if
         the judge had correctly recognised that Dr  Persaud  had  seen  the
         determination of Judge Del Fabbro, he  would  still  have  attached
         little weight to it for the reason given by the respondent  in  the
         RFRL (see paragraph 9 above).  This is apparent from  his  approach
         to Professor Lingham's report in paragraphs [23] and [24] where  he
         accepted  that  Professor  Lingham  had  seen  Judge  Del  Fabbro's
         determination, but said that his failure to engage with the  formal
         findings of the determination detracted from the report's standing.
          So the mistake of fact did not have  a  material  bearing  on  the
         judge's reasoning with respect to the weight to be attached to  the
         medical evidence.

     24. I do not consider the error with respect to the wife's evidence  is
         material, as the judge acknowledged  that  there  was  up  to  date
         evidence from the wife  that  was  not  before  Judge  Del  Fabbro.
         Similarly, the  judge  acknowledged  that  there  was  up  to  date
         evidence from the brother that was not before Judge Del Fabbro.

     25. Although Judge Del Fabbro did not have a letter of support from the
         appellant's wife, he had the appellant's hearsay evidence  of  what
         the wife had told him about what had been going on  in  Sri  Lanka.
         The fact that this  evidence  was  conveyed  to  Judge  Del  Fabbro
         through the mouth of the appellant, rather than  through  a  letter
         purportedly written by the wife herself, is not  material,  bearing
         in mind the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed and the fact  that  the
         putative letter  would  not  have  come  from  an  independent  and
         authoritative source.

     26. The thrust of the brother's statement in 2011 was that he had  sent
         money from Switzerland in 2008 to help fund the appellant's release
         from  detention.   While  this  evidence  was  supportive  of   the
         appellant's claim, the appellant's  brother  did  not  have  direct
         knowledge of the events which  had  precipitated  the  request  for
         funding.

     27.  Earlier,  at  paragraph  [19]  of  the  determination,  the  judge
         expressly referred to the reasons given by the  respondent  in  the
         refusal letter for attaching little weight to the letters from  the
         appellant's  relatives,  including  the  2011   letter   from   the
         appellant's brother.

     28. Since it was open to Judge Afako to attach  little  weight  to  the
         evidence given in 2011 by the appellant's wife and the  appellant's
         brother, for the reasons given in  the  refusal  letter  which  the
         judge adopts, I am not persuaded that  his  erroneous  belief  that
         these 2011 letters were before Judge  Del  Fabbro  had  a  material
         impact upon his assessment of the overall claim.  Although the 2011
         letters were not considered by  Judge  Del  Fabbro,  their  limited
         probative value was such that they would not have impacted  on  his
         findings, any more than the new evidence from the  mother  and  the
         brother to the same or similar effect impacted  retrospectively  on
         Judge Del Fabbro's findings in the estimation of Judge  Afako:  see
         paragraph [28].

     29. There is no error of  law  challenge  to  the  Judge's  finding  at
         paragraph [27]  that  the  appellant  would  not  be  perceived  as
         rendering a threat to the state of Sri Lanka as  a  result  of  his
         participation at a demonstration in London  in  front  of  the  Sri
         Lankan High Commission.  There is also no error of law challenge to
         the concluding sentence of paragraph [28],  where  the  judge  held
         that the key consideration was a question of risk on return.

     30. Viewed holistically, I consider that the judge has  given  adequate
         reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant  does  not  qualify  for
         recognition as a refugee, having regard to GJ and Others, and  also
         the dicta of Underhill  LJ  which  was  cited  by  Judge  Afako  in
         paragraphs [14] and  [15]  of  his  determination.   As  stated  by
         Underhill LJ at paragraph [50] of MP:

             The clear message of the Upper Tribunal's guidance is  that  a
             record of past LTTE activism does not  as  such  constitute  a
             risk factor for Tamils returning to  Sri  Lanka,  because  the
             government's concern  is  now  only  with  current  or  future
             threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state;  and
             that is so even if the returnee's past  links  with  the  LTTE
             were  of  the  kind  characterised  by  the  UNHCR  as   'more
             elaborate.'

     31. Against this background, there was not a real risk,  as  the  judge
         found at paragraph [29], that a person with the appellant's profile
         would face persecution or serious ill-treatment if returned to  Sri
         Lanka.

     32. There is a separate challenge in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
         judge's findings on suicide risk, and the availability  of  medical
         treatment for the appellant's mental health problems in Sri  Lanka.
         The appellant was not granted permission to appeal on this discrete
         ground. Also, I consider that the challenge  is  no  more  than  an
         expression of disagreement with findings which were reasonably open
         to the judge, applying J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, as he does  in
         paragraph [31]; and having regard to the evidence referred to,  and
         the  findings  made,  in  paragraphs   [32]   and   [33]   of   the
         determination.  In particular,  the  judge  found  that  there  was
         nothing to prevent the appellant from seeking help from the  former
         hospital where he worked, and there was nothing to suggest he would
         not be properly cared for at this  hospital.   Moreover,  he  found
         that the appellant's family would  rally  around  him  were  he  to
         return.  The  judge  held  that  whilst  removal  might  cause  the
         appellant some anxiety, he would be provided with  medical  escorts
         and on arrival he would have access to the medication he needed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed        Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

