
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00363/2016
                                                               PA/07207/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2016                            |On 14 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     K N
                                     L N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jaisri, instructed by Victory @Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge N J Bennett promulgated on 30 March 2016  in  which
    he dismissed their appeals against the decisions made by the respondent
    on 6 January 2015 and 22 October 2015 in respect of the first appellant
    (PA/07207/2016), and on 5 November in respect of the  second  appellant
    (AA/00363/2016).  He found no valid appeal was extant in respect of the
    earlier decision about the first appellant (AA/01146/2015).

 2. The appellants are brother and sister,  born  on  6  July  1997  and  2
    October 1995 respectively. Both are citizens of Vietnam who arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 21 May 2010. Although refused asylum,  they  were
    granted  Discretionary  Leave  to  remain  as   unaccompanied   minors.
    Applications made to extend those periods of leave were  refused  which
    resulted in these appeals.

 3.  The appellants were placed in foster care and since December 2011 with
    Binh Thi Tran and her husband, Huu Le, who have two children  of  their
    own. Although the first appellant continues to  live  with  the  foster
    parents, the second appellant now lives with her boyfriend in his home,
    but visits the foster parents at weekends.

 4. The appellants' case is that that they have  established  strong  bonds
    with their foster parents, this amounting to family life for the  first
    appellant, and that he was still part of that family. It is the  second
    appellant's case that she  had  established  a  family  life  with  her
    boyfriend, there being significant obstacles to him going  to  Vietnam,
    and that would be artificial to require her to  return  to  Vietnam  to
    apply for entry clearance.

 5. In both appeals, it is the appellants' case that they have made out the
    case  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   their
    reintegration into life in Vietnam; and,  that  to  remove  them  there
    would be in breach of their protected article 8 rights.

 6. There is a long history to the appeals which  have  been  adjourned  on
    several occasions. They finally came before the First-tier Tribunal for
    substantive consideration on 30 June 2016.

 7.  The  judge  was,  as  a  preliminary  issue,  concerned  that  as  the
    appellants' applications for leave to remain had been  made  when  they
    had no extant leave, that there  was  no  immigration  decision,  there
    being no leave to vary. The issues in respect of the  Second  Appellant
    were resolved in the decision at [7].

 8. The judge found that:

      i) There were significant obstacles to the  appellants  settling  into
         life in Vietnam [52], but that  these  were  not  very  significant
         [55], and thus the appeals under the Immigration Rules failed;

     ii) The appellants have very strong  relationships  with  their  foster
         parents which are important parts of their private lives  [56]  but
         that these did not amount  to  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
         article 8, albeit that the relationship was a very strong one;

    iii) The relationship between the second  appellant  and  her  boyfriend
         was, subsisting, but had not yet developed into family life [57];

     iv) The appellants had established private lives here extending  beyond
         relationships with the foster family and the boyfriend  [58];  that
         they would prefer to remain here; that it would not be unreasonable
         to expect the appellant's boyfriend to relocate to Vietnam, or  for
         her to seek entry clearance to return to the United  Kingdom  [63],
         [64];

      v)  The  removal  of  the  appellants  amounted  to  a   proportionate
         interference with their rights to  family  life  [65],  having  had
         regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act,

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge erred:

      i) In not considering the effect of the appellants' removal  on  their
         foster siblings, and thus failed to consider "section 55" [5];

     ii) In concluding that there were not very significant obstacles to the
         appellants' reintegration into Vietnam, although he  had  found  at
         [52] that there are significant obstacles to settling into life  in
         Vietnam, and at [53] that there were strong  bonds  to  the  foster
         parents [6];

    iii) In concluding that there could be no family life between  a  foster
         parent  and  a  foster  child,  the  judge  making  an   artificial
         distinction between the relationships between natural  or  adoptive
         parents and foster parents [7];

     iv) In concluding in the balancing exercise that the article  8  rights
         of the appellants were outweighed, the judge's conclusion that  the
         second appellant and her boyfriend entered into a relationship when
         the immigration status was precarious being flawed [8]

      v) In concluding that the second appellant had the option to apply for
         entry clearance as her circumstances could  be  distinguished  from
         that in Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.

10.  On  7  September  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer   granted
    permission to appeal

11.  At  the  hearing  before   me,   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives. Both were in agreement that although the  grounds  did
    not raise the issue of whether the judge had erred in  concluding  that
    the first appellant had  no  valid  appeal  in  respect  of  the  first
    decision, that I should consider that also.  The  parties  were  agreed
    that the judge had erred on this issue.  I reserved my decision.

Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

    Ground 1

12. As Mr Jarvis submitted, there is no indication that it was part of  the
    appellants' case that the respondent had erred in her exercise  of  her
    section 55 duties in  not  having  regard  to  the  appellants'  foster
    siblings.

13. It is not disputed that the foster parents have children of their  own.
    The older boy is under 10; the younger is, I was told, about 18 months'
    old. While the witness statements of the foster parents make mention of
    the fact that the older boy treats the first appellant like  and  older
    brother, and that they have lived as part of the same family, little is
    said of the effect of separation. It does not appear from  the  summary
    of the evidence at [10] - [47]  that  this  issue  was  raised  in  any
    material way, nor does it  appear  to  have  featured  in  Mr  Jaisri's
    submissions a summarised at [49].

14. It is evident that a significant number of other issues relating to the
    private lives of the appellants were raised, and that a submission  was
    made that they both, in different ways,  have  a  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom. These were dealt with in detail by the  judge  at  [52]
    onwards and flow from the evidence adduced.

15. It is not arguable that the judge erred in failing to have regard to an
    issue which was not properly put to him. There is  no  indication  that
    section 55 duties, or the best interests of the  foster  siblings  were
    raised.   It  is  for  a  party,   with   the   assistance   of   legal
    representatives, to put forward his  case,  and  the  judge  cannot  be
    faulted for not reaching conclusions on issues not put to  him.   I  am
    therefore not satisfied that ground 1 is made out.

    Ground 2

16. There is no merit in this ground. As  the  judge  rightly  observed  at
    [51], the word "very" in the phrase "very significant obstacles" is not
    redundant. It was open to the judge to  conclude  that  although  there
    would be obstacles, they were not  such  as  to  reach  the  very  high
    threshold required of the Immigration Rules. No effective challenge  is
    made to the findings he made at [53] as to the  assistance  they  would
    have, and as to the skills they had acquired [54] That they have strong
    bonds  to  their  foster  parents  does  not  amount  to  obstacles  to
    integration, not least as they are young adults,  as  the  judge  noted
    [53]. In reality,  this  ground  is  a  disagreement  with  a  properly
    reasoned and sustainable conclusion.

    Ground 3

17. This ground in part misstates the judge's findings. He did  not  direct
    himself that there could be no family life between a foster parent  and
    a foster child, but very properly  noted  that  there  are  differences
    between such relationships [56] and natural or adoptive parent -  child
    relationships. The judge also very properly noted,  in  a  nuanced  and
    careful  decision,  that  it  is  the  strength  and  nature   of   the
    relationship which  is  important,  not  the  label  attached  thereto.
    Although it is averred in the grounds that the judge should have looked
    at the quality of the relationships, but did  not,  that  is  precisely
    what he did do.

    Ground 4

18. It is not  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellants' status  was  precarious.  An  individual's  status  can  be
    precarious even if he or she has leave; that is clear from  Rhuppiah  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803. Here, the  appellants'  leave  was  expressly
    granted due to them being minors; there could have been no  expectation
    that further leave would be granted after they became adults. The judge
    was in the circumstances, manifestly entitled to conclude that this was
    relevant [66], having directed himself properly in accordance with  the
    relevant case law.

19. I do not consider that, as Mr Jaisri  submitted,  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that family life had not been established between the second
    appellant and her boyfriend.  Not all romantic relationships constitute
    family life, and the judge  gave  detailed  and  eminently  sustainable
    reasons at [57] for concluding that it had not yet developed.

20. I am not satisfied, accordingly,  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    balancing exercise was flawed.

    Ground 5

21. I find no merit in this ground.  The requirement  for  entry  clearance
    does, in this case, have a sensible purpose; the  couple  are  not  yet
    engaged, nor had they cohabited for two years; nor,  indeed,  is  there
    sufficient evidence to show that the financial  requirements  supported
    by the specified documents of the Immigration Rules  were  met.   While
    the second appellant did  have  leave  at  the  time  her  relationship
    commenced, that is not sufficient  to  distinguish  it  from  Hayat  or
    demonstrate that the judge erred in concluding that this route was open
    to the second appellant,

22. I turn finally to the issue of the validity of  the  first  appellant's
    appeal.

    The decisions made in respect of the first appellant

23. The first appellant's Discretionary Leave to Remain had  expired  on  8
    September 2013, and he applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  21
    November 2013. On 6 January  2015,  the  respondent  refused  to  grant
    further leave, and also made a decision to remove him pursuant to 47 of
    the Immigration and Nationality Act 2006 to  remove  him.  He  appealed
    against that decision, giving rise to the appeal number  AA/01146/2015.



24. On 22 October 2015,  the  respondent  issued  a  further  letter  which
    records that the decision of 6 January 2015 was incorrect, and that  it
    had been agreed that the respondent would reconsider the decision. This
    appears  to  flow  from  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  sent  to  the
    respondent.

25. The refusal letter sets out why the respondent did  not  consider  that
    the appellant is a refugee, was not entitled to Humanitarian Protection
    and that his removal would not be in breach of article 8 to remove  him
    to Vietnam.  The letter does, however, record that the first  appellant
    has a right of appeal against the decision under section 82 of the 2002
    Act (as amended). No appeal against that decision was made until 6 July
    2016, time being extended by the judge.

26. The judge noted in his decision extending time, that section 47 of  the
    2006 Act had been repealed by the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from
    20 October 2014, that is, after the first decision had been issued, but
    it is unclear if he had regard to the transitional provisions  set  out
    in articles 9-ll of the  Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.  3,
    Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014. Having  had  regard  to
    those provisions, I am satisfied that section 47 of the  2006  Act  did
    remain in place in respect of this decision, and that accordingly there
    was potentially a valid appeal against the decision of 6 January 2015.

27. Given that there is, however, no appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    judge to find no valid appeal against the first decision  (that  appeal
    being dealt with in the appeal number AA/01146/2015) there is no appeal
    in which grounds could be varied. In any event,  the  decision  on  the
    merits considred in PA/07207/2016) is sustainable,  any  error  is  not
    material.

    Conclusions

28. For the reasons set out above, I am  not  satisfied  that  any  of  the
    grounds are  made  out.   The  decision  is  well-structured,  properly
    reasoned and sufficiently detailed.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  AA/00363/2016  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  PA/07207/2016  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

 3. There is no valid appeal against the decision in AA/01146/2015.

 4. I maintain the anonymity order made in respect of the appellants by the
    First-tier Tribual.


Signed                                  Date:  13 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


