
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/00366/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th March 2018                   |On 21st March 2018                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe (Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant sought asylum claiming to be from Sudan. The  application
    was refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 18th  of
    February 2016. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer at Nottingham on the 4th of April  2017.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the  9th
    of May 2017

 2. The Appellant's immigration history was considered in paragraphs 32  to
    40 where the details he had given on arrival  in  2012  were  discussed
    along with  his  route  to  the  UK.  The  Judge  then  considered  the
    Appellant's previous asylum claim and the decision in paragraphs 41  to
    46. The expert's report was discussed in paragraphs 47 to 51 along with
    linguistic evidence.

 3. The Judge found that the Appellant had  not  shown  that  he  was  from
    Darfur and went on to find in paragraphs 55 to 62  that  the  Appellant
    had shown that he is from Sudan but did not go on to make a finding  on
    whether the Appellant was  from  Chad.  The  Appellant's  claims  about
    events in Sudan were  rejected  and  his  failure  to  claim  on  route
    undermined his credibility. The Appellant could  return  to  Sudan  and
    would not be at risk in his home area.

 4. The grounds argue  that  the  Judge  had  not  considered  whether  the
    Appellant would be at risk by virtue of his Tama ethnicity.  The  Judge
    had found that Mr  Verney,  the  expert,  did  not  have  expertise  in
    linguistics but did not give support  for  that  finding  although  the
    Respondent had not questioned Mr Verney's expertise. The Judge had  not
    considered that Rutana  was  a  colloquial  term  for  non-Arab  tribal
    languages. In paragraph 61 the Judge found the Appellant was from Sudan
    and that he was not from Sudan, the  Judge  should  have  followed  the
    findings of Judge Smith who had  found  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Sudan. Permission was granted on the 13th of September  2017  by  Judge
    Adio who found the grounds arguable.

 5. The Secretary of State's rule 24 response was submitted on the 13th  of
    October 2017. In seeking to uphold the decision it was noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted  the  expert's  expertise  but  it  was
    argued  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  his   linguistic
    qualifications. It was accepted that a holistic reading of paragraph 61
    showed that the Judge accepted that the Appellant was  from  Sudan  and
    that the assessment of internal relocation  had  to  be  made  on  that
    basis. There is no challenge in the rule 24  response  to  the  finding
    made in paragraph 61.

 6. At the hearing there had been an application for an adjournment as  the
    Appellant's representative was ill and, given  the  weather  conditions
    unable  to  attend.  The  matter   was   put   back   for   alternative
    representation to be instructed and in  the  event  Mr  Pipe,  who  was
    appearing in other cases in the list, was instructed  and  having  been
    given time was then able to present the case. In doing so he  was  able
    to speak to Mr Mills leading  to  considerable  agreement  towards  the
    resolution of the appeal. I am grateful to Mr  Pipe  for  assisting  at
    such short notice.

 7. For the Home Office it was accepted  by  Mr  Mills  that  it  would  be
    difficult to justify the decision and  that  it  was  agreed  that  the
    appeal would have to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing. The disagreement between  them  centred  on  the  findings  in
    paragraph 61 and  whether  it  had  been  found  sustainably  that  the
    Appellant is from Sudan. In any event the policy on  returns  to  Sudan
    has changed, the Home Office maintain the country guidance is no longer
    correct and that internal relocation to Khartoum is possible  and  that
    the new guidance would need to be applied. If the  judge  had  concerns
    about aspects of the expert's ability to  comment  on  various  aspects
    then Mr Mills accepted that should have been raised with the parties at
    the hearing, this was a matter of basic fairness.

 8. Given the Home Office approach to the Judge's findings set out  in  the
    rule 24 response it appears that there is no challenge to  the  finding
    that the Appellant has shown, to the lower standard, that the Appellant
    is from Sudan. That being the case that finding is  preserved.  However
    the other findings made by the Judge with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    account of events in Sudan are  not  maintained.  The  next  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who considers the case will have to consider  the  basic
    facts of the Appellant's claim and to apply the new policy with  regard
    to internal relocation in that context.

 9. The appropriate course of action is to set aside the decision of  Judge
    Colyer and to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing by any Judge except Judge Colyer. The finding  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's nationality is preserved. In addition to  the  evidence
    relating to the facts of his claim the  Appellant  will  also  have  to
    address the Home Office guidance on returns to Sudan.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision, the finding that the Appellant is  a  national  of
Sudan is preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  re-heard,  not  by
Judge Colyer.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  I  make  no  fee  award
which remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal at the conclusion of  the
appeal.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 20th March 2018

