
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00413/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2014                              |On 7th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                    Mr ZU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1996.
    The Appellant claimed asylum in the  UK  on  4th  December  2009.   His
    application for asylum was refused on 18th  January  2010  and  he  was
    subsequently granted discretionary leave until 12th May 2013.   On  7th
    January 2014 the Appellant's application for further leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom was refused.  The Appellant appealed and the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Meah  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 18th February 2014.  In a determination  promulgated  on  19th
    February 2014 the Appellant's appeal was allowed on asylum grounds  and
    pursuant to Article 3 and Article 8.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 3rd March 2014 and on 12th  March  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foudy granted permission to appeal.  Judge Foudy noted that the grounds
    argued that the judge had failed to give reasons as  to  why  he  found
    there was no sufficiency of protection  in  Kabul  and  also  that  the
    grounds argued that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  with  regard  to
    Article 8 in that the judge did not consider the Immigration Rules  and
    the decision in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640.   On  3rd  April  2014  the
    instructed solicitors for Mr ZU filed  a  detailed  Rule  24  response.
    That Rule 24 response submitted that the test is not one of sufficiency
    of protection when considering the issues of  internal  relocation  and
    that an individual holistic  assessment  of  all  relevant  factors  is
    required as set out in AH (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL  49.   Further  so
    far as the claim pursuant  to  Article  8  is  concerned  the  Rule  24
    response notes that whilst  the  judge  did  not  cite  Gulshan  it  is
    submitted that he clearly followed the guidance from  the  Tribunal  on
    Article  8  approaches  and  that  at  paragraph  25  the   judge   has
    acknowledged that the Immigration Rules could not  be  satisfied.   The
    Rule 24 request asks me to dismiss the appeal and to find that there is
    no material error of law.

 3. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  The Appellant  is
    represented by his instructed Counsel Ms Iqbal, Ms  Iqbal  is  familiar
    with this matter having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Deller.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  However for  the
    purpose of continuity throughout proceedings Mr ZU is  referred  to  as
    the Appellant herein and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Submissions/Discussion

 4. Mr Deller starts by making the very appropriate and  proper  concession
    that if I do not find there is an error of law under Article 3  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights then Article  8  is  academic.   He
    considers the question  of  consideration  of  the  purported  lack  of
    adequate reasoning on the question of sufficiency of protection  as  to
    the risk on return to be the starting point.

 5. Mr Deller contends that at paragraph 24 of his determination the  judge
    made a loose comment on whether there is a risk of return to Kabul  and
    that the judge has not dealt with the proper standard  by  saying  that
    the risk does not go away if  the  Appellant  is  returned  there.   He
    accepts that there is some reference to case law in  the  determination
    but at first blush contends that the judge has not gone into sufficient
    detail to consider whether or not Kabul is a reasonable safe place  for
    the Appellant to be  returned  to.   He  submits  that  the  dates  are
    important noting that the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    was only a month after the Appellant's 18th birthday.  He accepts  that
    18 is not a "magic number" but still contends that there has to be some
    sort of analysis carried out as to whether or not the case law has been
    examined and that this is what the Immigration Judge has not done.   He
    submits that the judge needs to have said more about why the  Appellant
    could not be returned to Kabul.  He does  not  seek  to  challenge  the
    judge's findings so far as any return to Helmand is concerned.

 6. So far as Article 8 is  concerned  Mr  Deller  contends  that  the  key
    question is whether or  not  the  judge  has  safely  carried  out  the
    appropriate approach.  He contends it is difficult  without  mentioning
    authorities to make a conclusion  and  the  judge  needs  to  show  the
    principles that  have  been  adhered  to  and  that  his  reasoning  in
    paragraph 34 is not sufficiently clear.  He submits it is impossible to
    consider whether or not the judge did apply a "Gulshan approach" and as
    to use Mr Deller's words "why the Appellant is good enough to win if he
    doesn't meet the Immigration Rules."  He asked  me  to  find  generally
    there are material errors of law and to set aside the judgment  and  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. Ms Iqbal relies on the Rule 24 response (of which she is  the  author).
    She submits in the first  instance  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    getting the test wrong and as the Rule 24 response points out the  test
    is not one of sufficiency of protection when considering the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  She submits therefore that the  first  ground  is
    not made out if it is considered that there has been a lack of adequate
    reasons given she submits that this has been addressed by the manner in
    which the judge has clearly set out his findings  having  analysed  the
    Appellant's circumstances at paragraph 16 to 23 that:

    (i)  The Appellant was an individual who he believed had not been  able
         to contact his family in Afghanistan despite attempts by him.

    (ii) That there had been no attempts whatsoever by  the  Respondent  in
         relation to this matter to trace the Appellant's family.

    (iii)    The Appellant had only just turned 18 at date of  hearing  and
         therefore the judge found merit in the Argument that there was  "no
         bright line" across which the risks to, and the needs of,  a  child
         suddenly disappear.

    That  of  course  is  an  extract  from  the  judgment  in  JS  (former
    unaccompanied child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568.

 8. Ms Iqbal points out that the judge has found that the appellant  is  at
    risk on return to his home area and has made an essential conclusion at
    paragraph 24 that he cannot return either to Helmand or  Kabul  because
    he is  vulnerable.   She  submits  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the
    individual circumstances of each case and that the judge has done  this
    at paragraph 21 pointing out that he has had  no  contact  with  family
    members and that cumulatively the judge  has  looked  at  the  relevant
    factors  and  has  not  carried  out  a  mere  "tick   box"   approach.
    Consequently she submits that the judge has made no material  error  of
    law in his assessment.

 9. So far as the claim pursuant to Article 8 is concerned she accepts that
    there is no reference to the authority of Gulshan but submits that that
    does not matter provided the judge has adopted the correct approach and
    considered the correct principles which he has done.  She submits  that
    the judge has set out specific factors from paragraphs 28 to  34  which
    were not covered by the Immigration Rules  but  were  of  a  compelling
    nature such as to make removal disproportionate.  She states that it is
    important to look at the links that the appellant has built in the  UK,
    that he has been here for some three years and that he was of  a  young
    age when he arrived and that he has made close family  links  with  his
    foster  family.   Such  factors  were  she  submits  similar  to  those
    considered in Gulshan and are  compelling.   Consequently  she  submits
    that there is no material error of law.

10. In response Mr Deller points  out  that  with  the  failure  to  recite
    Gulshan it is necessary to look at what has been said in  the  judgment
    and that this is limited to a very few  lines.   He  submits  that  the
    judge has not gone into sufficient detail and that  if  someone  is  to
    succeed under Article 8 then  that is a matter of discretion, it is for
    the judge to set out why having given a detailed analysis that  a  case
    should post-Gulshan succeed under Article 8  and  that  the  judge  has
    failed to do so.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. The thrust of the Secretary of State in this challenge is  put  on  two
    fronts,  firstly  that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  apply   the
    appropriate standard of proof, and secondly, he found that the risk  of
    being forcibly recruited did not go away even in Kabul.  I  have  heard
    detailed submissions on this point.  I am not satisfied that there is a
    material error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The  issues  are
    addressed between paragraph 16 and 24 of the determination.   Paragraph
    16 to 23 set out the evidence that was heard and took due consideration
    of the authority of JS.  The judge made findings at paragraph  24.   He
    analysed the position on return to Helmand and made a proper  analysis;
    this being one that is actually  conceded  by  Mr  Deller  as  being  a
    sustainable fact.   Thereafter  he  made  conclusions  have  previously
    analysed the Appellant's circumstances and made a  finding  that  given
    the vulnerability of the Appellant together with  the  lack  of  family
    support (which the  judge  had  directed  himself  to  earlier  in  his
    determination) led to the conclusion there was a risk of the  Appellant
    being forcibly recruited even in Kabul.

14. The judge has therefore carried out  a  proper  and  reasoned  analysis
    fully supported as to why internal relocation would not  be  reasonable
    in the Appellant's circumstances.  The correct test is whether  it  was
    reasonable on the facts of this particular Appellant's case for him  to
    relocate to Kabul.  The judge concluded that it was not reasonable  and
    has given full and detailed reasons for reaching this  conclusion.   In
    such  circumstances  the  decision  does  not  therefore  disclose  any
    material error of law.

15. The second argument of the Secretary of State relates to whether or not
    the judge made a material error of  law  by  failing  to  identify  any
    exceptional or compelling reasons for ignoring the Rules and proceeding
    straight to the consideration of Article 8  jurisprudence.   Mr  Deller
    has been open enough as stated earlier in this determination  to  state
    that if there is no error of law with regard to  the  judge's  analysis
    under Articles 2 and 3 (which there is not) then  it  could  be  easily
    argued that any analysis under Article 8 is academic.   It  is  however
    for the judge to go on and properly make an Article 8 assessment.   The
    Tribunal in  Gulshan  made  clear  and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad:

         "Where an  area  of  the  Rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in  particular
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the Rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

16. That is the legal approach that should be adopted.  Whilst there is  no
    reference to any relevant authorities save to  the  guiding  principles
    set out in Razgar in the judge's determination it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's findings in paragraph 34 the judge has considered  this  matter
    under Article 8 and therefore seemingly concedes that the appeal cannot
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.  However at paragraph 34 the judge
    makes findings that the Appellant has a significant private life in the
    UK during the time he has remained in the UK  lawfully  and  that  when
    this is considered alongside his substantial family life rights  it  is
    sufficient to tip the overall Article 8 proportionality assessment  and
    balance in his favour.  Those submissions when looked at alongside  the
    detailed specific factors that the judge has set out at  paragraphs  28
    to 33 of  his  determination  represent  findings  of  such  compelling
    circumstances  in  the  judge's   assessment   as   to   make   removal
    disproportionate.  Thus whilst the judge has not specifically  referred
    to the authorities he has approached the  principles  and  whether  any
    other judge would have come to a similar finding is not a  matter  that
    is before me.  It is not argued that the decision is perverse.  Further
    as mentioned above it remains a matter of debate as to the relevance of
    such a finding bearing in mind  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision based on both asylum and Article 3.  In such  circumstances  I
    am satisfied that overall there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal of the Secretary  of
    State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

An  anonymity  order  was  made  under  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   No  application  is  made  to
vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           16th April 2014

