
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00332/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 July 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     b S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).





The Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia who was born on 7  December  1979.
    He left Gambia on 29 April 2009 and arrived in  the  UK  with  a  valid
    student visa.  He enrolled at the Birmingham International  College  in
    order to study hotel management.  However, it would appear that he  did
    not complete his course, leaving some six or seven  months  later.   In
    2010 he unsuccessfully made an application  for  an  extension  of  his
    leave as a student.  He made a further application  on  15  March  2011
    and, as a result of that, was granted leave from 21 April 2011 until 31
    December 2013.  In fact, in November 2012 he joined  the  British  Army
    but was discharged on 1 September  2013  because  of  failings  in  his
    weapon handling skills.  The appellant temporarily left the UK on 7 May
    2013, returning to the Gambia before returning to the UK on 14 May 2013
    where he was able to re-enter the UK because of a residence  permit  in
    his passport.

 3. On 17 September 2013, the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis  of  his
    claim was twofold.  First, he claimed that he was at risk  because  his
    uncle "ES", a public official had obtained sponsorship for him  from  a
    local authority "KA Council".  His uncle had lost  his  employment  and
    had been imprisoned.  The appellant claimed that he was wanted  by  the
    Gambian police  because  he  had  illegally  obtained  the  sponsorship
    through his uncle.  (At his  appeal  hearing,  he  produced  an  arrest
    warrant dated 3 November 2013.)  Secondly, the appellant  claimed  that
    he would be at risk on return to Gambia because  he  had  been  in  the
    British Army.

 4. On 20 December 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum and on 3 January 2013 made a  decision  refusing
    to vary his  leave  to  enter.   The  appellant  appealed  that  latter
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In a determination dated 25  February  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Holder) dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds.   In
    particular, Judge Holder did not accept the appellant's  evidence  that
    he was at risk on return as a result  of  illegally  obtaining  student
    sponsorship through an uncle, "ES".  Judge Holder did not  accept  that
    the appellant was related to "ES" as he claimed or  that  he  had  been
    sponsored illegally by the "KA Council"  and  was,  as  a  consequence,
    wanted by the Gambian authorities.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 19
    March  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kamara)  granted   the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

 7. Ms Fenney, who represented the appellant, relied upon a  single  matter
    raised in the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that a  central  aspect
    of the appellant's claim was that he had obtained  illegal  sponsorship
    from the "KA Council" as a result of the  intervention  of  his  uncle,
    "ES" who was a public  official.   The  appellant  had  relied  upon  a
    sponsorship letter dated 14 February 2011  headed  "KA  Council".   She
    submitted that Judge Holder had not been informed at the  hearing  that
    the Secretary of State had accepted this sponsorship letter,  submitted
    with the appellant's application for leave as a  student  on  15  March
    2011, when granting him further leave  from  21  April  2011  until  31
    December 2013.  The appellant had been unrepresented  at  the  hearing.
    Ms Fenney accepted that any omission to inform the judge  of  this  was
    not deliberate but that, nevertheless, had the judge  been  aware  that
    the Secretary of State had accepted this sponsorship letter, that might
    well have affected his finding in relation to whether the appellant had
    been sponsored as he claimed and which was a basis upon  which  he  now
    feared return to the Gambia.  Ms Fenney submitted this was not a  minor
    error but was one that changed the  judge's  whole  perception  of  the
    appellant's claim.  It did not appear, Ms Fenney  submitted,  that  the
    judge was aware that  the  appellant  had  made  two  applications  for
    further leave as a student - in 2010 and 2011.  He had not had the full
    picture of the appellant's immigration history.

 8.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  McVeety  acknowledged  that  the
    respondent must have accepted the sponsorship document in granting  the
    appellant further leave as a student in 2011.  However, the  fact  that
    the judge was not aware of this, Mr McVeety submitted,  was  immaterial
    to his adverse credibility finding.  He submitted that  the  judge  was
    not constrained to accept the document, even though it  had  previously
    been accepted by the Secretary of State, and  the  judge  had  given  a
    number of reasons in para 32 of his  determination  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's evidence both as to his claimed relationship with "ES"  and
    the reliability of both the arrest warrants (which had  been  submitted
    at  the  hearing)  and  the  sponsorship  letter  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.   Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  there  was  no   basis   for
    overturning the judge's adverse credibility finding which was sound.

Discussion

 9.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  appellant  did,  in  fact,  make  two
    applications to extend his leave as a student - in  2010  and  then  in
    2011.  Equally, it is clear that the appellant  relied  upon  different
    sponsors  for  those  two  applications.   In  relation  to  the   2010
    application he relied upon "HJ" whom he  claimed  was  his  uncle  (see
    affidavit dated 9 August  2010).   Whilst,  in  relation  to  the  2011
    application, he relied upon sponsorship  from  the  "KA  Council"  (see
    letter dated 14 February 2011).

10. It may well be, and I accept for the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  that
    Judge Holder did not have drawn to his attention  explicitly  that  the
    appellant had made two applications and,  in  relation  to  the  second
    application, the Secretary of State had accepted the  sponsorship  from
    the "KA Council" in granting leave.  I do  not,  however,  accept  that
    this omission amounts to a material error of law so as to fatally  flaw
    the judge's adverse credibility finding.

11. First, it is clear both from the refusal letter and the  way  in  which
    the case was presented on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
    hearing that the Secretary of State had put in issue the reliability of
    the sponsorship letter relied upon by the appellant.  It  is  difficult
    to see  what  evidential  advantage  could  have  been  gained  by  the
    appellant if the judge had been aware that at one time  (but  not  now)
    the Secretary of State had accepted that the appellant was sponsored as
    he claimed in relation to his second student  application.   The  Judge
    was certainly not bound to accept  its  reliability  now  that  it  was
    contested.  The Judge was required to assess  its  reliability  in  the
    context of all the evidence which is precisely what he did.

12. Secondly, and more significantly, in para 32 of his  determination  the
    judge gave a number of reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  account;
    in particular that the appellant was not related as he claimed to  "ES"
    not least because the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  of  his  claimed
    uncle's wives; features of  the  documents  including  the  sponsorship
    letter led the judge to  conclude  they  were  unreliable  and  he  had
    returned to the Gambia in May 2013 despite claiming to know  that  "ES"
    had been dismissed and was having difficulties.  I set out the  judge's
    reasons in para 32 in full which are as follows:

         "32. I do not find that the Appellant has shown that he has a well-
             founded fear of persecution if returned to the Gambia.   I  do
             not find that he has shown that he is related to either [E] or
             [SS].  I do not find his account that  [ES]  was  involved  in
             obtaining sponsorship by the [KA Council] to be  true.   I  do
             not find that he has shown that he was, in fact, sponsored  by
             that Area Council or that he owes them money.  I do  not  find
             that he has shown that he is wanted by the Gambian  Police  or
             is of any interest to the Gambian authorities on return to the
             Gambia.  I  say  this  given  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
             following:

             a)   I find that the Appellant has not provided  any  evidence
                  showing that he is related to either [E]  or  [SS].   This
                  issue was clearly contested in the Refusal Letter.

                  I find from his evidence that the Appellant is in contact
                  with his brother.  His brother live with  the  Appellant's
                  mother and father.  I do not  find  it  credible  that  he
                  could  not  obtain  some  documentation  (such  as   birth
                  certificates) to show that he is related.  The  fact  that
                  he has not undermines the credibility of his claim  to  be
                  related to [E] or [SS];

             b)   I find that the Appellant did not know the names  of  any
                  of [ES]'s wives when asked in interview at questions 37 to
                  39.   If  the  Appellant's  evidence  is  correct,  he  is
                  sufficiently close to this uncle for the uncle to commit a
                  criminal offence in the  process  of  illegally  obtaining
                  sponsorship for the Appellant.  In those circumstances,  I
                  would expect the Appellant to know the name of his  aunts.
                  The fact that he does not undermines  the  credibility  of
                  his account that  [ES]  is  his  uncle  and  has  obtained
                  sponsorship for him;

             c)   The Appellant claims in interview  at  question  56  that
                  [ES]  was  [a  public  official]  for  about  two   years.
                  However, it was not disputed by the  Appellant  that  [ES]
                  was, in fact, in that position for approximately four  and
                  a half years.  I find that  this  inconsistency  does  not
                  support the Appellant's claim to be related to [ES];

             d)   There is no evidence (other than the Arrest  Warrant)  to
                  show that [ES]  is  in  jail  or  in  jail  for  illegally
                  obtaining sponsorship for the Appellant.

             e)   I have considered the  [KA  Council]  documents  and  the
                  Arrest Warrant in accordance  with  the  determination  in
                  Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439.

                  I do not find these documents to be reliable given:

                  i)   they do not contain a contact address.  I would  have
                      expected such documents to contain the  address  from
                      which they were issued;

                  ii)  the 14th February 2011 [KA Council] document contains
                      spelling mistakes:  'evolved'/'on wards';

                  iii) Similarly the Sponsorship letter of the same date: 't
                      be';

                  iv)  Similarly the Termination letter of 8th March,  2012:
                      'meet'/'in other'/'but influence'/'is terminate';

                  v)   No envelopes have been provided with the [KA Council]
                      documents.   Two  of  the  letters   appear   to   be
                      photocopies containing a live signature; and

                  vi)  The Warrant was produced  by  the  Appellant  at  the
                      hearing.  He said that he received it a  week  before
                      the hearing from his brother.  He did not produce any
                      envelope.  It is a photocopy.   The  Appellant  could
                      not  explain  how  the  police  came  to  obtain  his
                      photograph (he is not previously known to them).

             f)   The Appellant,  when  he  initially  entered  the  United
                  Kingdom to study had provided an affidavit dated  from  an
                  uncle called [HJ].  Mr [J] who clearly stated that he  was
                  financially supporting the Appellant through his studies;

             g)   The  Appellant  returned  to  the  Gambia  in  May,  2013
                  allegedly knowing  that  [ES]  was  dismissed  and  having
                  difficulties (given the Termination letter of  8th  March,
                  2012).  Additionally, he was  aware  of  his  own  alleged
                  difficulties with [KA Council].  He talks in his interview
                  (questions 72 and 73) of having to go  there  'undercover'
                  and 'sneaking in and out'.  I would not have expected  him
                  to  have  returned  had  he  believed  that  he   was   in
                  difficulties with the authorities; and

             h)   The Appellant claimed asylum a  few  days  after  he  was
                  discharged from  the  army.   He  was  discharged  on  1st
                  September, 2013 and  claimed  asylum  on  17th  September,
                  2013.  I find, given the above, that he has fabricated his
                  account having found himself without  an  income,  without
                  work and having abandoned his studies."

13. Whilst I accept that at para 32(f) the judge does taken into account  a
    change in the appellant's sponsorship without appreciating  that  there
    were, in fact, two applications, this was  only  one  of  a  number  of
    detailed  reasons  which  led  the  judge  to  reject  the  appellant's
    evidence.  None of those other reasons were challenged by Ms Fenney  in
    her submissions.  In my judgment, those reasons are  wholly  convincing
    and I am in no doubt  that  the  judge  would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusions on the evidence,  even  if  he  had  been  aware  that  the
    appellant had made two different applications for leave  and  that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted the  sponsorship  by  "KA  Council"  in
    granting leave following that second application.  I do not  accept  Ms
    Fenney's submission that this information  changed  the  judge's  whole
    perception of the appellant's claim.   On  the  contrary,  the  judge's
    reasons in paras 32(a)-(e) and (g)-(h) provide a comprehensive  set  of
    (unchallenged) reasons why the judge rejected the  appellant's  account
    and the reliability of the documents, including the sponsorship letter.
     Those reasons are,  in  my  judgment,  unassailable  as  a  basis  for
    rejecting the  appellant's  account  and  consequently  dismissing  his
    appeal.

14. For these reasons, the judge did not materially err in law in  reaching
    his adverse credibility  finding  and  in  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

15. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, accordingly dismissed.






                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
