
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    [n e]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Hooper, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought in relation to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hendry, promulgated on 18 November 2015.  The appeal  is
    brought with permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald given on
    18 December 2015.

2.   In granting permission, specific reference was made to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge misdirecting herself on the  standard  of  proof  to  be
    applied  and  also  making  irrational  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's uncle and otherwise in the course of the decision.

3.   By any account this is a lengthy  and  detailed  decision  but  as  the
    representative of the Secretary of State has conceded this morning,  at
    one stage (at least) in the course  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge misstates the standard or proof which is to be  applied.
    Although the concession is made that the  incorrect  statement  of  the
    standard of proof is an error of law, it  is  argued  that  it  is  not
    material. Looking at the case in the round, and at how  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge otherwise approached the question, it is argued  that  I
    can be satisfied that the decision was nonetheless safe and  a  proper.
    I confess to having some difficulty in the  assertion  that  where  the
    standard or proof is wrongly stated,  the  decision  can  be  saved  by
    reference to other material.

4.    The  briefly  background  is  as  follows.   The  credibility  of  the
    appellant was not in question before the First-tier Tribunal.  She  was
    brought to this country at the age of 13 by her grandmother.   She  was
    then placed into the custody of an aunt where she was put into domestic
    service and physically  abused.  Having  made  her  escape,  she  found
    herself in the care of the  social  services.  Being  an  unaccompanied
    minor she was given permission to remain  but  declined  to  return  to
    Nigeria when it expired. She claimed that  she  would  be  at  risk  on
    return for the purposes of international protection under  the  Refugee
    Convention. The Secretary of  State  in  the  original  refusal  letter
    declined to give permission to remain and her appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was similarly unsuccessful.

5.   I have been taken today to the decision in PO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  132.  That  deals  with
    detailed matters of country guidance so far as Nigeria is concerned and
    makes the distinction between trafficking within a  family  environment
    and trafficking by criminal  gangs.  It  indicates  that  the  Nigerian
    authorities are able to  offer  protection  against  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking.

6.   I take the view that the findings in this matter are not sound  because
    of the misapplication of  the  standard  of  proof  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is fair to say that elsewhere in the course of  the
    decision there may  well  be  an  indication  that  in  making  factual
    findings she had in her mind the higher  standard  which  was  actually
    required but I cannot  with  confidence  as  a  reviewing  Tribunal  be
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did in this instance apply
    the appropriate standard of proof in relation to a number of key issues
    which needed to be determined, not the least of which is the finding in
    relation to destitution and exploitation  and  the  existence  of  very
    significant obstacles to returning to her country of origin.

7.   I propose to say no more at this stage about the evidence  as  was  led
    before the First-tier Tribunal because the matter must be  remitted  to
    be heard afresh by a different First-tier Tribunal Judge and  in  those
    circumstances it would not be appropriate for me to give any indication
    on the issues to be decided de novo at the re-hearing. The Judge  might
    come to precisely the same conclusion.  That is an  outcome  which  the
    appellant must face but  the  decision  as  promulgated  cannot  stand.
    There is a material error of law and for  those  reasons  I  remit  the
    matter to be considered afresh.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Matter remitted for rehearing by First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
