
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00328/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2017                              |On 22nd June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [F M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Asjad, promulgated on 13th February 2017, following  a  hearing
    at  Birmingham  Sheldon  Court  on   19th   January   2017.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born on [  ]
    1989.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  14th
    April 2015, refusing her application for asylum and humanitarian  leave
    under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is  a  Tamil  speaking  Muslim  whose
    brother, [M], was arrested and detained in 2008 on suspicion  of  being
    involved with the LTTE.  After he was released in April 2009 he  failed
    to comply with bail conditions.  Her father and [M] then left Sri Lanka
    for Dubai in September 2009.  On 26th October 2009 the police  came  to
    arrest [M] and her father and because they were not there they arrested
    instead the Appellant and a  younger  brother,  [Z],  and  her  mother.
    Although they were then released, the  Appellant  herself  remained  in
    detention and she was beaten.  After a  bribe  had  been  paid  on  9th
    November 2009 she was released.  However, on 7th August  2012  she  was
    again arrested and detained for two months.  She claims  to  have  been
    tortured and raped.  She was  then  released  on  bail  again  on  10th
    October 2012.  Her uncle paid an agent to make an application  for  her
    for a student visa and this enabled her to leave Sri Lanka and come  to
    the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge criticised the Appellant for the fact that  her  brother  and
    father's statement in letters, as to what happened to her in Sri Lanka,
    makes no mention of the torture, the injuries, or treatment  (paragraph
    7).  The judge also threw doubt on the Appellant's claim that  she  was
    kept in detention for two weeks, endured beatings of a  severe  nature,
    and yet "she received no medical treatment whilst in detention  and  no
    medical treatment once she returned home" (paragraph 9).   It  is  also
    said by the judge that in her witness statement the Appellant  did  not
    mention the physical assaults at all or what injuries she received (see
    paragraph 12).  All in all, therefore, the judge found the  Appellant's
    core claim to be lacking in credibility and she dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge had made basic  factual
    errors in assessing the evidence.  She made findings as to the need for
    medical treatment which were unsustainable.  She made a  factual  error
    as to when the Appellant first  mentioned  her  rape.   The  claim,  in
    short, had been fundamentally misunderstood.

 6. On 10th March 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that,



         "In general adverse credibility findings would not raise points  of
         law, but there are important and well established  principles  that
         form an exception.  Two of these are findings that are not based on
         evidence; and mistakes of fact (that are clear from  evidence  that
         was before the judge)".

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 8th June 2017, Mr Paramjorthy, appearing as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, made the following submissions.

 8. First, there was the issue of what the Appellant had been  informed  as
    to having happened to her brother, by her family  members.   The  judge
    held that what she said here in the witness statement (at paragraph  8)
    was inconsistent with what the Appellant had  originally  said  in  her
    asylum interview at question 78.  However, what this is based  upon  is
    an entirely truncated reading of the asylum interview.  If one looks at
    the entirety of the questions on this very issue, from question  70  to
    78, it is plain that the Appellant is referring to her brother as  "he"
    in response to questions 70, 76, 77, and 78, so that her purpose is  in
    demonstrating that this is what she was told.  The Appellant's evidence
    was that she was not physically at home herself.

 9. Second, the judge at paragraph 7 suggests  that  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's brother makes no mention of torture  but  this  is  plainly
    wrong because the Appellant's brother at page 19 of the bundle, in  the
    fifth paragraph, makes it clear that he was tortured by stating, "I was
    tortured in a bad way in detention and I did not want  to  remain  here
    now, because it was sensitive and affected me badly".

10. Third, the judge found that the Appellant had only mentioned  that  she
    had been raped in detention in  her  witness  statement,  but  this  is
    factually  incorrect  because  the  Appellant  had  mentioned  this  at
    paragraph 13 of her witness statement, which makes clear that,  "I  was
    beaten in detention, in that I was punched and slapped with their fists
    and they then used a long bamboo stick and beat me  to  my  legs  ...".
    Once again, the judge's reading of the interview notes is truncated and
    selective.  She refers to there being no medical  treatment  whilst  in
    detention or when she returned home (AIR 153 to 155)  but  neglects  to
    mention that AIR 152 there is a reference to  medical  treatment.   Yet
    she states that, "after the treatment I was OK".   This  suggests  that
    the judge had failed to apply "anxious scrutiny".

11. Fourth, the judge states that in her witness statement,  the  Appellant
    did not mention the physical assaults  at  all  or  what  injuries  she
    received (paragraph 19) and that, "she only refers to being  raped  and
    sexually assaulted", but this is untrue because at paragraph 19 of  the
    witness statement there is an express reference to such  ill-treatment.



12. Fifth, the judge records that, "there is then a 'diagnosis ticket' that
    is dated October 2012 that  appears  at  page  26  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle", but the judge goes on to say that, "I place no weight on  this
    document" (paragraph 14).  The reason that the judge gives is  that  at
    paragraph 24 of her witness statement, a medical report was produced by
    her uncle which led to her release from prison on medical grounds,  but
    that is because this is not the diagnosis  ticket.   If  one  looks  at
    question 225 of the interview, there is an  express  reference  to  the
    Appellant having received treatment in detention on the  basis  of  the
    "diagnosis ticket" (see also question 250  of  the  interview).   There
    were, submitted Mr Paramjorthy, accordingly, a  series  of  fundamental
    errors of fact which rendered the entire determination to be unsafe.

13. In reply, Mr Mills, acting as Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    accepted that there were errors in the determination which he could not
    defend.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision.   Given  what  Mr
    Paramjorthy has set out, it is plain that these errors are such  as  to
    attract the strictures of LJ Brooke in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
    where his Lordship stated that what was required was  a  decision  that
    was "irrational" or "perverse" for a decision to be set  aside,  and  I
    conclude that on the basis of the submissions that I have  heard,  that
    is indeed the case here.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Asjad under  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  because  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd June 2017
