
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00314/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 November 2017 and 25 January    |On 9 February 2018                    |
|2018                                 |                                      |
|                                     |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     JI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Pennington-Benton, counsel (2 November 2017)
      Ms H Masood, counsel (25 January 2018)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer (2
November 2017)
      Mr E Tufan, Home Officer Presenting Officer (25 January 2018)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 11 February 2016 refusing his claim for asylum.



Background

2.    The appellant claims  to  be  a  Rohingya  Muslim  and  a  citizen  of
    Myanmar, born on [ ] 1984.  He said that he was  born  in  Myanmar  and
    lived there with his parents and siblings until he  was  8  years  old.
    The family then had to flee following an attack on his religion in 1992
    by Buddhists.  His family went to Bangladesh where they were placed  in
    a refugee camp not far from Chittagong.  In 1995 when  he  was  11,  he
    escaped from the camp with 2 elders and went to Sylhet where  he  lived
    until 2008  when  he  left  Bangladesh  with  the  help  of  an  agent,
    travelling to an unknown country before making a clandestine entry into
    the UK in August 2008.  He claimed asylum on 4 November 2013.

3.    The respondent accepted that if the appellant was  a  Rohingya  Muslim
    from Myanmar, he would be entitled to asylum.  However, for the reasons
    given in Annex A of the  decision  letter  of  11  February  2016,  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  was  from  Myanmar  or
    that he had ever lived in or escaped from a refugee  camp  there.   His
    application was accordingly refused.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.    At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  gave
    evidence adopting his witness statement.  He confirmed that he had left
    his home village when he was 8 years old and the family had fled  to  a
    refugee camp in Bangladesh.  He repeated that when he  was  11  he  was
    able to escape from the camp.  He said that when he was on the beach on
    Cox's Bazar they met a man, S, who had come on holiday with his  family
    from Sylhet.  The appellant, who did not speak Bengali, could not speak
    to S but he was able to communicate with him through one of the  people
    he had escaped with.  S offered to take the appellant to Sylhet to work
    in his shop.  In his witness statement the  appellant  described  being
    enslaved by the family and working as a shop assistant  for  S.   While
    working at the shop he was able to learn to speak Bengali.  In  support
    of his claim he produced a Rohingya Refugee Family  Book  ("the  Family
    Book") but, as the judge commented at [20-24],  the  oral  evidence  he
    gave about the order in which his siblings were born  contradicted  the
    order set out in the Family Book.

5.    The judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   He
    found that it was not credible that the appellant had  been  unable  to
    speak Bengali at the age of 11 but had learnt it when  working  for  S.
    The appellant had given evidence that S did not know that  he  was  not
    Bengali but the judge found that to be  implausible.   The  judge  also
    found that the inconsistency of the oral evidence of the order in which
    the appellant's siblings had been born with the order set  out  in  the
    Family Book adversely affected  his  credibility.   He  considered  the
    Linguistic  Origin  Identification  Report  ("the  Linguistic  Report")
    obtained by the respondent (see annex C1-18 of the respondent's bundle)
    and commented that, although the report of itself could not  show  that
    the appellant was not Rohingya, it  was  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account that the analysis in the report  showed  that  the  appellant's
    language was inconsistent with being from the Rohingya  community.   He
    also found that the appellant's failure to regularise his  stay  for  5
    years until  claiming  asylum  in  November  2013  detracted  from  his
    credibility as it was not what a genuine asylum seeker would do.

6.    The judge summarised his findings as follows at [30]:

         "Taking all the evidence into account and applying that evidence to
         the lower standard I find that the appellant has been  inconsistent
         in his evidence to such an extent that there  is  no  part  of  his
         claim that can be accepted.  I find that the  appellant  is  not  a
         Rohingya and was not  born  in  Burma/Myanmar.   I  find  that  the
         appellant is a Bangladesh national who  has  made  up  this  entire
         asylum claim in order to simply remain in the United Kingdom."

    For these reasons, the judge dismissed the appellant's asylum claim  at
    [32].

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

7.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued in  ground  1  that  the  judge
    erred by failing to consider all the  evidence  with  anxious  scrutiny
    and, in particular, the documents submitted in support of  the  appeal,
    and failed to consider or engage fully with the  explanations  provided
    by the appellant and the arguments deployed on his behalf.  In ground 2
    it is argued that the judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    conclusions in the Linguistic Report and that it was perverse  to  find
    that the report at least gave some weight to the  appellant  not  being
    Rohingya.  Ground 3 argues that the judge failed to  deal  with  or  to
    consider the human rights claim and, more specifically, to consider the
    medical evidence submitted in support of that part of the appeal.

8.    In his submissions, Mr  Pennington-Benton  adopted  his  grounds.   He
    argued that the judge had not  dealt  with  the  issue  of  credibility
    properly.  He had commented at [17] on the fact that the appellant  had
    described himself as "enslaved" when he had meant that he was afraid to
    go out because  he  thought  someone  would  take  him.   It  had  been
    irrational of the judge, so he argued, to find  at  [18]  that  it  was
    implausible that S would not have known  that  the  appellant  was  not
    Bengali when he had first met him.  The judge had also  been  wrong  to
    find that the  Family  Book  was  not  genuine  on  the  basis  of  the
    inconsistency about the order in which the siblings were named  and  to
    reject the appellant's explanation about the circumstances in  which  a
    new book had been issued.  He further  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    wrong  to  find  that  the  Linguistic  Report  was  even   potentially
    supportive of an argument  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  Rohingya.
    Finally, he submitted that the judge had erred in failing  to  deal  at
    all with the article 8 appeal based on the appellant's private life.

9.    Mr Walker submitted that the judge had said  that  he  had  considered
    all avenues of appeal and there was no reason to believe that that  was
    not the case.  The lack of any further reference to article  8  in  the
    submissions before the First-tier Tribunal tended to indicate that  the
    appeal had not been  pursued  in  any  substantial  way  on  article  8
    grounds.   The  judge  had  given  clear  reasons  for  rejecting   the
    appellant's credibility and the grounds simply amounted to  an  attempt
    to reargue issues of fact.



Assessment of whether the judge erred in law.

10.   I shall deal first with the asylum appeal. Ground 1 arguing  that  the
    judge failed to consider the evidence with anxious  scrutiny  or  apply
    anxious scrutiny raises a number of issues.   It  is  argued  that  the
    judge  failed  to  refer  to  a  number  of  documents  when  assessing
    credibility.  It is right that some of the documents relied on  by  the
    appellant were  not  referred  to  by  the  judge,  in  particular  the
    appellant's  application  to  the  Bangladesh  High  Commission  for  a
    Bangladeshi passport, photographs of him at Rohingya rallies in the  UK
    and Facebook  posts  evidencing  him  campaigning  for  the  plight  of
    Rohingya people.

11.   However, I am not satisfied that is  any  substance  in  this  ground.
    The judge was under no obligation to refer to each and every  document.
    He said at [11] that he had taken into account all  the  documents  and
    there is no reason to believe that he did not.  There was no  need  for
    the judge to spell out why the evidence about  the  application  for  a
    Bangladeshi passport took the matter no further. The response from  the
    High Commission simply indicates that the information supplied  by  the
    appellant did not support his application as his own documents revealed
    that he was a Myanmar national. It was for the judge to decide  whether
    the appellant had shown to the lower standard of proof that  he  was  a
    Myanmar national and that depended on the view the judge took about the
    evidence the appellant relied on. Similarly, the photographs at rallies
    and the appellant's Facebook posts depended on the credibility  of  his
    evidence about his nationality.  I am satisfied that  in  his  decision
    the judge focused on the core aspects of the evidence and there  is  no
    reason to believe that any relevant factor in the evidence relating  to
    the asylum claim, which turned on the appellant's nationality, was  not
    properly taken into account.

12.   Ground 1 then identifies at paragraph 10 four issues which it is  said
    the judge failed to engage with fully.  The first is that at  [17]  the
    judge commented on the appellant's evidence in  his  witness  statement
    that he was "enslaved" by the family whereas in his  oral  evidence  he
    said that he was not enslaved but was fed well and was not  overworked.
    The grounds say that the appellant  explained  that  by  "enslaved"  he
    meant that he was afraid to go out because  he  thought  someone  would
    take him. However, it was for the judge to decide what weight  to  give
    to and what inferences to draw from the evidence.  He  did  not  accept
    the appellant's evidence on this issue and was entitled not  to  do  so
    for the reasons he gave. This issue does not raise any point of law but
    is seeking to reopen and reargue an issue of fact.

13.   The second issue refers to [26] where the appellant had  explained  in
    his witness statement that the family had been given a new Family  Book
    because the original one was exhausted in  the  section  for  recording
    food rations.  It is argued that this  is  obvious  when  the  book  is
    looked at.  However, the judge explained at [20]-[26] why  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Family Book was reliable.  He was entitled to attach
    weight to the discrepancy in the evidence of the  order  in  which  the
    siblings were born and to the fact referred to at [26] dealing with the
    explanation given by the appellant that the book was issued because his
    younger sister was born and a new Family Book  was  then  issued.   The
    judge was also entitled to note and give weight to the fact that  there
    was evidence that  Family  Books  such  as  the  one  produced  by  the
    appellant were easily available and were sold on by  Rohingya  refugees
    [25].  Again, this ground deals with an issue  of  fact  and  does  not
    disclose an error of law.

14.   The third issue refers to the delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  argues
    that the appellant had explained in his interview that when he came  to
    the UK, he knew nothing about asylum and it was only  when  someone  he
    lived with advised him at the end of 2013 about claiming asylum that he
    took steps to do so.  There is no reason to believe that the judge  did
    not consider that evidence. But, having considered the  evidence  as  a
    whole, he was entitled to reject it and to  draw  an  adverse  evidence
    from such a  long  delay  in  the  appellant  claiming  asylum,  having
    properly reminded himself of the provisions of s.8 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

15.   The fourth issue refers to the Linguistic Report which also forms  the
    substance of ground 2. It is argued that the judge's assessment at [28]
    was simplistic and indicated a failure to apply anxious  scrutiny.   It
    is further argued that the judge's comment that the report lent  weight
    to the fact that  the  appellant  was  not  Rohingya  was  perverse  or
    irrational.  I am not satisfied that this ground discloses any error of
    law.  It was for the judge to decide what  inferences  could  be  drawn
    from the report.  It was the respondent's view that the report did  not
    assist in determining the appellant's nationality (see para 23 of Annex
    A of the decision letter).  The judge said that, although he found that
    the report of  itself  could  not  show  that  the  appellant  was  not
    Rohingya, it lent weight and  was  another  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account  in  that  it  showed  that  the   appellant's   language   was
    inconsistent with being from the Rohingya community.

16.   I am satisfied that this comment was open to the judge  in  the  light
    of the contents of the Linguistic Report and in particular at 3.4  that
    the linguistic analysis clearly suggested  that  the  results  obtained
    were most likely inconsistent with the hypothesis  that  the  appellant
    was from the Rohingya linguistic community and at 4.4 that the language
    analysis somewhat suggested that the results obtained were more  likely
    than not consistent with the hypothesis that the appellant was from the
    Bengali linguistic community.  The report was in  evidence  before  the
    judge and, although the respondent had taken the view that it  did  not
    assist, it was for the judge to decide whether it did  and  if  so,  to
    what extent.  The judge's cautiously expressed comment cannot  be  said
    to be perverse or irrational and does not disclose any error of law  on
    this issue.

17.   In summary, the grounds and submissions relating to the  asylum  claim
    do not satisfy me that the judge erred in law in his assessment of  the
    appellant's credibility and whether he was entitled  to  asylum.   When
    the evidence is considered as a whole, his finding  of  fact  that  the
    appellant had failed to show that he was a Rohingya  from  Myanmar  but
    was national of Bangladesh was properly open to him for the reasons  he
    gave.

18.   I now turn to ground 3 and the article 8 appeal.  The  judge  referred
    to the human rights appeal in [2] and to  considering  all  avenues  of
    appeal in [3]  but there is no mention of the human  rights  appeal  in
    the Summary of Decision at [32] which only refers to the asylum appeal.
     There is nothing to indicate that the article 8 appeal was not pursued
    at the hearing even though it clearly played a minor part  in  contrast
    to the asylum appeal whereas there is  evidence  that  the  appeal  was
    being pursued. I have seen counsel's skeleton argument before the First-
    tier Tribunal and this refers to article  8.   I  have  also  seen  the
    judge's record  of  proceedings  (and  given  the  representatives  the
    opportunity of looking at it).  The judge's  note  of  the  submissions
    made by the presenting officer  refer  briefly  to  article  8  but  no
    submission on  this  issue  is  recorded  in  the  submissions  by  the
    appellant's counsel.  The grounds of appeal refer to the fact that  the
    appellant had and  was  receiving  treatment  for  a  rare  immunologic
    disorder and had been treated for non-infectious tuberculosis and  this
    was supported by medical reports which were in evidence. However, these
    issues were not referred to or dealt with in the judge's decision  and,
    on the evidence relied on, it is not possible to say that the article 8
    appeal had no prospect of success.

19.   For these reasons, I am satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to make any findings on the human rights appeal  under  article
    8.  I am satisfied that this is a matter which can  properly  be  dealt
    with in the Upper Tribunal and does not require remittal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  There is no error of law in  the  asylum  decision  and
    that decision stands.

20.   The hearing was adjourned to enable  the  appellant  to  file  further
    evidence in respect of the article 8 appeal and directions  were  given
    accordingly.  At the resumed hearing on 25 January 2018, the  appellant
    relied on the two bundles of documents before the First-Tier  Tribunal,
    A1 indexed and paginated 1-102 and A2, the supplemental bundle, indexed
    and paginated 1-124.  A further witness  statement  was  filed  by  the
    appellant dated 1 November 2017, a medical report by Professor S Lingam
    dated 15 January 2018, a letter from  Dr  S  Gregoriado,  a  consultant
    immunologist at the Immunopathology  Department  of  Barts  Health  NHS
    Trust, dated 30 October 2017 and an extract from the Home  Office  Fact
    Finding Mission published September 2017.  No application has  made  to
    call further oral evidence.

Further Submissions.

21.   Ms Masood indicated that the appellant maintained his  assertion  that
    he was a Rohingya .  He had not seen his family members since  he  left
    the refugee camp and he had no family in the UK as he had indicated  in
    answer to Q9 of his asylum interview.   She  referred  to  the  medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal at A1, 23, a letter from  Dr  M
    Buckland, and at 25, a letter from a TB nurse at Barts Health NHS Trust
    and then to the further medical evidence and in particular  the  report
    prepared by Professor Lingam.  She referred to GS v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and in  particular  to  [86]
    where Laws LJ said:

         "If the article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the article 8 paradigm-
         the capacity to form and enjoy relationships or a state of  affairs
         having some affinity with the paradigm. ..."

23.   Ms Masood submitted that  the  relevant  article  8  factors  for  the
    appellant were the length of time he had been in the UK  and  the  fact
    that he had no family here and had lost  contact  with  his  family  in
    Bangladesh.  She referred to the  factors  set  out  in  s.117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She  accepted  that  the
    appellant was not fluent in English but did speak some.   His  presence
    in the UK had been unlawful since his entry but the weight to be  given
    to that fact depended on all the circumstances.  In summary, she argued
    that this was  a  case  where  article  8  was  engaged  and  that  his
    circumstances  were  sufficiently  exceptional  to  make  his   removal
    disproportionate.

24.   Mr Tufan referred to EA & Ors (Article 3 medical  cases  -  Paposhvili
    not applicable) [2017] UKUT 00445 which held that the test set  out  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium, 13 December 2016,  ECtHR  41738/10  was  not  one
    which it was open to the Tribunal to apply in the light of the  binding
    precedents of the House of Lords in N v Secretary of State [2005]  UKHL
    31 and the Court of Appeal in GS v Secretary of State. When  an  appeal
    could not succeed under article 3, it would be  very  rare  for  it  to
    succeed under article 8.    The  facts  in  the  present  case,  so  he
    submitted, did not disclose factors sufficient to bring it  within  the
    article 8 paradigm.

Assessment of the Article 8 Appeal.

25.   I accept that the medical evidence confirms  that  the  appellant  has
    had TB in multiple sites and that during his treatment in this  country
    he was investigated for immune defects when it was discovered  that  he
    had a serious immunological condition - type I cytokine defect.  In the
    light of this prognosis it was recommended that he  had  medication  to
    prevent TB coming back which involved being given interferon gamma,  an
    injection treatment three times week.  He has had  this  treatment  for
    two years from October 2015 to October 2017. Full details are  set  out
    in the recent report of Professor Lingam, making it clear that this  is
    a complex medical problem  which  can  only  be  treated  in  developed
    countries where there are both resources  and  the  necessary  clinical
    expertise.   His  condition  is  being  reinvestigated   and   if   the
    immunological defect is again  confirmed,  the  doctors  in  charge  of
    managing him will give him the same treatment which will be lifelong to
    prevent the reactivation of TB.

25.   In para 10  of  her  opinion,  Professor  Lingard  confirms  that  his
    medical  problems  are  rare  and  complex  and  once  the  defect   is
    reconfirmed, he  will  be  under  specialist  treatment.   It  will  be
    important for his sake and others that he should be  treated.   Without
    expert therapy, the appellant will  die  and,  before  then,  he  could
    spread the infection to others.  Professor Lingard would  say  that  in
    neither Myanmar nor Bangladesh can his  treatment  be  managed  to  any
    acceptable standard and that so far, the appellant has had a very  high
    standard of care.

26.   However, it is clear that the appellant's medical condition  does  not
    bring him with the ambit of article 3 as set out in N  v  Secretary  of
    State and GS (India) v Secretary of State and Ms Masood has not  sought
    to argue that article 3 is engaged.  It is her  submission  that  there
    are factors which engage article 8: in particular the  length  of  time
    the appellant has been in the UK and the fact that  he  has  no  family
    here.  I am not satisfied that these factors lead to  article  8  being
    engaged in the appellant's circumstances.  The  fact  that  he  has  no
    family here takes the matter no  further.   He  cannot  show  that  the
    decision lacks respect for his family life and the lack of family  life
    in itself has no bearing on any lack of respect for his  private  life.
    The length of his residence on his own account runs from 2008  when  he
    made a clandestine entry into the UK, only claiming asylum in 2013.  He
    cannot meet the private life requirements in the para 276  ADE  of  the
    Rules and in the light of the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he fails  to  show  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh if required to leave.

27.   I am not satisfied that the decision to remove him  shows  a  lack  of
    respect for  his  private  life  or  that  the  interference  would  be
    sufficiently substantial to engage article 8 (1).  Even if article 8 is
    engaged, I am not satisfied that removal would be disproportionate to a
    legitimate aim particularly in the light of the finding that his asylum
    application had no substance, he having failed  to  show  even  to  the
    lower standard of proof that he was a Rohingya from Myanmar.

28.   I have taken account of the provisions of s.117B of the  2002  Act  as
    amended.  The appellant has some knowledge of English  but  he  is  not
    fluent and his residence in the UK has been unlawful since his arrival.
    In these circumstances little weight should be given  to  such  private
    life as he has established by length  of  residence.   In  summary,  if
    article 8 is engaged, I find that his removal would be proportionate to
    a legitimate aim and would not lead to a breach of article 8.

Decision.

28.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in its  assessment  of  the
    asylum appeal but did err by failing to make a decision on the  article
    8 appeal.  I re-make the article 8 decision and dismiss that appeal.

29.   The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 6 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

