

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00733/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 3 April 2017                       |On 12 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     a h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. She applied for a visit visa  to
   enter the United Kingdom which was issued on 30 June 2010 and she entered
   on 28 July 2010. She then lived in Belgium for 4  years  and  her  asylum
   application there was refused. On 19 September 2014 she returned  to  the
   UK with an agent. She claimed asylum on 27 September 2014. The Respondent
   refused her application and made a decision to remove her as  an  illegal
   entrant under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The
   Appellant appealed that decision under section  82  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA 2002). Her appeal was dismissed  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Barrowclough in a  decision  promulgated  on  3
   June 2015 on asylum, humanitarian and human rights grounds.


2. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  but  granted
   on renewal to the Upper Tribunal. In granting permission  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Plimmer stated:


      "The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to consider  why  the
      appellant acted in the manner she did and whether she did so in  order
      to avoid persecution. It is also arguable that the FTT failed to  take
      into account the evidence concerning the distribution of leaflets."

3. The grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  noting  that
   the Appellant did not fear persecution from the state as persecution from
   Ahmadis was primarily from the  state;  failed  to  address  the  correct
   question in  addressing  the  Appellant's  evidence  namely  whether  the
   Appellant would not intend to practise her faith in fear of  prosecution;
   incorrectly  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  verifying   her
   religious  activity  in  Belgium  had  only  recently  been   introduced;
   misconstrued the guidance in MN and others (Ahmadis - country  conditions
   - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) by attempting to look for  an
   Appellant whose religious activities fell into the category of public and
   open manifestation and compounded the error by commenting that this would
   not include the record of distributing leaflets  and  misinterpreted  the
   term 'preaching'. It is further submitted that it was procedurally unfair
   for the Judge to attach more significance to the period 2003 to 2010 when
   considering the Appellant's religious activities in  Pakistan  when  this
   aspect of the Appellant's claim had never been challenged.


   The Hearing


4. Mr Khan referred me to paragraphs 4 and  5  of  the  Appellant's  witness
   statement at p2 of her bundle and said that her case was that  she  could
   not preach and proselytise in Pakistan due to  legislative  restrictions.
   The First-tier Tribunal examined the Appellant's religious activities and
   cited them at  paragraph  24  and  concluded  that  the  distribution  of
   leaflets and was "internal activity".  At  p7  of  the  same  bundle  the
   Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  described  her  activities  in  the  United
   Kingdom which included participation in preaching programmes which was an
   external manifestation of her religious activity. In the case of MN three
   out of the Appellants were distributing leaflets and  if  one  looked  at
   paragraph 145 of MN the Appellant in  that  case  had  been  distributing
   leaflets. The Appellant had moderated her behaviour. At paragraphs 153 to
   paragraph 157 in MN the Upper Tribunal accepted that this was  sufficient
   activity to trigger international protection. It was impossible to preach
   in Pakistan. At paragraph 107 it was said that  moderation  was  not  the
   answer. At paragraph 25 of the decision the  Judge  was  saying  that  he
   expected moderation of  the  Appellant's  behaviour.  The  Appellant  had
   established that she was in need of international protection. The  second
   issue was in relation to  the  activities  in  the  UK.  With  regard  to
   preaching,  proselytising  and  distribution  of  leaflets  the  relevant
   question was whether she could do this on return and she could  not.  Not
   only had she openly practised in the UK but also in  Belgium.  This  case
   was clear and simple and she was saying that she could not openly  preach
   and it was irrelevant whether she had threats or  not.  The  Judge  found
   that she had a restricted life but erred in finding that it was  arguable
   that she should continue in that restricted way. He  submitted  that  the
   appeal could be re-made allowing it.


5. Mr Hibbs relied on the Rule 24 response. He submitted  that  the  grounds
   amounted to a dispute  with  the  Judge's  findings.  The  Appellant  had
   highlighted certain factors without looking at the decision as  a  whole.
   It was easy to criticise but he heard oral evidence and made a  judgment.
   The criteria had been correctly identified.  In  MN  the  Upper  Tribunal
   confirmed that adverse findings may be relevant to  risk  on  return.  He
   correctly applied MN. He assessed then whether she met  the  criteria  in
   MN.    He  had  serious  reservations  about  the  reliability   of   the
   Appellant's evidence. In MN the Upper Tribunal concluded  that  that  you
   needed to look at what the  Appellant  did  before  arriving  in  UK  and
   whether or not preaching was important to manifestation of  their  faith.
   She was not preaching in Pakistan and therefore was not at risk  and  the
   question then became whether preaching was important as part of her faith
   and the Judge found that it was not important to her faith to preach. Far
   from being an error he had broken MN down, looked at  past,  present  and
   credibility and found that it was not an important part of her  faith  to
   be preaching. At the end of paragraph 24  he  found  there  was  not  the
   evidence that her activities were directed to  the  wider  community.  At
   paragraph 25 the Judge had identified the relevant evidence  and  he  was
   entitled to his view of the evidence having heard it.   Also  if  Belgium
   refused on third country grounds it had to be questioned why there was no
   copy  of  the  decision  from  the  authorities.  The  appeal  should  be
   dismissed.


6. Mr Khan submitted that the point regarding Belgium had  not  been  raised
   before and should not be raised at this stage. The Judge's reasoning  was
   subject to challenge and not the findings of fact and those parts of  the
   determinations were subject to challenge. The appeal should be allowed.


7. Mr Hibbs said that if there were in error of law in  should  be  remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal  because  MN  would  not  have  been  properly
   applied.


   Discussion


8. It was the Appellant's case that she and her family  had  been  targeted,
   threatened and attacked by the Mullahs of KN over the years and that  the
   police had failed to protect her. The first ground asserts that the First-
   tier Tribunal misdirected itself in stating  at  paragraph  20  that  the
   Appellant did not claim persecution from the state but rather individuals
   within it because, according to MN, persecution in relation to Ahmadis is
   mainly from the state.


9. In  paragraph  2  (i)  of  MN  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
   background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation that restricts the
   way in which they are able to openly  practise  their  faith.  The  Upper
   Tribunal conclude that there is clear evidence that this  legislation  is
   used by non-state actors to threaten and harass  Ahmadis.  The  ratio  of
   that paragraph is not, as the grounds assert, that  persecution  emanates
   from the state  and  it  was  not  the  Appellant's  case  that  she  was
   persecuted by the state. I find there is nothing in this ground.


10.  The  grounds  also  impugn  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning   in
   paragraph 23:


      "I attach more weight and significance to the period between 2003  and
      2010, and to what he Appellant says or doesn't say about her religious
      activities and their consequences whilst  she  and  her  husband  were
      still in Pakistan. It seems  to  me  that  there  is  no  good  reason
      (certainly none has been put forward) why  the  Appellant's  religious
      practices and observances should be any different now from  what  they
      were during that time; and if they led to persecution,  harassment  or
      other difficulties, then it is reasonable to conclude that they  would
      do so again, were she to return to Pakistan".


11. The First-tier Tribunal had found, at paragraph 24,  that  the  evidence
   in relation to the Appellant's  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
   credible and reliable  and  that  this  evidence  painted  a  picture  of
   somebody who was an active and regular participant. He concluded that:


      "Overall, the evidence seems to me to paint a picture of an active and
      regular participant, albeit not  someone  whose  religious  activities
      necessarily fall into the category of public and  open  manifestation.
      That category would not include, at least to my mind, the  Appellant's
      record of distributing leaflets, attending branch meetings and manning
      stalls or cooking and serving food; attending seminar, exhibitions and
      training classes; or regular attendance at the mosque.  All  of  those
      activities could I think be described as internal, in the  sense  that
      they are carried out within the expatriate Ahmadi community."


12. The First-tier Tribunal then found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  of
   being involved in preaching was less clear and could have  been  directed
   to those who were already  in  the  Ahmadi  faith.  With  regard  to  her
   activities in Pakistan, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that  what  was
   of significance was that the Appellant gave very few instances of  having
   herself been targeted, harassed or persecuted for  any  religious  reason
   during those years and that given what is known about the approach of  KN
   towards openly religious Ahmadis it was not unreasonable to have expected
   some threats or actions during those seven years if it was  important  to
   her to engage in such activity. The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the
   evidence linking the threats to her faith and  religious  activities  was
   unpersuasive. He had concerns about  her  credibility  and  concluded  at
   paragraph 28 that whilst she was genuinely of the Ahmadi faith,  and  the
   evidence showed that historically she  had  practised  her  religion  and
   continued to do so privately and  in  a  community  with  other  Ahmadis,
   without infringing domestic Pakistan law and that she had not proved that
   it was of particular importance to her to do so publicly and openly.


13. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal misinterprets  the  term
   preaching, and misconstrues the guidance in MN in  requiring  public  and
   open manifestation of religious activities.


14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  evidence  in  relation  to   the
   Appellant's activities in the  UK  to  be  credible  and  reliable.  This
   consisted of a letter, dated 6 May 2015, at page  7  of  the  Appellant's
   bundle confirming that she had, inter  alia,  participated  in  preaching
   programmes of the branch including distribution of  preaching  literature
   and attended Tabligh Training Classes. She is described in that letter as
   an active member of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community and to have  exhibited
   long-standing strong links, participation and devotion to her faith.  The
   letter states that this shows that she attaches a significant  importance
   to her identity as an Ahmadi Muslim and that preaching in public, seeking
   converts, producing, publishing and dissemination of religious  materials
   are essential and integral to the faith. According to the Schedule  1  to
   MN, which records the  expert  and  other  evidence,  Tabligh  and  da'wa
   (preaching and propagation of the faith) are for  Ahmadis  the  lifeblood
   and raison d'etre of the movement.


15. There was a further letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community at C1  of
   the Respondent's bundle  dated  26  October  2014  based  on  information
   obtained from Karachi that her contact and cooperation with the Ahmadiyya
   Muslim Community were good and that she was a Secretary Tahrik Jadid.


16. I conclude that there is a tension between the findings  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal that the evidence of the Appellant's activities in  the  UK
   is credible and reliable and that the activities in which  she  has  been
   engaged  are  internal  rather  than  demonstrating   public   and   open
   manifestation of her faith. The evidence, which was  accepted,  certainly
   shows an active involvement in the faith in the  United  Kingdom  and  an
   involvement the activities of preaching  and  distribution  of  preaching
   literature which prima face come within paragraph 2 (i) of MN rather than
   being,  as  the  Tribunal  concluded,  an  internal  activity.   In   the
   circumstances I conclude that the Tribunal should have considered whether
   the Appellant had moderated her behaviour in Pakistan to avoid a risk  of
   persecution and would have moderate her  behaviour  on  return  to  avoid
   persecution.   The absence of evidence past persecution is not an  answer
   to this question. In the circumstances, whilst  the  First-tier  tribunal
   adopted a structured approach which followed the guidance in  MN  I  find
   that there was a material error of law.


17.  In view of the fact that an inquiry is required into the intentions  of
   the Appellant and appropriate findings will need to be made and the  case
   law applied, I remit this matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
   findings preserved.

Conclusions:
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a  Judge
other than Judge Barrowclough.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order but in view of the  fact  that
there is a claim that the Appellant would be at risk of harm, in  accordance
with Presidential Guidance No 2 of 2011 I make order (pursuant  to  rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008). Unless and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated  10/05/2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

