
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00565/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            ABDUL MOHAMMED BADJIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay of Duncan Lewis, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judges Cheales and Woodward promulgated on 11  March  20015,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 18  November  1980  and  is  a  national  of
Gambia.

4.    On 24 December 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5.    The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. A panel  comprising
First-tier Tribunal Judges Cheales and  Woodward  ("the  Judges")  dismissed
the appeal against the Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged, and  on  7  July  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Lindsley gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The first-tier tribunal have not examined,  at  paragraph  31  of  the
    decision or elsewhere, the risks the appellant may  face  even  if  his
    political activities in writing articles is correctly assessed as self-
    serving, which is something they must do - see  Danian  v  SSHD  [1999]
    EWCA Civ 3000.......... It is arguable that insufficient reasons for  a
    lack of risk are given at paragraph 31 of the decision  as  it  is  not
    clear why lack  of  a  photograph  of  the  appellant  would  mean  the
    appellant could not be identified."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Sesay, for the appellant told me that the decision  is  tainted  by
material errors of law because  inadequate  reasoning  is  set  out  in  the
decision. He adopted the terms of  the  skeleton  argument  which  had  been
lodged, and drew my attention to [23]. He told me that  the  starting  point
of the Judges'  reasoning  commences  with  an  attack  on  the  appellant's
credibility. He told me that [24] to  [31]  lacks  any  reasoning  and  that
those paragraphs of  the  decision  are  devoid  of  findings  of  fact.  In
summary, he submitted that the decision  is  not  adequately  reasoned,  and
that the appellant is not given adequate notice of  the  reason  his  appeal
was  dismissed.  He  relied  on  MK  (duty   to   give   reasons)   Pakistan
2013[UKUT]000641 & ML (Nigeria)v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844. Mr Sesay  focused
on [27] and told me that, at best, only lip service has been  given  to  the
principles set out in Danian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 3000.

8.    Miss Savage, for the respondent, told me that the judges were  correct
to focus on the appellant's credibility  and  that  the  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law. She told me that between [8] and  [19]  the
Judges set out the appellant's account in detail and between [23]  and  [31]
they specify why the appellant's  claim  is  not  considered  credible.  She
relied on R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  arguing  that  there  is  no
duty on the Judges to carry out a clinical exegesis of  every  single  point
raised. She told me that the decision is a careful,  well-reasoned  decision
containing findings of fact which were properly open to the panel of  Judges
on the basis of the evidence led. She urged me to dismiss the appeal.



Analysis

9.    The Judges carefully set out the appellant's detailed account  between
[6] and [19]. Between [23] and [31] the  Judges  set  out  the  reasons  for
rejecting  the  appellant's  claim.  They  commenced  by  finding  that  the
appellant's apparent delay  in  claiming  asylum  damages  his  credibility.
Between [27] and [31]  the  Judges  deal  with  the  appellant's  sur  place
activities. It is crucial to the appellant's claim that he has  been  active
in opposition politics in the  UK,  &  that  he  published  an  open  letter
calling for the impeachment of the Gambian President.  At  [27]  the  Judges
take guidance from the  case  of  BA  (demonstrators  in  Britain  -risk  on
return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). At  [31]  the  Judges  find  that  the
articles written by the appellant are self-serving and  place  that  finding
in the context of the findings that the appellant is not a credible  witness
before reaching a conclusion that "....the  appellant  is  not  a  committed
opponent of the Gambian regime with a significant political profile"

10.   Although the judges to guidance  from  the  case  of  BA,  it  is  not
obvious from the decision that they consider the fundamental principles  set
out in the cases of Danian v SSHD (2002) IMM AR 96 &  YB  (Eritrea)  v  SSHD
2008 EWCA Civ 360. The absence of appropriate self-direction  and  the  lack
of reference to the guidance contained in the case law is an indicator  that
the judges have not correctly directed themselves in law

11.   In Danian v SSHD (2002) IMM AR 96 the Court of Appeal said that  there
is no express limitation in the Convention in relation to persons acting  in
bad faith, despite Counsel's attempt in Danian to have one implied.  In  the
court's opinion the answer to the 'riddle' lay in the judgement of Millet  J
in Mbanza (1996) Imm AR 136. Millet J said "The solution  does  not  lie  in
propounding some broad principle of abuse of the  system....but  in  bearing
in mind the cardinal principle that it is for the applicant to  satisfy  the
SSHD that he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
reason.  Whether he can do so  will  largely  turn  on  credibility  and  an
applicant who has put forward a fraudulent and baseless claim for asylum  is
unlikely to have much credibility left."

12.   In YB (Eritrea) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 360 the Court of  Appeal  sounded
a note of caution in relation to the argument  that,  if  an  appellant  was
found  to  have  been  opportunistic  in  his  sur  place  activities,   his
credibility was in consequence low.  "Credibility  about  what?",  said  the
Court of Appeal.  If the appellant had already been  believed  ex  hypothesi
about his sur place activity, his motives  might  be  disbelieved,  but  the
consequent risk on return from his activity sur  place  was  essentially  an
objective question.

13.   In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT
36 (IAC) the Tribunal held that,  given  the  large  numbers  of  those  who
demonstrate here and the publicity which demonstrators receive, for  example
on Facebook, combined with the  inability  of  the  Iranian   Government  to
monitor all returnees who have been involved in demonstrations here,  regard
must be had to the level of involvement of the individual here  as  well  as
any political activity which the  individual might  have  been  involved  in
Iran before seeking asylum in Britain.  It  is  important  to  consider  the
level of political involvement before  considering  the  likelihood  of  the
individual coming to the attention of the authorities and the priority  that
the Iranian regime would give to tracing him. It is only  after  considering
those factors that the issue of whether or not there is a real risk  of  his
facing persecution on return can be assessed.

14.   Although the Judges find that the appellant is not a credible  witness
between [23] and [26], apart from declaring that the  appellant's  delay  in
claiming asylum damages his credibility the Judges do not say why they  find
the appellant to be neither  credible  nor  reliable  witness.  They  simply
reject his account. At [30] &  [31]  the  judges  find  that  the  political
articles written by the appellant are self-serving, but they do  not  go  on
to assess any risk which may be created to the  appellant  as  a  result  of
political activities, regardless of the  motivation  for  those  activities.
Such an assessment is required by the case-law narrated  at  [11]  [12]  and
[13] above.

15.   The net effect is that when  the  appellant  reads  the  decision  the
appellant can see that his appeal has been dismissed, but  he  is  not  told
exactly why his appeal was dismissed. I therefore find that the decision  is
tainted by material errors of law because it is not clear  that  the  Judges
have properly directed themselves in  law,  nor  is  it  apparent  from  the
decision that the guidance contained within the case-law has been followed.

16.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Conclusion

17    I find that the Judges' decision is  tainted  by  material  errors  of
law. The Judges' decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters to be re-determined afresh.

18.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19.   In this case I find that the case should be remitted  because  of  the
extent to which judicial fact finding is necessary for the decision  in  the
appeal to be re-made. In this case none of  the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand; the matter requires a complete re-hearing.

20.   I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
heard before any First-tier judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
Cheales and Woodward.


Signed      Date 16 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

