

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00342/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th April 2014                            |On 15th April 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     M B
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms G Loughran, counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a  decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Drabu who  had  dismissed  his  appeal  against  a
      decision to remove him from the UK pursuant  to  s10  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999.


   2. It was agreed before me that there was an error of law in the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal such that the decision should be set  aside
      to be remade. The error of law, in essence, was a failure by the First-
      tier Tribunal judge to adequately consider the  issue  of  trafficking
      and Article 8.

   3. The SSHD through the presenting officer at the First-tier Tribunal  in
      front of Judge Drabu had conceded that the appellant's credibility was
      not in issue although the presenting officer relied upon  the  reasons
      for refusal of asylum letter dated 7th January 2013. Mr Nath confirmed
      that concession before me today. The effect of this is that the issues
      at large  are  sufficiency  of  protection,  internal  relocation  and
      Article 8.

     4. These matters are of substance and there have been no findings with
        regard to this. The scheme of the Tribunals Court  and  Enforcement
        Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary  fact  finding  to
        the Upper Tribunal.


     5. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside s.12(2)  of
        the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First tier  with
        directions or remake it for myself. In accordance with the Practice
        Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  and  in  particular
        the nature of the judicial fact finding which is necessary in order
        for the decision in the appeal to be re-made and having  regard  to
        the overriding objective in rule 2 of the Practice Statement, it is
        appropriate in this appeal for the case to be remitted to the First-
        tier Tribunal.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





                                    Date 14th April 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
