

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/00667/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |           Decision & Reasons      |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 9 June 2017                     |           On 20 June 2017         |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           THILEPAN THILLAINATHAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Ms S Jegarajah (counsel) instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co, solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, promulgated  on  3  February
   2017. which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 17/04/1985 and is a national of Sri  Lanka.  On
   24/03/2016 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
   claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Fox ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 9 March  2017  Judge  Page
   gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The respondent has identified an arguable error of law in  complaining
      that there has been a procedural error such as to amount to a material
      error of law. The respondent argues that the correct  course  for  the
      Judge to have taken in circumstances where the Judge appears  to  take
      the view that the correct course would be for the respondent to make a
      decision on  the  evidence,  following  a  consent  order  settled  in
      judicial review proceedings, in favour of  the  appellant  would  have
      been to remit this matter to  the  respondent  to  conduct  a  further
      investigation into the appellant's claim for asylum and  consider  the
      position afresh. The Judge at paragraph 17 has said that the result of
      the appeal being allowed  in  the  appellant's  favour  was  that  the
      respondent would do this. It is unsatisfactory for  the  reasons  that
      the respondent has given so permission to appeal is granted.

The Hearing

5. Ms Jegarajah, counsel for the appellant, told me at the outset  that  the
   appeal is no longer resisted.

6. (a) Mr Whitwell, for the respondent, moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
   referred me to [17], [23] and [26] of the decision. In those  paragraphs,
   the Judge says that he allows the appeal to the limited extent  that  the
   case is remitted to the respondent to consider  of  new  and  to  make  a
   lawful decision. Having said that, the  Judge  summarises  the  decisions
   incorrectly by saying that the appeal is allowed on  asylum  grounds,  on
   humanitarian protection grounds and on article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds.


   (b) Mr Whitwell relied on Greenwood (No.2) (para 398  considered)  [2015]
   UKUT 00629 (IAC). He took me to [9] and [15] of the  decision  where,  he
   told me, the Judge adequately sets out  the  flaws  in  the  respondent's
   decision. He asked me to substitute my own decision remitting  this  case
   to the respondent so that the respondent can make a lawful decision.

7. Ms Jegarajah told me that there had  been  an  earlier  determination  in
   this case in 2014. Following  that  determination,  there  were  judicial
   review proceedings which were settled by a consent order sealed on 22/12/
   2015. Explicit provisions  were  made  in  the  consent  order  regarding
   confidentiality. One condition agreed to in the consent  order  was  that
   the respondent should not have regard to the 2014 decision.  The  reasons
   for refusal letter dated 24 March 2016 draws on what was contained in the
   decision of 2014. Ms Jegarajah did not resist the appeal,  but  expressed
   concerns that the decisionmaker to whom this case will soon  go  must  be
   made aware that consideration of the case is to be made of  new,  and  is
   not to be made by reference to the Home Office refusal letter of  13  May
   2014 or the First-tier Tribunal decision in 2014.

Analysis

8. At [9] of the decision the Judge records the consent order sealed  on  22
   December 2015. At [15] of the decision the Judge records  the  presenting
   officer's position that the reasons for refusal  letter  dated  24  March
   2016 is flawed. At [17] & [23] the Judge quite  clearly  states  that  he
   intends to allow the appeal to the limited extent that the case is to  be
   remitted to the respondent to consider of new.

9. There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  decision  until  [24]  of  the
   decision. Between [24] and [29] of the decision  the  Judge  strays  away
   from the clear path that he takes up to [23] of the decision and  appears
   to consider the appellant's article 2, 3 and 8 ECHR  grounds  of  appeal.
   [28] is clearly a clerical error, rather than a sentence or paragraph


10. It is quite  clear  that  the  Judge's  concentration  wavered  when  he
   summarised his decisions. The summary of decisions appear  to  allow  the
   appeal under both the 1950 and 1951 convention, and then  find  that  the
   appellant is entitled to  humanitarian  protection.  Those  are  not  the
   decisions that the Judge reaches. The actual  decision  is  contained  in
   [17], where the Judge says


      To that end I allowed the appeal. In all eventualities, I am satisfied
      that the respondent  will  conduct  a  fresh  investigation  into  the
      appellant's claim for asylum  and  consider  his  position  afresh.  A
      decision will subsequently be issued. Subject to  the  terms  of  that
      decision, fresh Appeal rights may be generated.

11. [24] to the end of the decision contradicts  the  findings  clearly  set
   out at [17] and repeated at [23]. The final part of the Judge's  decision
   is clearly a material error of law. I must  therefore  set  the  decision
   aside

12. Because there is nothing wrong with  the  first  23  paragraphs  of  the
   decision, and on the joint motion of the parties to  this  appeal,  I  am
   able to substitute my own decision by  simply  recording  accurately  the
   decision that the First-tier Tribunal Judge reached.


13.  I therefore set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside  because
   it contains a material error of law


14. I substitute my own decision.


15. The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that this case  is  remitted
   to the respondent to consider of new, in  line  with  the  consent  order
   sealed on 22 December 2015 and without reference to either  the  decision
   made on 30 May 2014 by the respondent or the First-tier Tribunal decision
   of 2014.


16. The case is remitted to the respondent to make a lawful decision.



Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 16 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


