
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
AA/00259/2016

                                                     PA/01484/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 October 2017                          |On 17 October 2017              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                1) AH (INDIA)
                              2) MN (PAKISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms V Easty, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson, sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  22
    June 2017) dismissing their appeals against the separate  decisions  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  them  as  refugees  on
    account  of  their  claimed  homosexual  orientation.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction on the appellants' favour,  and  I
    consider it is appropriate that this anonymity direction be  maintained
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



Relevant Background

 2. Both appellants arrived in the United Kingdom as students in 2010.   On
    14 August 2014, the first appellant (A1) was served with  a  notice  of
    liability to removal, the respondent having concluded that he had  used
    false educational documentation in order  to  obtain  leave  to  remain
    through deception.  On 2 October 2015 he claimed asylum, based upon his
    claimed homosexual relationship with the second appellant (A2).

 3. A2 made an application for further leave to remain as a  student  on  6
    February 2012, which was refused.  On 25 September 2012 he applied  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of "S", a woman whom he  had  married  in
    the UK on 8 August 2012.  Leave in that capacity was granted to him  in
    2013, valid until 27 September 2015.  However, the  marriage  ended  in
    divorce on 7 March 2014. A2 claimed asylum on 22 September 2015,  based
    upon his claimed homosexuality and his claimed homosexual  relationship
    with A1.

 4. Refusal decisions were issued to  A1  and  A2  in  February  2016.   In
    summary, the respondent did not accept that either appellant  was  gay;
    and she rejected, as lacking credibility, their respective accounts  of
    events, both in the UK and in their  home  countries,  due  to  claimed
    inconsistencies in their evidence and to other issues of concern.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellants' appeals came before Judge Hodgkinson by way of remittal
    from the Upper  Tribunal,  the  previous  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing their appeals having been set aside on error of law
    grounds.  Mr Sellwood of Counsel was instructed to appear on behalf  of
    the appellants, and the respondent was represented by Mr Bassi, a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

 6. The Judge received oral evidence  from  the  appellants  and  from  two
    supporting witnesses: Mr B, who gave his evidence in Urdu (as  did  the
    appellants) and Mr W, who gave his evidence in English.

 7. In his subsequent decision, Judge Hodgkinson set out the claims of each
    of the appellants at some length.  They had met each other in the UK in
    2012 and they initially became friends.  Their  relationship  developed
    to the point where they became  partners,  although  they  never  lived
    together due to their circumstances.  They regularly met  up  and  went
    out together: paragraph [29].  In 2014,  A1  met  Mr  B,  when  playing
    cricket, and they became  good  friends.   In  about  September/October
    2014, A1 confided to Mr B about his sexuality.  He had already seen the
    appellants eating together at his  restaurant.   In  2015,  as  A1  was
    having difficulties with his accommodation, Mr B allowed A1 to stay  in
    his house with his family, where  he  continued  to  reside:  paragraph
    [30].

 8. A2 said that on 8 December 2011 he met A1 for  the  first  time,  at  a
    house-party of a mutual friend, Mr  W.   Their  relationship  developed
    from there.  At first, their relationship  was  not  sexual,  but  they
    became more than just friends on 14 April 2012: paragraph [42].

 9. In October 2013, A2 returned to Pakistan to hold discussions  with  his
    family, and the family of his wife, about their marriage.   In December
    2013, A2 returned to the UK.  His relationship with his  wife  did  not
    improve, and he did not try to improve it.  The divorce  was  finalised
    on 7 March 2014.  After his marriage had broken down, he got in contact
    with A1 again through Mr W about 1-2 months later.   This  was  with  a
    view to re-kindling his relationship with A1.  Mr W arranged a  meeting
    between the two appellants and they recommenced  a  friendship.   Their
    relationship became sexual at the end of 2014  and  their  relationship
    became official on 14 February 2015: paragraphs [46]-[48].

10. The Judge set out his findings on the appellant's protection claims  at
    paragraphs [59]-[117] of his subsequent  decision  (pages  12-25).   He
    addressed the evidence of Mr W and Mr B at paragraphs [88]-[99]  (pages
    19-21).

11. He found Mr W's evidence was broadly consistent  with,  and  supportive
    of, the nature of the claimed relationship between the appellants,  and
    he said that  he  had  given  Mr  W's  evidence  "appropriate  weight":
    paragraph [94]. The Judge made adverse credibility findings on  Mr  B's
    evidence at paragraphs [98] and [99].

12. At paragraph [115], the Judge said that, having considered the totality
    of the available evidence, he found that both appellants had failed  to
    establish that the material facts of  their  claims  were  credible  or
    truthful.  Both appellants had  failed  to  establish  that  they  were
    involved in a gay relationship with each other, or that they  were  gay
    men.

The Reasons for the Grant of Admission to Appeal

13. On 24 July 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

    3) The majority of the issues raised in the first ground were simply  a
       point-by-point  traverse  of  the  adequate  reasons  given  by  the
       Tribunal for finding that A1 and  A2  were  not  credible  witnesses
       and/or a disagreement with  the  Tribunal's  record  of  their  oral
       testimony unsupported by contradicting  evidence  from  Counsel  who
       attended the hearing.  It is nevertheless arguable that having found
       the testimony of Mr W to be both credible  and  supportive  "of  the
       nature  of  the  claimed  relationship  with  the  appellants",  the
       Tribunal made an  error  of  law  by  failing  to  explain  why  his
       testimony  was  not  decisive  of  this  issue  in  respect  of  the
       credibility of the appellants themselves.  It is  also  argued  that
       the Tribunal erred by drawing adverse conclusions in the absence  of
       photographs  depicting  A1  and  A2  acting   intimately   together.
       Permission to appeal on these two grounds (which  apply  equally  to
       both appellants) is accordingly granted.

    4) It is not, however, arguable that the Tribunal erred by  failing  to
       have regard to the possible reasons for A1's failure to mention core
       aspects of his claim during his screening interview, given  that  he
       had not himself raised those reasons for consideration (paragraph 14
       of the grounds).  It is also not arguable that the matter raised  at
       paragraph 17 of the grounds adds anything to the grounds  considered
       at paragraph (3) above.  Permission to appeal on  these  grounds  is
       accordingly refused.

The Rule 24 Response

14. On 22 August 2017 Mr Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  Judge Kelly clearly rejected the
    other grounds of appeal, and so what could be argued at  the  up-coming
    hearing was limited  to  what  Judge  Kelly  had  identified  as  being
    arguable grounds.  In respect of the evidence of Mr W, it was incumbent
    on  the  Judge  not  to  treat  any  single  piece   of   evidence   as
    determinative.  While he found the  evidence  given  by  Mr  W  broadly
    consistent with that of the appellants, much of his evidence  was  told
    to him; and also Mr W had never seen the  appellants  behaving  overtly
    sexually towards  one  another.   The  Judge  had  fairly  treated  the
    evidence of Mr W in the round, and his finding that the appellants were
    not in a gay relationship, and that neither of them were gay  men,  had
    been fully reasoned, and  it  was  a  conclusion  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to reach.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me to determine whether an  error  law  was  made
    out, Ms Easty submitted that it was not open to the Judge to sit on the
    fence.  The Judge had not given reasons for finding that  the  evidence
    of Mr W - and to a lesser extent, the  evidence  of  Mr  B  -  was  not
    sufficient to establish  that  the  appellants  were  a  genuinely  gay
    couple.   The witness statement of Mr W was not in any of  the  bundles
    of documents in my file, and so I agreed with Ms Easty's proposal  that
    she send a copy of the witness statement to me and Mr Tufan  after  the
    hearing, which she did. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Tufan  adhered
    to the Rule 24 response settled by his colleague.

Discussion

16. In broad terms, the Judge did what he was supposed to do - which was to
    carefully weigh each significant piece of evidence, expressing  a  view
    on its probative value, before coming to a conclusion on  the  ultimate
    issue of whether the appellants had discharged the burden  of  proving,
    to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  each  of  them  was  genuinely
    homosexual  and  that  they  were  together  in  a  genuine  homosexual
    relationship.

17. It is possible to envisage circumstances where the  acceptance  of  the
    credibility of the evidence  of  a  third  party  witness  should  lead
    inexorably to a finding in favour of the claimant, notwithstanding  the
    claimant's own general lack of credibility.  For example, if Mr  W  had
    given evidence that he himself had had a homosexual  relationship  with
    A1, and the Judge accepted that his account was credible, it would have
    been perverse for the  Judge  not  to  find  that  A1  was  homosexual,
    although not necessarily perverse not  to  accept  that  A1  was  in  a
    homosexual relationship with A2.

18. However, Mr W's evidence was not  of  such  a  stark  nature.   In  his
    witness statement, he stated that he noticed that A1 and A2 "started to
    get on really well" at his house-party on 8  December  2011.   He  said
    that he was not aware of their particular relationship "which I came to
    know at  a  later  date".   He  said  that  he  came  to  know  of  the
    relationship when, at some point in 2012 after A2 had got  married,  A2
    informed him of the relationship.  A2  did  not  "openly  declare"  his
    relationship.  Nor did A1.  A2 told him that he had a relationship with
    A1, and he had not wanted to get married but had been forced to  do  so
    by the family.

19. Mr W said that, in around December 2012 or early  2013,  A2  approached
    him with the view of contacting A1 for him to meet him.  A1 refused  to
    meet A2, without giving any reason.   He  came  to  know  that  A2  had
    divorced in 2014, and when they met, A2 told him about his relationship
    with A1, and asked him to inform A1 that he was now divorced and wished
    to meet up with him again.  As far as he was aware, they were now in  a
    relationship.

20. The Judge rehearsed the salient contents of Mr W's witness statement in
    paragraphs [89]-[92].  He observed, at paragraph [93],  that  his  oral
    evidence was  broadly  consistent  with  the  content  of  his  witness
    statement and with the evidence of the appellants.

21. At paragraph [94], he said that the only specific concern raised by  Mr
    Bassi regarding Mr W's evidence was that in  cross-examination  he  had
    indicated that he had not socialised with the  appellants  since  April
    2016.  Mr Bassi suggested that consequently Mr W could not know if  the
    appellants were involved in a genuine,  gay  relationship.   The  Judge
    found this contention to have some arguable merit:

         ...bearing in mind that, by his own admission,  Mr  W  had  had  no
         contact with the appellants since April 2016,  [and]  none  of  his
         evidence indicated that he had ever seen the appellants engaged  in
         any overtly homosexual behaviour with each other.

22. The Judge continued:

         That said, I accept that Mr W's evidence is broadly  supportive  of
         the nature of the claimed relationship between the appellants and I
         have taken that fact into account  alongside  the  balance  of  the
         evidence (my emphasis).

23. It is pleaded in the grounds of appeal that Mr W's evidence was  highly
    probative, and since the Judge found that it  was  credible,  the  only
    possible conclusion was that his evidence should have been accepted  as
    being decisive.

24. However, while  Mr  W's  evidence  was  corroborative  of  the  claimed
    relationship, as the Judge acknowledged, it was nonetheless open to the
    Judge not to attach decisive weight to it, having regard to its nuanced
    nature  and  also  having  regard  to  all  the  other  evidence.    In
    particular, it was open to the Judge to attach weight to the fact  that
    Mr W had not seen them engaged in  overtly  homosexual  behaviour  with
    each other.

25. Ms Easty submitted that the Judge needed to give reasons as to  why  Mr
    W's evidence was not decisive.  I consider that the reasons why not are
    tolerably clear from the Judge's analysis and conclusions in paragraphs
    [88]-[94].  In short, Mr W  was  informed  by  A2  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship with A1, and their observed  behaviour  and/or  what  they
    said - both before and after this disclosure - was (in his  perception)
    consistent with the disclosure of being true.  However, neither A1  nor
    A2 openly declared their relationship, and Mr W's understanding of  the
    nature of their relationship was not necessarily correct.  As the Judge
    indicated, Mr W's corroborative evidence  had  to  be  weighed  in  the
    balance with the remainder of the evidence.

26. Mr B's  evidence  is  a  different  category,  as  he  said  in  cross-
    examination that he had seen the appellants holding hands  and  kissing
    outside his restaurant.  Thus, his evidence stands as a stark  contrast
    to that of Mr  W,  who  never  claimed  to  have  witnessed  any  overt
    homosexual behaviour between the appellants. If the Judge had found  Mr
    B credible on this aspect of  his  evidence,  it  could  reasonably  be
    contended that his ultimate  conclusion  was  perverse.   However,  the
    Judge did not find Mr B credible on this aspect of  his  evidence.   He
    found it to be an embellishment which was "potentially damaging to  his
    credibility".

27. At paragraph [99], the Judge identified another specific aspect  of  Mr
    B's evidence which he found to be damaging to his credibility and  that
    of A1.

28. Ms Easty submits that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  make  a  clear
    finding as to whether in consequence he rejected the evidence of Mr  B.
    I do not consider that it was necessary  that  he  should  do  so  when
    engaging with his evidence, and arguably it would have been  wrong  for
    him to do so until he had considered the remainder of the evidence. The
    Judge indicated that Mr B's reliability  as  a  witness  of  truth  was
    compromised by the adverse credibility findings in paragraphs [98]  and
    [99], and it is apparent that the  Judge  ultimately  rejected  Mr  B's
    corroborative evidence as he found  that  the  appellants  were  not  a
    genuine gay couple.

29. It is pleaded that the Judge misdirected himself in law in  drawing  an
    adverse inference from the absence of sexually explicit photographs.  I
    consider that this is an unfair and inaccurate characterisation of  the
    Judge's finding on the photographs at paragraph [72].  It  is  not  the
    case that the Judge drew an  adverse  inference  from  the  absence  of
    sexually explicit photographs.  He merely  observed  that  the  undated
    photographs did not, of themselves,  establish  that  the  relationship
    between the appellants was of the nature claimed by them.  They did not
    show them together involved in "any kind of intimate act".  This  could
    include kissing or cuddling.  It is thus unreasonable  to  assume  that
    the Judge was calling for photographic evidence  of  sexually  explicit
    acts. Also, the Judge did not draw an adverse inference. He merely held
    that the photographs did not materially advance the  appellants'  case.
    Due to their contents and the appellants' admission that they had  been
    taken  for  the  purposes  of  the   appeal,   the   Judge   said:   "I
    consequentially have given them no material weight".

30. It was open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the  photographs  did  not
    materially advance the appellants' core claim.  In so finding,  he  was
    not by implication drawing an adverse inference from the non-production
    of sexually explicit photographs.

31. Ms Easty also made passing reference to paragraphs 11  and  12  of  the
    grounds of appeal, in respect of which permission  to  appeal  was  not
    specifically granted  by  Judge  Kelly.   These  paragraphs  relate  to
    passages in paragraphs 104 and 106 of the decision in which  the  Judge
    is alleged to have made a mistake of fact as to the evidence  given  by
    A1 and A2.

32. On  2  October  2017,  the  appellants'  solicitors  served  a  witness
    statement  from  Counsel,  exhibiting  his   records   "during   cross-
    examination", and sought permission for the admission of this  evidence
    under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

33. Service of this evidence addresses the evidential deficiency identified
    by Judge Kelly when refusing permission to appeal on  the  grounds  set
    out in paragraphs 11 and 12. However, a review of the decision  reveals
    a more  significant  procedural  hurdle,  which  is  that  the  alleged
    mistakes of fact as to the oral evidence were raised as inconsistencies
    by Mr Bassi in his closing submissions, and thus Mr  Sellwood  had  the
    opportunity  to   contest   the   factual   basis   of   the   asserted
    inconsistencies in his reply. However, he did not  do  so.  He  engaged
    with Mr Bassi's submissions on the premise that the oral evidence of A1
    and A2 had not been mispresented by Mr Bassi.

34. At paragraph [104], the Judge referred to Mr  Bassi's  submission  that
    there was an inconsistency between A1 and A2 on the  topic  of  whether
    they  had  made  any  enquiries  about  the  possibility  of  obtaining
    accommodation to enable them to live together.  A1 indicated that  they
    had made such enquiries.  A2 indicated that no such enquiries had  been
    made by them.  The Judge continued: "Mr Sellwood sought to explain this
    discrepancy, by indicating that the first  appellant  might  have  made
    such enquiries, whilst not informing the second appellant that  he  had
    done so.  I do not find such explanation adequately explains  the  fact
    that the second  appellant  was  unaware  that  the  first  appellant's
    evidence was that 'they' had made enquiries about accommodation."

35. At paragraph 11 of the grounds, Mr Sellwood pleads that  the  purported
    inconsistency in the evidence between A1 and A2 does not exist, as  his
    contemporaneous note from the hearing records A1 being asked whether he
    or A2 had made enquiries. However, it was not apparently  submitted  by
    Mr Sellwood at the time that Mr Bassi had misrepresented  the  evidence
    which had been given.  It is also not  suggested  that  the  Judge  has
    misrepresented Mr Sellwood's response  to  the  apparent  inconsistency
    identified by Mr Bassi.  Further, having considered  the  extract  from
    Counsel's note which is reproduced at paragraph 11, I consider that  it
    was open to the Judge to construe the series of answers given by A1  as
    importing that "they"  (both  A1  and  A2)  had  made  enquiries  about
    accommodation.

36. At paragraph [106], the Judge addressed Mr Bassi's submission  that  A1
    and A2 had been inconsistent about what they intended to  do  if  their
    appeals were unsuccessful.  A1 had said that  they  had  not  discussed
    this, whereas A2 said that he and A1 had discussed it.  The Judge  said
    that Mr  Sellwood  had  sought  to  address  this  discrepancy  in  his
    submissions, but he was satisfied that there was a discrepancy  between
    the two of them in this regard.

37. Paragraph 12 of the grounds does not identify any mistake of fact.  The
    line taken by Mr Sellwood is that the oral  evidence  given  by  A2  is
    consistent with what A1 said in his witness statement at paragraph  21.
    But even if this right, this does not change the fact that  A1  and  A2
    gave contradictory oral evidence  on  the  topic.   Therefore,  it  was
    clearly open to the Judge to draw an adverse credibility inference from
    this discrepancy.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 8 October 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







