
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA001642016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 June 2017                               |On 21 June 2017               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     Zn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, of Counsel instructed by Fisher
Jones Greenwood
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission against a decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Rayner who in a determination promulgated on 24
    January 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  who  claimed  to  have  been
    born in March 2000 but had not appealed an age assessment  placing  his
    date of birth in 1998.  He claimed to come from the Helmand Bazaar area
    of Helmand Province and to  be  illiterate.   He  had  lived  with  his
    parents, two brothers and a  younger  sister.   He  asserted  that  the
    Taliban had visited his family home and had taken his brother and  then
    returned the body three days later and then, twelve months later,  they
    had  taken the appellant's father returning his body after four or five
    days.  Six months thereafter the appellant his mother and his remaining
    siblings had left Helmand travelling to either Kabul or Charaka  Bazaar
    in Parwan Province before the appellant travelled  to  Britain.   While
    travelling he had been fingerprinted in Hungary.

3.   The Secretary of State did not consider that the  claim  was  credible.
    The judge heard evidence from the appellant and in his determination he
    set out a detailed  note  of  the  submissions  made  before  correctly
    setting out the burden  and  standard  of  proof  in  both  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claims as well as in issues under the ECHR.

4.   In paragraphs 41 onwards the judge set out his  decision  and  reasons.
    He noted that the appellant had given a date of birth of 1 January 1998
    when stopped in Hungary, that that was the  age  given  after  the  age
    assessment and he stated that that was  the  date  he  would  use  when
    assessing the appellant's claim.   He  stated  that  he  did  not  find
    credible the appellant's assertion that his mother had given him a date
    of birth from the Gregorian calendar before he left Afghanistan.

5.   He noted that it was not specifically accepted or  contested  that  the
    appellant came from Helmand Province despite the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of Afghanistan - in particular the fact that he did not  know
    the currency despite having worked in a  shop  there  -  and  that  the
    appellant had failed  to show knowledge of matters he might  reasonably
    be expected to know, such as the names of Afghan rivers, the  names  of
    other places in Helmand Province, and the distance or time  taken  from
    travelling from Helmand to Kabul.

6.   He referred to various inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  story  of
    travelling from Helmand Bazaar to Charaka District and  concluded  that
    the appellant's lack of knowledge of Afghanistan  and  of  the  journey
    damaged the appellant's credibility.

7.   He went on to state that he did not accept the appellant's  claim  that
    his father and brother had been murdered by the Taliban.   He  referred
    to the expert report which stated that  the  Taliban  had  no  need  to
    practice forced recruitment, although he accepted that the  expert,  Dr
    Giustozzi, had stated  that  local  leaders  might  mobilise  a  tribal
    militia - known as lashkars - to fight alongside the Taliban and  might
    punish those for not complying with the dictates of the  tribal  elders
    by banishing them from the community, but  that  the  killing  of  non-
    complying individuals would be an extreme measure.  He pointed out that
    Dr Giustozzi's report did not carry any footnotes or references to show
    provenance.   Having  considered  the   background   documentation   he
    concluded that there was no need for  the  Taliban  to  recruit  either
    directly or by "lashkar" mobilisation in  Helmand,  but  that  even  if
    "lashkar" mobilisations  was  practised  there,  the  killing  of  non-
    complying individuals would only be an extreme measure, which  he  took
    to mean would only rarely happen.

8.   He noted that the appellant had never been directly approached  by  the
    Taliban to join them and stated that:-

         "In light of the overall inconsistency of the appellant's  account,
         and that this element of it is not consistent with  what  both  the
         respondent and Dr Giustozzi acknowledge - that  forced  recruitment
         directly  by  the  Taliban  does  not  happen  in  Helmand  -   the
         appellant's account that two members of his family have been killed
         in lashkar mobilisation, or directly by the Taliban,  is  not  made
         out to any degree of likelihood."

9.   He went on to state that what is written in the report did not  add  to
    the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim   which   was   otherwise
    unsupported by objective evidence.

10.  In paragraph 55 he stated:-

     "In relation to the alleged  murder  of  the  appellant's  brother  and
         father, the appellant's account is that his brother was taken first
         and murdered.  At that stage no effort was made  to  relocate.   As
         this event cannot be explained by direct  Taliban  recruitment,  Dr
         Giustozzi  suggests  it  as  possibly   being   part   of   lashkar
         mobilisation.  If that were the case, it is not credible  that  the
         appellant and his family would remain in  Helmand  Province.   They
         would know the purpose of the killing, and that the  appellant  was
         at risk of recruitment.  They had family in Kabul.   They  did  not
         support the Taliban.  It is not plausible that they would remain in
         Helmand Bazaar when at such  risk.   Again,  when  the  appellant's
         father was allegedly taken a (sic) murdered a year later,  if  this
         were part of lashkar mobilisation, it is entirely inconsistent that
         the appellant and his family would wait a further six months before
         relocating, when they had the capacity to do so.   The  appellant's
         account of the Taliban taking and murdering his brother and  father
         is not made out to any degree of likelihood."

11.  In paragraphs 56 onwards the judge dealt with the issue of  recruitment
    to the Taliban noting that in his witness statement the  appellant  had
    not made any reference to this, although when interviewed he  had  said
    that the Taliban  wished  to  recruit  him.   Having  stated  that  the
    appellant's differing accounts of his travels on leaving Helmand Bazaar
    damaged his credibility, the judge went on to say  that  the  appellant
    had claimed that he had left Kabul immediately on his uncle finding out
    that the Taliban were  aware  of  his  presence,  but  in  his  witness
    statement he had said that  he  had  initially  moved  to  a  different
    location.

12.  The judge  stated that certain issues were minor, taking  into  account
    the appellant's age, and would not significantly damage his claim,  but
    however in a claim which otherwise lacked consistency and  plausibility
    they did damage the appellant's credibility.

13.  He concluded that the appellant had never been approached  directly  by
    the Taliban and that the alleged threat had  to  be  seen  against  the
    dearth of evidence, including the Danish Report  which  confirmed  that
    forced recruitment was unlikely in any event.  He stated  that  it  was
    implausible therefore that the Taliban would seek the appellant out and
    threaten him, via his uncle or agent, in Kabul or in Charaka.

14.  Having emphasised that he was applying the lower  burden  of  proof  he
    stated that he made no adverse findings that the  appellant  had  given
    the wrong age or that he had failed to  claim  asylum  in  safe  places
    before arriving in Britain, but he indicated that his  conclusions  was
    that the appellant's account was implausible, inconsistent and  lacking
    in credibility because his account of living in Helmand was unsupported
     by knowledge of the town or area, his account of  the  murder  of  his
    brother and father was implausible, and his contradictory  accounts  of
    his journey from Helmand to  Kabul  and/or  Chakara  also  damaged  his
    credibility. Moreover,  the  assertions   that  the  Taliban  had  made
    threats in Kabul were,  at best,  based on hearsay  evidence  and  were
    not consistent with the objective evidence that the Taliban  would  not
    be interested in him.

15.  The  judge  emphasised  again  that  he  had  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's youth when reaching his findings on credibility.

16.  Turning to the issue of  family  tracing  the  judge  referred  to  the
    guidance in EU & Others (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32 to  the
    passage which referred to the motivation for asylum seekers not to  co-
    operate with family tracing because they would not wish  to  return  to
    Afghanistan, nor indeed would their parents wish to co-operate as  that
    would mean a waste of  their  investment  in  the  child's  journey  to
    Britain.  He quoted from the determination in HK and others  (minors  -
    indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by Taliban - contact  with
    family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC) and concluded that
    the appellant had not established "to any degree of likelihood" that he
    faced or faces any personal individual danger from any of  the  various
    authorities  in  Afghanistan  or  from  the  Taliban.   He  stated  the
    appellant had family support in Afghanistan and that he  could  in  any
    event return to his home area, whether that was Helmand Bazaar, Chiraka
    or Kabul.

17.  He considered in the alternative  the  issue  of  internal  relocation,
    noting what Dr Giustozzi had written in that regard but relying on  the
    determination in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163
    (IAC).  He stated that it was evident that the appellant had family  in
    Kabul, an aunt and uncle, who  were  plainly  supportive  as  they  had
    financed his journey to Britain.  He  was  not  undergoing  any  health
    treatment and spoke  Pushtu  and  would  receive  financial  and  other
    support to help establish himself in Kabul. Given  that  the  appellant
    was now 18 and approaching 19 internal relocation would be open to him.



18.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

19.  The grounds of appeal argued that the judge had erred in  paragraph  55
    of the determination (which I have set out above) when  he  found  that
    the murders of the appellant's father and  brother  were  not  credible
    because the appellant had remained in the family home after  the  death
    of his father.  It was stated that the appellant would  not  have  been
    able to leave because he would only have been 15 when  his  father  was
    killed and he had not been in charge of the family and therefore  could
    not reasonably be expected to make a decision to leave  then.   It  was
    argued that the judge had imposed his own expectation that  anyone  who
    had suffered in the way the appellant and his family had would have got
    out of Helmand Province.  It was stated that that was not a  conclusion
    open to the judge as it was subjective - it did  not  comply  with  the
    recommendation of the  UNHCR  at  paragraph  40  of  the  Handbook  and
    Guidelines on Procedure and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status.

20.  The grounds went on to argue that the judge had made  a  factual  error
    in that he considered that the appellant and his mother had waited  for
    six months after the death of the father, but in fact it was  the  case
    that the family had left the day after the Taliban told his mother that
    the appellant was wanted by them.  The evidence was therefore not  that
    the appellant and his mother had been aware for  six  months  that  the
    Taliban wanted the appellant.

21.  The second ground argued that the  judge  had  erred  in  applying  the
    wrong standard of proof to the issue of the  availability  of  internal
    relocation when he had stated that he found that it was likely that the
    appellant could return to family in Afghanistan that he could  contact.
    It was  further  stated  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his
    application of the standard of proof indicating that the judge had  not
    shown that he had a level of certainty of the evidence that there would
    be no real risk to the appellant or that he would be in  danger  as  he
    claimed.

22.  Before the hearing Mr Jarvis submitted a  short  skeleton  argument  in
    reply.  Mr Nicolson asked for the appeal to be  adjourned  so  that  he
    could consider that and when I refused to adjourn the appeal he  stated
    that he would need five hours to consider the skeleton argument.  Given
    that the skeleton argument merely set out a reply  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal, did not refer to any information that was not before the  judge
    in the First-tier and merely referred to cited case law  I  refused  to
    adjourn the appeal but gave Mr Nicholson twenty minutes to collect  his
    thoughts.

23.  Mr Nicholson first turned to the argument in the ground of appeal  that
    the judge had erred in  what  he  had  said  in  paragraph  55  of  the
    determination and in the following paragraph stating that the judge had
    erred in considering that he was entitled to conclude that a boy of  15
    could persuade an entire family to relocate.

24.  However, I consider that that is clearly not what the  judge  wrote  in
    paragraph 55 of the determination.  What he wrote therein is  perfectly
    clear.  Given that the appellant's brother had been forcibly  taken  by
    the Taliban the family would surely have been likely to  consider  that
    the appellant might similarly be taken.  It was not  suggested  by  the
    judge that it would have been the appellant who  would  have  made  the
    decision that the family should flee and indeed nowhere does the  judge
    state that that  could  have  been  the  case.   He  merely  draws  the
    inference which he was  clearly  open  to  draw  that  given  that  the
    appellant claimed that his brother and his father had  been  killed  by
    the Taliban the family would surely have been likely to  have  been  in
    fear and  would  have  wished  to  leave  Helmand.   Moreover,  in  the
    following paragraph the judge was entitled to set out the discrepancies
    in the appellant's statement and what he had said at interview.

25.  Secondly, Mr  Nicholson  argued  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    conclude that the appellant would be able to trace his family on return
    or using the Red Cross.  He then produced a Red Cross form,  which  was
    undated which he indicated was a family  tracing  form.   It  gave  the
    names of the appellant's sister and brother,  but  merely  stated  that
    they and his mother, whose name is  not  given,  were  in  "Afghaistan"
    (sic).  There is no indication that the  document  had  been  given  to
    anybody or indeed that it had originated at any  time  other  than  the
    date of the hearing.

26.  Although Mr Nicholson pointed out that the letter of  refusal  did  not
    state that the appellant had frustrated attempts  to  trace  he  argued
    that the judge was wrong to quote from the Court of Appeal decision  in
    EU and drawing the appropriate inference from them.

27.  Mr Nicholson went on to argue that the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof regarding the age of the appellant when finding  that
    he had been born in 1998.

28.  He then went on to state that it was necessary to be certain  that  the
    appellant's family would be  there  to  receive  him  on  return  -  he
    referred to a map which showed the distance between Charikar and Kabul.



29.  In reply Mr Jarvis stated that the  determination  was  solid  and  the
    judge had properly considered the report of Dr  Giustozzi  and  applied
    the correct standard of proof.

30.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  This  is  indeed  a  detailed  and  thorough
    determination.   The  judge  properly  weighed  up  all  the   evidence
    including the expert report.  He was entitled to find on the  basis  of
    that  report  that  there  was  no  reasonable  likelihood   that   the
    appellant's father and brother had been murdered  by  the  Taliban,  or
    that the  Taliban  would  wish  to  take  the  appellant  for  forcible
    recruitment. The judge had clearly considered  the  expert  report  and
    based his conclusions thereon.

31.   I have referred above in paragraph  24  to  my  conclusions  that  the
    ground  of  appeal  which  asserted  that  the  judge  had  erred  when
    considering the delay by the   appellant  and  his  mother  in  leaving
    Helmand was based in a misreading of what the judge had actually said.

32.  Moreover, given the appellant's lack of knowledge  of  his  home  area,
    let alone the currency of Afghanistan, I consider that  the  judge  was
    entitled to be  sceptical  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Throughout  I
    consider that the judge properly considered the appellant's claim.

33.   I consider that he applied the correct standard of proof which he  set
    out in paragraph 37 of the determination. He was also entitled  to  use
    the date of birth that the appellant had given in Hungary and which was
    the date of birth assessed when he arrived in Britain and which was not
    challenged.

34.   He was entitled to conclude that not  only  would  the  appellant  not
    face persecution in his home area but also that internal relocation was
    open to him and gave clear and cogent reasons for his conclusions.

35.   While Mr Nicholson made much of  the  assertion  that  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong standard of  proof  when  considering  the  issue  of
    internal relocation in that he had stated that it was probable that the
    appellant's aunt and uncle could  be  traced,  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation does not require that an appellant has  family  to  whom  he
    could return.  The reality is that the judge was entitled to find  that
    the appellant would be safe and free from persecution in Kabul.

36.  I consider therefore that the determination of the judge of the  First-
    tier contains no material error of law and therefore the  determination
    shall stand.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.
[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 21 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

