
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
AA/00520/2015

                                                    aa/00521/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7th April 2016                        |   On 29th April 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                            o a (first appellant)
                         l m t m (Second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Palmer, Counsel for Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors, Croydon
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Namibia born on 19th  January  1981  and
    7th April 2010 respectively.  I shall refer to the first  Appellant  as
    "the Appellant" throughout this decision.  They  appealed  against  the
    decisions of the Respondent dated 12th December 2014 refusing to  grant
    them asylum and refusing their claims on  the  humanitarian  protection
    issue and on human rights grounds.  Their appeals were heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Roots on 15th January 2016.   Their  appeals
    were dismissed in a decision promulgated on 5th February 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pooler  on  2nd
    March 2016.  The permission was granted based on the grounds  that  the
    judge erred in law by refusing to adjourn the hearing, by  misdirecting
    himself as to the standard of proof,  by  failing  to  consider  expert
    evidence in reaching his findings on  credibility  and  by  failing  to
    consider relevant matters in his assessment of future risk, sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation.  The permission states that  the
    refusal to adjourn in order to obtain information about the  continuing
    family proceedings must be assessed by reference to Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT
    00418 (IAC) as the Tribunal is under a duty to have regard to the  best
    interests of the child, the second Appellant.  The grounds  state  that
    the judge's decision deprived the child of his right to a fair hearing.
     The permission goes on to state that the remaining  grounds  are  less
    likely to disclose a material error of law.   The  judge  accepted  the
    general credibility of the Appellant's claims but found she  would  not
    be at risk on return.  The grounds do not particularise in what way the
    expert evidence could have affected the outcome given the  findings  of
    fact but permission was granted on all grounds.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  This states that the  Appellants'
    grounds fail to establish a material arguable  error  of  law  and  are
    merely a disagreement with the negative outcome  of  the  appeals.   It
    states that contrary to the Appellants' grounds  the  First-tier  Judge
    properly  considered  the  Appellants'  adjournment  application  as  a
    preliminary issue noting that there  were  family  proceedings  in  the
    Family Court which had started on 21st August 2015 and that there was a
    final hearing in March  2016  for  a  Child  Arrangements  Order.   The
    response states that the Appellants' Counsel did not  even  know  whose
    application was in the Family Court.  The  second  Appellant  has  been
    living with his father since 15th July 2015.  His father  may  have  no
    status in the United Kingdom but may have an EEA partner.  The response
    states that it was properly open to the First-tier Judge to refuse  the
    Appellants' application and the  judge  provided  adequate  sustainable
    reasons to support his decision not to adjourn,  bearing  in  mind  the
    late application and the level of uncertainty surrounding  the  reasons
    for the adjournment request.  The response states  that  there  was  no
    guarantee that the Tribunal would be in a better position on  the  next
    occasion and the application was not in compliance with the  overriding
    objection to grant an adjournment request.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the  Appellant  submitted  that  permission  has  now  been
    granted by the Family Court to release evidence to this  Tribunal.   He
    submitted that the court orders  have  not  yet  been  received  and  I
    allowed him an adjournment of an hour to obtain more information  about
    this.  He also stated that a new bundle of 206 pages has been  sent  to
    the Tribunal and to the Respondent. Counsel did not have  this  bundle.
    Neither did I and neither did the  Presenting  Officer.   He  submitted
    that at page 152 of that bundle there is an email from the  Appellants'
    family solicitors which sets out what occurred on 9th March 2016 at the
    Family Court.  He submitted that this email refers to two court  orders
    of 22nd and 28th January 2016, statements by the  Appellant,  a  letter
    from  Dr  Rikaby  to  the  Appellant's  general  practitioner   and   a
    psychiatrist's report on the Appellant.  He submitted that there is now
    an agreement relating to residence and there has to be contact  between
    the Appellant and the second Appellant and that the immigration  status
    of both parents has to be satisfactory.  He submitted  that  the  order
    states that the second Appellant will live with his father for a twelve
    month probationary period  but  the  Appellant  will  have  three  days
    contact with him for three hours each day although the second Appellant
    will not stay with her overnight.  He  informed  me  that  it  was  not
    unusual for the final orders not to be available yet, even  though  the
    decision was made on 9th March 2016.  He submitted  that  it  is  clear
    that this Tribunal should have seen the orders before the decision  was
    made. I asked him if  he  is  suggesting  a  further  adjournment.   He
    appeared to be suggesting this.

 5. The Presenting Officer opposed any adjournment as this matter has  been
    ongoing since  January  2016.   He  submitted  that  the  Family  Court
    proceedings were on 9th March 2016 and there is still  no  court  order
    available.  He submitted that the judge considered matters at the  date
    of the hearing, dealt with the adjournment request and was  correct  in
    law to refuse this.  He submitted that if there have been  developments
    relating to the second Appellant, a proper application can be  made  by
    the Appellants rather than opening up this particular case.

 6. He submitted that there is no material error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 7. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that this appeal should  have  been
    adjourned at the first hearing.  He accepted that at  that  date  there
    was no information about whether the Family Court would give permission
    for its documents to be released to the Immigration Tribunal and it was
    only after the First-tier hearing that permission was granted for  this
    information to be disclosed.  He accepted that when the judge heard the
    appeal there was no date as to when and if this  information  would  be
    disclosed.

 8. He submitted that the judge found that the Appellant was  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  He submitted that he should have given the Appellants  an
    opportunity to provide evidence from the Family Court as there  was  no
    dispute  about  whether  the  family  proceedings  were  ongoing.    He
    submitted that it is arguable that there has been unfairness because of
    this decision of the judge and he submitted that the  first  ground  is
    made out.

 9. He submitted that the other grounds also have merit and that the  judge
    used the wrong standard of proof.  The judge stated that the  Appellant
    must prove that there are substantial grounds to show  that  she  meets
    the requirements for a refugee claim.  He submitted that based on  this
    the judge's decision must be unsafe and the asylum claim  cannot  stand
    as it is.

10. He then referred to the rights of the  child  and  submitted  that  the
    child has been deprived of a  fair  hearing  based  on  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision.

11. Counsel  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  was  not  given  much
    information about the Appellant's mental health but that a  psychiatric
    report was placed before the Family Court which is now  available.   He
    referred to evidence that was before the judge, of suicide attempts  by
    the Appellant and he referred to the Appellant as a  vulnerable  person
    being at real risk of persecution for a Convention  reason  if  she  is
    returned to Namibia, as the judge found she had been trafficked before.

12. He submitted that based on what was before  the  judge  the  claim  was
    quite weak but it has now been strengthened considerably because of new
    evidence which the judge was  not  aware  of.   He  submitted  that  an
    adjournment should have been granted and that this was a material error
    of law.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the First-tier Judge was entitled
    to refuse the adjournment in  the  circumstances.   He  submitted  that
    nothing was forthcoming at that time relating to the family proceedings
    and I was referred to the case of RS  India  [2012]  UKUT  00218  (IAC)
    dealing with claims where there  were  outstanding  family  proceedings
    relating to a child. He submitted that the factors referred to in  this
    case, which should have been considered by the judge  were  not  before
    the judge and even now there is little before the Tribunal.

14. He submitted that this is a case where the Appellant should make a  new
    application to the Secretary of State rather than open  up  the  First-
    tier decision which contains no errors of  law.   With  regard  to  the
    Appellant's mental health, the judge considered  the  medical  evidence
    before him properly and the  new  medical  evidence  is  not  for  this
    Tribunal to take a view on.

15. Counsel submitted that this error of law hearing could be adjourned for
    a short period until the documentation of  the  family  proceedings  is
    made available and at that time the materiality of the First-tier Judge
    not adjourning the case can be  dealt  with.   He  submitted  that  the
    status of the second Appellant's father has not been  made  forthcoming
    and he submitted that in this claim the second Appellant's rights  have
    not been fully determined.

16. He submitted that the Appellant  could  make  another  application  but
    there are material errors in the First-tier Judge's decision and I  was
    asked to find that the claim  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.  He referred to the risk of the Appellant being
    re-trafficked and the wrong standard of proof being used.

Decision and Reasons

17. The Appellant's application for asylum is based on her membership of  a
    particular social group as a former victim of trafficking and a  person
    who will be subject to forced marriage.  Her last valid  leave  in  the
    United Kingdom expired on 30th January 2012.  She came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 29th June 2004.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge deals with  the  adjournment  request  at
    paragraphs 3 and 4 of his decision.  The judge was informed that  there
    was a final hearing in the Family Court in  March  2016  but  when  her
    Counsel at that hearing was asked  about  the  family  proceedings  she
    could not even say whose application was in the Family  Court  for  the
    Child Arrangements Order, although she did  tell  the  judge  that  the
    family proceedings were crucial as the  Appellant  is  relying  on  her
    Article 8 rights.  Her Counsel told the judge that the  solicitors  had
    no funding to make an application to the Family Court for permission to
    disclose information.  The judge refused the request for an adjournment
    and her decision makes it clear why she refused this request. The judge
    at paragraph 5 states that there is no guarantee that a Tribunal  would
    be in a better position on the next occasion and that  the  adjournment
    request was not in compliance with the overriding objective to grant an
    adjournment and so the judge refused it.  This is not an error of  law.



19. In the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision the  judge  considered  the
    medical  treatment  before  him  adequately  and  the  issue   of   re-
    trafficking.  He also dealt with internal relocation adequately.

20. Counsel submitted that the judge used the wrong standard of  proof.   I
    have considered paragraph 21 of the decision.   This  states  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that there are  substantial
    grounds  for  believing  that  she  meets  the  requirements   of   the
    Qualification Regulations and that  she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a reason recognised by the Refugee Convention.

21. This is not  the  correct  standard  of  proof.   When  he  deals  with
    humanitarian protection the standard of proof of real risk is  referred
    to.  Although the judge has referred to the wrong standard of proof  at
    paragraph 21 relating to the asylum claim,  he  goes  on  to  refer  to
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 00011 and when his decision is  considered,
    although he has referred to the wrong standard of proof,  he  has  used
    the standard of real risk when dealing  with  the  asylum  claim.   The
    judge has  dealt  properly  with  risk  on  return,  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking and internal relocation.   He  finds  that  this  Appellant
    would not be at any risk on return to Namibia.  I therefore do not find
    that this is a material error although it is an error.

22. Based on the evidence before him the judge has dealt properly with  the
    best interests of the second Appellant at paragraphs 40 to 52 referring
    to the correct case law and he has made  his  conclusions  relating  to
    this clear, at paragraphs 53 to 56 of his decision.

23. The judge has also made proper findings  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility and although he does not specifically  mention  the  expert
    report it is clear that he has considered the medical evidence relating
    to her vulnerability and has found there to be credibility issues for a
    number of reasons.  At paragraph 45 when the Appellant  was  pulled  up
    for one of her answers she changed her answer.  The judge refers to the
    lack of information given by the Appellant and at paragraph  55  refers
    to the Appellant  having  previously  been  untruthful  about  her  two
    children and their whereabouts.

24. I find that there is no material error of law in the  judge's  decision
    based on what was before him and that both the Appellant and the  child
    had a fair hearing.  The burden of proof was on the  Appellant  and  it
    was not  discharged  even  to  the  low  standard  required  in  asylum
    hearings.

25. There is now additional evidence which was not  before  the  judge  and
    unfortunately was not before me but  as  suggested  by  the  Presenting
    Officer a further application can be made to  the  Secretary  of  State
    based on this evidence.

26. I find that there is an error of law in the decision promulgated on 5th
    February 2016 relating to the  standard  of  proof  but  it  is  not  a
    material error of  law.   The  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Roots dismissing these Appellants' appeals on asylum  grounds,
    human rights grounds and on  the  humanitarian  protection  issue  must
    stand.

27. Anonymity has been directed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray




