
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00038/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2016                      |On 25 January 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    A T G
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 15 September 2010 and claimed asylum  on  arrival.  That  claim  was
    refused on 5 November 2010 but he was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules. He appealed against that decision
    and this appeal was  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  Raymond  on  13
    January 2011.

2.   Subsequently, on October 16, 2012, the appellant  applied  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom which  was  subsequently  refused
    and directions were made for his removal.  He  appealed  that  decision
    and his appeal was allowed under Articles 2  and  3  of  the  ECHR  but
    dismissed on asylum and Article 8 grounds by a First-tier Judge  on  15
    April 2015.

3.   That decision was subsequently  set  aside  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Alis, on 24 August 2015.  He made it clear that he  would  rehear
    the matter in its entirety. The matter was subsequently transferred  to
    me, hence the hearing which took place today.

4.   There were two preliminary matters.  Mr Fripp argued that  this  was  a
    partial rehearing of the appeal  and  that  Judge  Quinn  at  the  2015
    hearing had not rejected the conclusions of Dr Kakhki on  the  summons.
    It seemed to me clear however that at the error of law  hearing  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Alis had made it clear that the  matter  would  be
    reheard in its entirety, so that was the  course  that  I  proposed  to
    follow.

5.   The second issue raised by Mr Fripp was that of Article 8.  He  argued,
    in part basing his argument on what had been said in Bulale [2008] EWCA
    Civ 806 that, although it had not been argued that the First-tier Judge
    had erred in  law  in  dismissing  the  appeal  under  Article  8,  and
    accepting that the decision with regard  to  Article  8  had  not  been
    challenged, nevertheless the circumstances had  changed,  referring  to
    the policy on grant of discretionary leave, and arguing that there was,
    in line with Bulale, good reason for the Tribunal to consider Article 8
    where a point arose through the passage of time even if  there  was  no
    relevant error in the decision below.

6.   I concluded, however, that I was not bound by Bulale to  allow  Article
    8 to be argued.  Mr Fripp properly accepted that the  First-tier  Judge
    had dismissed the appeal in that regard and that decision had not  been
    challenged.   Although  there  may  well  have   been   a   change   of
    circumstances and in particular a situation may  have  arisen  where  a
    relevant policy that would not have been applicable previously  is  now
    relevant, it seemed to me that that was a matter more appropriate for a
    further application to be made to the Secretary of  State  rather  than
    seeking to extend the Tribunal's jurisdiction and the  very  particular
    circumstances adverted to at paragraph 24 in Bulale are not in my  view
    made out.

7.   The appellant adopted his three witness statements as signed by him  as
    being true and correct to the best of his knowledge.

8.   He was  referred  to  a  photograph  at  page  22  of  the  bundle  and
    identified his family home and said that on  the  ground  floor  was  a
    mechanics shop which had previously  been  a  print  shop  run  by  his
    brother.  There were shops on either side and houses to the rear of the
    house. There was a front entrance to the shop  and  also  a  back  door
    which led to an alley which itself led to the main road with houses  on
    either side of the alley.  If the shutters were down at  the  front  of
    the shop then it was necessary to open them in order to enter the shop.
    The back entrance was protected by a lock and  also  by  the  potential
    vigilance of neighbours.

9.   He was asked what might have attracted the attention  of  the  security
    forces to the printing shop and he said that at 12  at  night  all  the
    shops were  required to be closed and the police would pass by and they
    would come and give a warning. He had gone into the  shop  through  the
    front.  He had raised the shutters as much as was necessary in order to
    enable him to get in. He did not use  the  back  entrance  because  the
    neighbours could have thought it was a thief and called the police.

10.  When he reproduced the original documents he had used the copy  machine
    as it was quieter than the other machines and his  brother  would  hear
    them.

11.  His brother R is currently in the United  Kingdom.   The  events  which
    had led to the appellant leaving Iran had taken place in 2009  and  his
    brother had been in the United Kingdom in 2002.   The  print  shop  was
    operated by his brother E. E was now in Dubai. He had learned that from
    his mother.

12.  By the time the summons came to the house he had left. His  mother  had
    told him it had come. At that time R was in the United Kingdom.  R  had
    not had anything to do with the appellant's exit  from  Iran.   It  had
    been arranged by his brother-in-law M. After  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom he initially stayed with R for three months.  R lived with  his
    wife.  The appellant had been 15 then.  He had had a problem with  them
    and with the wife and had a lot of arguments and he had left  and  gone
    to social services.  As to how the  summons  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom, he had been aware of it because his mother told him and when R
    went to Iran the appellant had asked them to give it to  him  to  bring
    and he had done so.

13.  Since he had moved out of R's house he did not go  to  their  house  at
    all but occasionally talked to R on the telephone. He was asked whether
    he knew anything about R's conviction which  was  believed  to  include
    assisting or facilitating unlawful immigration to  the  United  Kingdom
    for asylum seekers.  The appellant said that he knew that R had gone to
    prison and he had understood it was because of  banking  fraud  not  in
    connection with illegal immigration.

14,  He was asked about the note from FB and said that it  was  her  writing
    and he had asked her to write down when she received the summons and to
    whom she had handed it.

15.  Cross-examined by Mr Tufan the appellant agreed that  he  had  said  in
    his latest statement that his brother had not  given  evidence  because
    their relations were not good but said that he was no longer in prison,
    having been out for some three months.  He had not asked  him  to  give
    evidence because they did not have a good relationship.  They spoke  on
    the telephone occasionally, because of their mother.  It  remained  the
    case that he had thought it was  not  appropriate  to  ask  R  to  give
    evidence.  R had told him that he had gone to prison for bank fraud. He
    was asked whether he had told him that it was  seven  years  and  three
    months sentence and he said yes, he had  told  him  three  and  a  half
    years.

16.  With reference to the picture  that  he  had  been  shown,  that  house
    belonged to the family and had always been in the family as long as  he
    had known it.  It comprised two flats and one shop.  He  did  not  know
    when the family had acquired it but said it was as long ago as he could
    remember.

17.  He was referred to paragraph 7 of his statement  in  2010  and  he  had
    referred to his brother buying the shop a number of years  ago  and  he
    said it had belonged to their father and his brother was working there.
    The paragraph was read to him and he was asked how this  could  be  the
    case as it had  belonged  to  the  family  as  long  as  the  appellant
    remembered.  He said that it belonged to his family and the brother was
    his family so it belonged to his family.

18.  He had escaped at the time of the arrival of the police  via  the  back
    door.  It was put to him that at D24 he said he had escaped through the
    front and he said this was a mistake by  the  interpreter  and  he  had
    always said the back door and questioned how  he  could  run  from  the
    front door when the police were there. As to whether the back door  was
    locked, he said there was a sort of hook and he would open that and  go
    out.

19.  He had not spoken to his girlfriend  since.  The  telephone  was  dead.
    When he was in Iran he had tried but not since  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He did not have an email address for her and had not  written
    her a letter. It was the case that he did not know what she studied  or
    what her full name was and yet he had had sex with her.  He  was  asked
    whether there was any reason.  He  was  asked  whether  there  was  any
    reason why he had not found out what she was studying and what her full
    name was and he said each time he asked she had  twisted  the  question
    and had not answered.

20.  He agreed that he would usually print the documents at 10 to  10.30  in
    the evening.  He was asked why the family would not be aware of this as
    they were upstairs and he said he used to come  downstairs  secretively
    and be very quiet.  His girlfriend had come by herself both then and at
    the time when she came at midnight and it was normal for a woman to  be
    out on her own at those times of night.  He had told  her  to  come  at
    midnight and said as they had guests he had informed her and  told  her
    to come later.

21.  He had slept with her once, at her house. Her family had  not  been  at
    home and he had gone there in secret.  They had also met  in  the  park
    because it was quiet between 2 and 3 o'clock  because  people  went  to
    lunch and went home.  He agreed that also he had said in his  statement
    that it was because it was hot at that time of day.

21.  As to R being a failed asylum seeker, he did not know much about  that.
     He was referred to the 2010 determination of Judge Raymond and  agreed
    it was a determination in this case.  R had given  evidence  then.   He
    had not been aware that R was a failed asylum seeker. He  was  referred
    to paragraph 4 of the determination.  It was put  to  him  that  R  had
    claimed to be at risk in Iran yet he had gone back voluntarily  and  he
    said that R was a British citizen when he returned to Iran.  It was put
    to him that the basis of R's  claim  was  that  it  was  for  providing
    leaflets in I's shop.   He was asked whether he  had  not  known  about
    this and he said he was very young at the time.  It was put to him that
    it was a major incident within the family and both brothers had had  to
    leave Iran because of printing leaflets in E's shop.  He  said  he  was
    very young when these things happened.

22.  He was asked whether he had not asked where they were and  he  said  he
    knew R had a problem and hence he had left Iran. It was put to him that
    E had left also and he said he had not known about E.  He did not  know
    whether what was recorded at paragraph 4(3) in the  2010  determination
    of E having escaped to Iraq where he spent four years before  returning
    to Iran was true.

23.  He was asked, given there had been  a  huge  event  within  the  family
    because of documents printed in E's shop why he had then agreed to have
    documents printed there again.  He said it was as he was very young and
    the girl had taken advantage of him because he loved her.

24.  He agreed that in the 2010 the hearing the summons  had  been  produced
    and the judge had decided it could not be relied on.  He was asked  how
    he had obtained that summons and he said he thought R's friend  brought
    it for him.  He really could not remember.  He recalled the judge being
    against him on that point.

25.  On re-examination the appellant said he was 6 or 7 at the time in  2003
    when these events had occurred. He was asked how he had known  about  R
    having a problem leaving and said he was very young and noticed he  was
    not there and they had told him that he had left when he asked and when
    he was a bit older he found out there was a problem and he  left.   His
    mother had told him. He had not known much  about  the  nature  of  the
    problem.  He had learned there was a problem with the government and  R
    had left and he had not had many  details.   There  had  been  no  open
    discussion of the event between his parents and E.

26.  He was referred to questions 115-118 of his interview  with  regard  to
    the issue of which door he left the shop by.

    [Subsequently Mr Tufan agreed that there was  no  discrepancy  in  this
    regard bearing in mind the wording of the  questions  and  the  answers
    being indicative with regard to the  answer  to  question  118  of  his
    general practice rather than  what  had  happened  on  that  particular
    occasion].

27.  At the time of the appeal in 2010  the  appellant  had  been  aged  15.
    Before the hearing he was living with his  brother  and  his  brother's
    wife. He had not discussed his brother's immigration history.   He  was
    asked whether he would have felt confident asking him about it  and  he
    said, nor he was his elder brother. He had not read  the  determination
    from 2010 nor had it read to him in a complete way.  He had not made  a
    note at the time of his brother's evidence. His English was much better
    now than when he had arrived  and  in  2010  he  could  not  understand
    English at all.  He had given evidence then through an interpreter.  He
    did not remember what language his brother had given evidence in.

28.  In his submissions Mr Tufan relied on the  two  refusal  letters.   The
    record of the evidence given to the judge in 2010 was to  be  borne  in
    mind. The  production  of  a  new  summons  could  not  outweigh  those
    findings.  The basis  of  his  claim  was  the  same  as  that  of  the
    appellant's brother R.  It was not credible that the appellant did  not
    know about that.  It would have been mentioned in the  family  when  he
    asked about his brother.  It was also the case that his brother  E  had
    left Iran for Iraq for four years subsequently.  The appellant  claimed
    to be unaware of that and little or no weight should be placed  on  his
    explanation.

29.  He claimed to have had a relationship with a woman nine  or  ten  years
    older than him and he had not asked her her full name  or  her  course.
    They had had a sexual  encounter  and  in  the  context  this  was  not
    credible.  Nor was it credible that in such a  society  he  would  have
    been able to go to her house and have sex with her and that  she  would
    come to the shop between 10 o'clock and 10.30  and  once  at  midnight.
    The summons did not outweigh the previous findings.  It  was  the  only
    issue in the appellant's favour. It had  been  brought  to  the  United
    Kingdom by his brother R and he had been sentenced to seven  years  and
    three months' imprisonment for facilitating illegal immigration.   That
    was not a mere coincidence.

30.  One of the scenarios envisaged in Tanveer Ahmed  was  that  a  document
    could be genuine but the information in it  was  false.   This  summons
    came within that criterion.  The appellant  was  not  credible  so  the
    claim should be considered in light of  that.   Mr  Tufan  referred  to
    paragraph 17 in the country information and guidance report for Iran of
    July 2016.  Mr Tufan also referred to the country guidance decision  in
    SSH and HR [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) where it had been held,  bearing  in
    mind Dr Kakhki's evidence, that there was  no  risk  to  a  person  who
    exited Iran illegally.  Some caution was expressed with regard  to  his
    evidence at paragraphs 28 to 30.  There was no risk to the appellant on
    the basis of the country guidance and the summons could not  be  relied
    on.  The appeal should be dismissed.

31.  In his submissions Mr Fripp said there was no reason to think that  the
    appellant's  brother's  claim  had  been  misstated  before  the  judge
    earlier.  He did not have instructions to challenge the record of  what
    R had said was the basis of his claim. The appellant had been  a  child
    at the time aged 7 or 8, so it was highly understandable that he  would
    not know or would be unaware  of  the  detail  of  the  event  and  the
    political element.  He was still not an adult when he  became  involved
    in 2009.  The decision of the judge in 2010 was the starting point.  It
    depended  on  the  circumstances  what  that  meant  in  practice.  The
    appellant had now given evidence on a number of occasions and had  been
    highly consistent and that assisted.  None of the basis  of  his  claim
    was implausible or substantially inconsistent. The use  of  the  coffee
    shop at the time of the election was understandable and fitted in  with
    the background of events in Iran at  that  time.   The  situation  with
    regard to R  in  2003  was  not  implausible.  The  details  about  the
    relationship did make sense when considered correctly as  a  young  man
    looking older than he was but still at school and a  young  woman.   He
    had not had such a relationship previously and he was led by her, which
    was understandable in the circumstances.  That he was  not  inquisitive
    was again understandable. Women were prohibited from  associating  with
    men but it was not suggested they were not allowed to be out  on  their
    own or that there was any kind of curfew for women.

32.  The Devaseelan guidelines were relevant but the weight to  be  attached
    to that as a starting point depended to a degree upon the issues in the
    case.   It was argued that Judge Raymond's reasons  lacked  substantial
    force and the case had expanded  and  continued.   The  use  of  "first
    floor" and "second floor" was not a matter of substance  since  it  was
    quite well known that the floor in which such a  building  was  entered
    was sometimes referred to as "the ground floor" and sometimes  as  "the
    first floor".  It was not therefore a confusion  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant.  He had explained the composition of his household and  that
    was again consistent and was resolved at D24. The judge  had  begun  by
    treating his claim as essentially weak by treating him as if he claimed
    to be an expert political activist, and reference was made to paragraph
    2(3).  This did not carry much weight.  He  had  not  claimed  to  have
    sophisticated political understanding.  It was not an appeal from  that
    decision nor was it impossible that the Tribunal  would  disagree  with
    the conclusions there.

33.  Judge Quinn in 2015 had applied  Devaseelan  at  paragraph  29  of  the
    decision. Paragraph 38 was wrong with regard to the standard  of  proof
    but it was not a finding appealed by the judge and the judge had got it
    right in any event.

34.  It was  true  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  considered  Dr  Kakhki's
    evidence on a number of occasions.  The conclusions in SSH and  SB  did
    not mean his view of the extent of the risk category went beyond  those
    in whom there was official interest and that had not  been  overturned.
    It seemed that his  good  faith  was  acknowledged  but  there  was  no
    challenge to his  core  expertise  or  to  his  knowledge  of  document
    verification.  His report was very detailed and  careful.   The  serial
    number was correctly set out and  the  printing  was  correct  and  the
    procedure appeared to be correct.  There was no  flaw  in  the  judge's
    acceptance of the report.  His qualifications said he had expertise  in
    document authentication.

35.  With regard to the reference by Mr Tufan to  the  country  report,  the
    relevant paragraph on this seemed less to do with  the  Iranian  courts
    and civil justice system but rather than  to  with  travel.   Paragraph
    17.1.4 was the only reference to court documents  in  the  section  and
    that suggested that such forgeries were rare.  It did  not  offset  the
    consistent and plausible account of the appellant and the  well-founded
    authentication of the summons.  It showed that he was of some  interest
    to the state and it was  relevant  that  the  document  came  from  the
    security court.  At the lowest he was  someone  who  had  come  to  the
    negative attention of the state, not having been a serious activist. It
    was clear from the country guidance that he would be at risk on  return
    and the appeal should be allowed.

36.  I reserved my determination.

37.  At his appeal in September 2010 the appellant  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis of risk on return as a consequence of him being  persuaded  by  a
    young woman some nine or ten years old than him with whom he was  in  a
    relationship, to use his brother's printing shop clandestinely to print
    anti-government leaflets for distribution.  He said that one night when
    they were printing off leaflets the front  shutter  of  the  shop  were
    pulled up by the police but he and the  girl  managed  to  escape.  His
    brother who owned the printing shop was arrested that night and at  the
    time of the nearing remained in prison but the family  managed  to  get
    the appellant away into hiding and he came to the United Kingdom.

38.  The judge bore in mind the appellant's age (he was 15 at  the  time  of
    the  hearing),  bearing  in  mind  he  had  embarked  upon   a   sexual
    relationship with a young woman ten years old than him and had  already
    formed independent political views before meeting her, on his evidence.
    He considered that those matters and the actions of keeping  production
    of anti-government political  pamphlets  from  his  family  and  having
    obtained a master key from his brother's printing shop hardly suggested
    that he was a na�ve and suggestible juvenile.  He noted inconsistencies
    in the evidence such as where the various family members lived  in  the
    house and where the shop was and also  inconsistent  and  contradictory
    explanations by the appellant for the paucity of  his  knowledge  about
    the young woman.  He did not  know  her  full  name  or  what  she  was
    studying at university. He also felt it  lacking  in  credibility  that
    they had met and kissed in a public park bearing in mind the intolerant
    attitude of the authorities to such activities in Iran.

39.  The judge also noted that the appellant at the outset said he  had  not
    read the political pamphlets that were being produced and  yet  it  was
    their political affinity as opponents of the regime who had met  at  an
    anti-Ahmedinejad   demonstration   which   triggered   their   personal
    relationship.  The judge also found it lacking in credibility that  the
    appellant claimed to have attended political demonstrations in his  own
    right and his claim that his subsequent attendance at  a  demonstration
    with his brother-in-law was his first political activity.

40.  This led the judge  not  to  accept  the  credibility  of  the  claimed
    relationship and as a consequence to reject the claim as a  whole.  The
    judge referred to the decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed leading
    him to conclude that no reliance could be placed on a purported summons
    of October 2010 so as to find that the appellant would be  at  risk  on
    return.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

41.  Subsequently on 30 March 2015 Dr Mohammed Kakhki provided a  report  on
    the authenticity of the purported summons. He confirmed  that  all  the
    necessary legal and official requirements for  a  genuine  document  of
    this type had been satisfied within the document  and  that  there  was
    complete accordance with Iranian law and  procedure.  He  commented  on
    such matters as the form, layout, texture and size of the document, the
    procedure  for  serving  a  summons  having  been  observed,  the  file
    reference number was correct, there was  no  evidence  of  manipulation
    with regard to the text and the conclusion was that it  was  a  genuine
    summons with no sign of manipulation.

42.  The guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702  says  among  other  things
    that the first adjudicator's determination stands as an  assessment  of
    the  claim  the  appellant  was  then  making  at  the  time  of   that
    determination.  It was not binding on the second adjudicator but on the
    other hand the second adjudicator is not hearing an appeal against  it.
    As an assessment of the matters that were before the first  adjudicator
    it should simply be regarded as unquestioned.  It might be built  upon,
    and as a result the outcome of the hearing of  the  second  adjudicator
    might be quite different from what might  have  been  expected  from  a
    reading of the first determination only.  It is  relevant  to  bear  in
    mind that the issue before the second adjudicator was not the  same  as
    that before the first adjudicator  and  that  in  particular  time  has
    passed and the situation  at  the  time  of  the  second  adjudicator's
    determination may be shown to be different  from  that  which  obtained
    previously.

43.  The first adjudicator's determination should  always  be  the  starting
    point. Facts happening since the first adjudicator's determination  can
    always be taken into account by the second adjudicator. Facts happening
    before the first adjudicator's determination having no relevance to the
    issues before him  could  always  taken  into  account  by  the  second
    adjudicator as the first adjudicator would not have been concerned with
    such facts and his determination is not an assessment of them.

44.  I bear these precepts in mind in going on to consider  the  credibility
    of this claim.  As I have set  out  above,  the  conclusions  of  Judge
    Raymond of 2010 were that the claim significantly  lacked  credibility.
    There was no challenge to that decision.  It is not a  case  where  the
    facts have materially changed, subject to the important matter  of  the
    verification of the summons by Dr Kakhki in 2015.  This,  as  Mr  Fripp
    argues, is clearly relevant to the credibility of the claim as a whole.
     The evidence must be considered in the round, but I shall  look  first
    of all at the appellant's evidence  itself  before  coming  on  to  the
    implications for that of Dr Kakhki's views on the summons.

45.  I have set out above the respective arguments  of  the  representatives
    on the credibility issues.  Mr Tufan emphasised his concerns as to  the
    vagueness of the appellant with regard to  the  lack  of  knowledge  he
    claimed to have as to the circumstances in which his brother R  claimed
    to have  left  the  United  Kingdom,  the  circumstances  which  appear
    strikingly similar to those in the appellant's case and with regard  to
    the use of the printing shop for anti-government  leafleting  purposes.
    It was part of R's evidence that E had left  Iran  for  Iraq  for  four
    years as a consequence, although the appellant claimed to be unaware of
    that.

46.  I agree with Mr Tufan  that  it  is  inherently  implausible  that  the
    appellant albeit that he was only 7 or 8 at the time,  would  not  have
    become aware of the circumstances, very significant within  the  family
    as they must have been, of R's departure  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Esmayel's imprisonment and subsequent departure to Iraq for four years.
     I agree with him also that  it  is  inherently  implausible  that  the
    appellant at the age of 15 would have a relationship with a  woman  ten
    years older than him in circumstances where he never knew  her  surname
    or what she was studying at university but nevertheless  had  a  sexual
    relationship with her at her home on one occasion.

47.  These matters have to be seen in the context of the  repressive  nature
    of Iranian society and are not to my mind satisfactorily  explained  by
    the fact that the appellant was much younger or was led on by  her.  To
    these points have to be added the adverse findings of the judge in 2010
    which are not overridden by subsequent events or evidence  (subject  to
    the issue of the summons to which I will turn in a moment) and I do not
    agree with Mr Fripp that the judge erred, for example, in regard to the
    view he came as to  the  relative  sophistication  of  the  appellant's
    views.

48.  I turn to the summons. I have set  out  above  the  conclusions  of  Dr
    Kakhki on this. I note also the statement from the  appellant's  mother
    confirming the circumstances in which the summons arrived  and  how  it
    came to be sent to the appellant via her son R. In this regard  I  note
    the evidence on forged and fraudulently obtained documents. That is set
    out at section 17 of the Country Information  and  Guidance  Report  on
    Iran of July 2016.  I note for example from  paragraph  17.1.1  that  a
    western embassy mentioned that it is possible to buy legal documents in
    Iran and obtain genuine documents in a fraudulent  manner.  The  source
    distinguished between genuine  documents  with  false  information  and
    forged documents.

49.  There was also reference from consular officials of the US  Embassy  in
    Ankara to documents being easy to obtain in Iran  through  bribery  and
    connections  and  to  change  documents  through   bribery.    Consular
    officials of the US Embassy in Ankara had also commented that this  was
    also the case with civil documents and it was speculated that some were
    genuine  documents  fraudulently  obtained  through  bribery  to  state
    whatever the applicant needed.  There  is  also  a  quotation  from  Dr
    Kakhki's evidence in the country guidance case of SB in 2009,  and  the
    response by the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board of  6  May  2009
    stating that Amnesty International had no information on  the  relative
    difficulty in obtaining forged or false court documents  in  Iran.   It
    was said that anecdotal evidence suggested that within  Iran  forgeries
    were rarely used since the provenance of a  document  could  be  easily
    obtained by reference to court or office registers.  It is said that it
    is impossible to determine whether forged court documents found outside
    Iran are produced within or outside the country.

50.  Mr Fripp made the point with regard to the  latter  piece  of  evidence
    that  this  appeared  to  be  the  only  part  of  the  evidence   that
    specifically concerned what documents, and the use of the word "rarely"
    was relevant, and the other evidence seemed to refer  rather  to  entry
    and exit documents.

51.  I do not read the report in that way, however.  The earlier  references
    do not limit their applicability to documents  relating  to  entry  and
    exit, and the point made as to the reasons  why  forgeries  are  rarely
    used within Iran seems relevant particularly to the  easy  checking  by
    reference to court or office registers on the provenance of a document,
    which of course is not a relevant issue in this case since  it  is  the
    authorities of this country who are having  to  evaluate  the  document
    rather than it being produced  within  Iran  to  indicate  a  different
    conclusion from the truth.

52.  Bearing in mind the adverse credibility findings of the judge in  2010,
    the extent to which they feed into my decision today, and the points  I
    have noted above adverse to the appellant's  credibility  that  I  have
    made, I consider that, although I accept Dr Kakhki's evidence as to the
    genuineness of the  documents,  his  report  cannot  nor  does  it  say
    anything about whether it is a genuine document with false information.
     The genuineness of the format appears to be clear, but in light of  my
    findings on the adverse credibility of the  appellant  as  a  whole,  I
    consider that this, as was argued on behalf of  the  respondent,  is  a
    case of a genuine document with false  information  in  it.  I  do  not
    accept that the summons  is  genuine,  and  in  light  of  the  adverse
    findings otherwise I conclude that the appellant has not made  out  his
    claim, and as a consequence the appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 25 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




