
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00515/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan promulgated on 13th March 2013, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 24th February 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  31st  December
    1982.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of
    State dated 10th January 2014, refusing  her  application  for  refugee
    status in the UK or for  humanitarian  protection  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 339C of HC 395, or for a grant of permission to remain in the
    UK on the basis of her human rights claims.

 3. The Appellant's claim rests upon her case that if she is made to return
    back to Pakistan, then her family, and in particular her uncle, M A  B,
    will kill her, throw acid on her, or chop her into pieces, because  she
    had a relationship in the UK with a person by the name  of  I  H.   She
    said her uncle is a police officer in Pakistan.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not accept the Appellant's version of events  (para  48).
    He did not accept that she was at risk in Pakistan.  He did not believe
    her when she said that the threats from her family  were  going  to  be
    made (para 48).  His firm finding was that the  Appellant's  claim  has
    "no reality about them whatsoever" (para 48).

 5. In coming to these conclusions, the judge had regard to the  fact  that
    the Appellant maintained that she came from a very strict upbringing in
    Pakistan.  However, she had been educated to the highest levels and had
    been to a private school.  She had worked  there  as  a  teacher.   The
    judge did not accept the claim that the Appellant was  strict  at  face
    value in the light of three particular circumstances.  First, that  the
    Appellant had been educated to a high degree.

 6. Second, that she had been allowed  to  travel  overseas,  thousands  of
    miles away, on her own, in order to further her studies (see para  38).
    Third, that she had then gone on to have a relationship with I H in the
    way that she maintained (para 41).  However, there was  also  a  fourth
    reason as far as the claim, as alleged, was  made  by  this  Appellant.
    This was that, after the Appellant moved out of  her  home  to  another
    address, she maintained that she continued to receive threatening phone
    calls, that she was scared that her family in Pakistan may find someone
    in the UK to harm her, but the police  had  then  offered  her  refuge,
    which she did not accept.

 7. The judge held that, "I find that had  the  Appellant  been  afraid  as
    claimed, she would have accepted the refuge offered by the police or at
    the very least moved out of the  address  where  she  felt  threatened"
    (para 43).  Despite finding that the Appellant's credibility  had  been
    rendered nugatory, the judge went on to  consider  the  possibility  of
    risk of persecution to the Appellant in Pakistan in the  light  of  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Buxton in GM and YT (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA  Civ
    833, on the basis as to whether there was a  reasonable  likelihood  of
    persecution  on  return,  notwithstanding   the   Appellant's   damaged
    credibility (see para 47 of the  determination).   The  judge  rejected
    that there was any possibility of such likelihood of persecution.





Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons for the conclusion, and  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    circumstances upon return, having had an abortion, and failed  to  give
    proper weight to the material factors.

 9. On 2nd April 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that,
    whilst the judge found the Appellant to be an  unreliable  witness,  it
    was not clear  what  facts  were  found,  or  whether  there  had  been
    consideration of the Appellant's circumstances upon return.

10. On 2nd May 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered in a robust manner,  to
    the effect that the grounds amounted to a mere  disagreement  with  the
    negative outcome of the appeal.  In particular, the judge had given his
    reasons at paragraphs  38  to  47  of  the  determination,  for  making
    negative credibility findings, and had in particular  stated  (at  para
    47) that,

         "I do not accept she will be at risk on her return to Pakistan.   I
         do not accept that the  threats  from  the  Appellant's  family  in
         Pakistan are genuine or that they will be carried out as claimed by
         the Appellant.   I  find  that  these  claimed  threats  have  been
         generated by the Appellant for the purpose of this asylum claim and
         have no reality whatsoever."

11. The Rule 24 response went on to say that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that, as a highly educated woman, and a teacher, the Appellant
    could not be believed when she said that she did  not  know  about  the
    asylum process, despite having been in the UK since 2009 as a  student,
    and that is why the judge applied Section  8  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act to make an adverse credibility
    finding against the Appellant.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me on 10th June  2014,  Mr  Wells,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, argued that the judge had fundamentally  erred
    in failing to give adequate reasons for the decision reached  at.   For
    example, the judge had stated (at para 40) that the photographs adduced
    at the hearing "cumulatively add to the  Appellant's  credibility"  but
    then went on to reject the Appellant's relationship with I H  (at  para
    41).  In fact, it was not clear what finding  the  judge  had  made  in
    respect of the Appellant's relationship with I H.  There were  also  no
    findings whatsoever in relation to the miscarriage of  the  Appellant's
    baby, which the Secretary of State had accepted at paragraph 28 of  the
    reasons for refusal.

13. Moreover, the Appellant had expressed a fear of her other uncle,  A  B,
    and the judge had made no findings with respect  to  this  uncle.   The
    judge  had  also  speculated  in  concluding  that,  just  because  the
    Appellant had achieved a  high  degree  of  education,  that  this  was
    inconsistent with her having had a very  strict  upbringing.   This  is
    because it could just as easily be argued that a person who had such  a
    high level of education had also a strict upbringing alongside it.  The
    findings at paragraph 38 were flawed.

14. Furthermore, the judge had failed to consider the Appellant's  position
    as a member of a particular social group, which was accepted to be  the
    case, as far as women in Pakistan were concerned, ever since the  House
    of Lords ruling in Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20.

15. The Appellant was a lone female returning back to Pakistan, following a
    miscarriage in the UK, and the findings made at paragraph 43 that, "the
    Appellant continued to live amongst the  community  from  her  area  in
    Kolti, where it would be obvious that someone would see her actions and
    report to her family" were inadequate.  This is because they would  not
    follow through logically in terms of their natural conclusions.

16. No consideration or assessment was made by the  Tribunal  of  the  fact
    that the Appellant was returning as a lone woman to Pakistan.  Finally,
    there was a reference to immaterial matters at paragraphs  39,  40  and
    41, which led the judges astray.

17. For his part, Mr  Whitwell  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  amounted  simply  to  a  mere
    disagreement.  The judge had handled the credibility  issues  perfectly
    correctly.  This was clear  with  his  treatment  of  the  evidence  at
    paragraphs  40  to  41,  where  he  had  accepted  there  had  been   a
    relationship with a Mr I H by the Appellant.

18. The Appellant's case was that she came from a  family  so  conservative
    that they would not let her go to work and the judge rejected this.  He
    was entitled to do so.  The  judge  had  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    belonged to a particular social group but that did not mean to say that
    he had to also conclude that she would be at risk upon return.

19. He had not found her credible and he did not find that she would be  at
    risk.  He had come to the firm conclusion that  her  asylum  claim  was
    deliberately constructed in a way as to give her the right to remain in
    the UK.

20. In his reply, Mr Wells stated  that  essentially  what  the  judge  was
    saying  was  that  because  the  Appellant  came  from  a  conservative
    background, she could not have entered into a relationship  with  I  H,
    even if she was educated.  There was no basis for such a conclusion.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should  set  aside  this  decision.   This  is
    because the judge had given a comprehensive consideration  to  all  the
    evidence before him (see paras 38 to 45).

22. He had particularly observed that the  Appellant  had  been  offered  a
    refuge by the police, after claiming that she was receiving threatening
    telephone calls and feared  that  harm  would  come  to  her,  but  had
    rejected this offer of help.

23. The judge had expressed his reservations about the  evidence  given  at
    paragraphs 38 to 39.  The judge considered the photographs and observed
    that, "the only people in the photograph at the party are the Appellant
    and I H eating a cake at a table, and there  is  no  one  else  in  the
    pictures" and found that "this event is not a party, as claimed by  the
    Appellant" (para 40).  The judge also found that the Appellant  was  in
    any event a highly educated lady.

24. Ultimately, however, what this appeal before this Tribunal  amounts  to
    is whether, such errors as they may or  may  not  be  in  the  Tribunal
    below, amount to a material error.  There is no material error  because
    the judge concluded that, as a highly qualified person,  and  a  person
    who had teaching experience  in  Pakistan,  the  Appellant  could  find
    reasonable relocation possibilities open to her in  a  country  of  180
    million people and could live away from her family.

25. As the judge held, "she also failed to explain as  to  how  her  family
    would find out that she has returned to Pakistan" (para 44).  The judge
    also was not impressed by the fact that the  Appellant  did  not  claim
    asylum until 22nd November 2013, even though she had  received  threats
    at first as long ago as March 2013, some eight months earlier.

26. It was open to the judge to conclude that  he  could  not  believe  the
    suggestion that the Appellant was not aware about  the  asylum  process
    (para  46).   It  has   to   be   remembered   that   "perversity"   or
    "irrationality" is a high threshold for an Appellant to surmount.   The
    Appellant has to show that on any reasonable view the findings made  by
    the judge were not open to the judge as a decision maker.

27. This was not such a case.  As the Rule 24 response  states,  these  are
    mere disagreements with the negative findings of fact made by the judge
    in this appeal.  I have no hesitation in rejecting the appeal.

Decision

28. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

Anonymity order made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014
