
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 1 July 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           Mr Sayed Ahmad Khaksar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with leave against the decision  made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 22 January 2014 refusing him  asylum
    in the UK.
2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1994.   He
    arrived in the UK by lorry on 21 November 2008 and  claimed  asylum  on
    that day on the ground that he feared persecution in  Afghanistan.   As
    the appellant appeared to be a minor, he was placed by  Croydon  Social
    Services Department with foster  parents.   He  subsequently  absconded
    from their care.

3.   In or about October 2013, the appellant made a further application  for
    asylum on identical grounds  as  before.   He  was  interviewed  on  29
    October  2013  with  the  assistance  of  a  Pushtu  interpreter.   The
    respondent refused his application on 22 January 2014.

4.   The appellant based his claim on a  longstanding  dispute  that  exists
    between his family and a distant relative, a Khyal Mohammed,  over  the
    ownership of a piece of land.  The land was claimed by the  appellant's
    family and worked by a tenant.  In about  December  2006  a  Jirga  was
    called in their village to resolve  this  problem  but  Khyal  Mohammed
    refused to attend.  Khyal Mohammed's men later visited the  appellant's
    father and told him to cancel the Jirga.  It  went  ahead  and  in  the
    absence of Khyal Mohammed the Jirga found for the  appellant's  father.
    As a  consequence  Khyal  Mohammed's  men  beat  up  the  tenant.   The
    appellant's father reported this to the police who did nothing  because
    Khyal Mohammed is an influential man and a local District Judge.

5.   He said that on 7 January 2007, Khyal Mohammed  kidnapped  his  father.
    The next day he was  found  dead.   At  the  funeral,  the  appellant's
    brother was warned by Khyal Mohammed's men that he would be  killed  as
    well if his family did not comply with his wishes.  As  a  result,  the
    appellant's family moved to Kabul, where they stayed with his  maternal
    uncle.  Two of the appellant's brothers  reported  the  matter  to  the
    police.  They were told to return in two weeks.  When they did so, they
    did not return.  The maternal uncle searched for them  and  the  police
    eventually notified them that they had been killed.   He  was  shown  a
    letter from Khyal Mohammed saying that as they had  not  complied  with
    his  instructions,  they  would  all  be  killed.   As  a  result,  the
    appellant's mother died of heart failure.

6.   At the end of April 2007, the appellant said that he was approached  by
    men in a car in Kabul when he was on his way back home  from  shopping.
    He recognised them as Khyal Mohammed's men.  They  chased  him  and  he
    managed to escape, but not before a threat was shouted at  him.   As  a
    result, the appellant's uncles sent  him  to  stay  with  relatives  in
    Peshawar, and subsequently arranged for him to be sent to the  UK.   He
    travelled  by  lorry  and  spent  time  in   Greece,   where   he   was
    fingerprinted.  He said he absconded from foster care  because  he  had
    heard that he would be returned to Greece.  He fears that if he returns
    to Afghanistan, he will be killed by Khyal Mohammed.

7.   The judge had before him a report from Dr Antonio Guistozzi.

8.   Counsel submitted that there are two planks to the appellant's  appeal.
     The first is the way the judge dealt with the expert evidence and  the
    second is a reasons challenge which borders on the rationality  of  the
    judge's credibility findings.

9.   The judge accepted that the appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan,  now
    aged 20 years and has been educated to primary level.  In his  judgment
    the appellant was an intelligent and articulate  individual.   Although
    Mr. Yeo had suggested that the appellant was vague as to events because
    they occurred when he was still young, Mr.  Yeo  did  accept  that  the
    appellant's  statement  was  quite  specific  and  did  give  seemingly
    accurate dates, when this was pointed out to him.

10.  In the light of the objective evidence before him, the  judge  accepted
    that  there  are  land  disputes  in  Afghanistan,  blood   feuds   and
    corruption, but he did not accept  the  conclusion  of  Dr  Guistozzi's
    report.  The judge did not find that the account given by the appellant
    of the events and reasons that led him to leave Afghanistan  and  claim
    asylum in the UK credible.  He found that there was nothing to  support
    the appellant's conclusions that Khyal Mohammed  is  a  member  of  the
    Afghan judiciary. If,  as  the  appellant  claims,  and  Dr.  Guistozzi
    accepts unquestioningly, Khyal is a member of the judiciary, the  judge
    wondered why he was not willing to attend and to accept the decision of
    the Jirga.  The judge also found that throughout the appellant's claim,
    Khyal Mohammed appears to have done nothing personally.  It was  always
    suggested  that  others  acted  on  his  behalf.   This  had  not  been
    satisfactorily explained to him.

11.  The Judge found the account of the incident in Kabul  incredible.   The
    appellant was supposedly in fear of his life, yet, when  approached  by
    men he did not recognise in a vehicle, he simply goes over to them when
    beckoned.  A twelve year old, in such circumstances  would  simply  run
    away at once.

12.  The judge said the appellant told him that the money required  to  send
    him to the UK, some $7-8,000 was easily raised by selling property  and
    a business in Kabul.  The appellant told him he has had no contact with
    anyone in either Pakistan or Afghanistan for over four years.   He  did
    not find this credible.

13.  The judge said that Kabul now has a population  of  some  3.3  million,
    including many returnees from Pakistan.  He did  not  find  it  at  all
    likely that the appellant would be found by Khyal  Mohammed  or  anyone
    else.   The  appellant  is  a  resourceful  individual,  not  only   as
    demonstrated by his ability to travel to the UK at a  tender  age,  but
    also by his evasion of the Croydon Social  Services  Department,  which
    behaviour damaged his credibility.

14.  Counsel disagreed with the judge's  comments  at  paragraph  30  on  Dr
    Guistozzi's report but submitted that the comments did not amount to an
    error of law.

15.  However Counsel took issue with the judge's finding that  Dr  Guistozzi
    seems to have accepted, without challenge things that the appellant had
    said, such as that Khyal Mohammed is a member of the  Afghan  judiciary
    and  further  that  there  was  nothing  to  support  the   appellant's
    conclusion that Khyal Mohammed is a member  of  the  Afghan  judiciary.
    Counsel questioned what evidence the appellant could have submitted  to
    prove this point.  Ms Isherwood on the other  hand  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 28 of  the  respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,  the
    respondent had considered the appellant's claim that his family have  a
    dispute with Khyal Mohammed and that Khyal  Mohammed  is  the  District
    Judge of Pacher Agham area. The respondent had carried out an extensive
    search of the internet and had not found a person by this name  working
    as a District Judge in Afghanistan.  In addition, a search of this name
    did not find anyone of  that  name  working  in  the  legal  system  in
    Afghanistan.

16.  Counsel argued that the judge's finding that  Dr.  Guistozzi  seems  to
    have accepted, without challenge things that the  appellant  has  said,
    such as that Khyal Mohammed is a member of  the  Afghan  judiciary  was
    misguided.  The expert was asked to comment  on  general  issues.   Dr.
    Guistozzi has no direct personal knowledge  of  the  appellant  or  his
    family so he could not into more details on  the  appellant's  personal
    situation.   The  expert  accepted  the  appellant's  account   without
    question because those were the instructions given to him.  It was  not
    the job of  the  expert  to  examine  credibility  but  to  comment  on
    plausibility.  To do so requires acceptance of the appellant's  account
    and therefore this was an irrelevant reason for reducing the weight  to
    be attached to the report.

17.  I find in light of Miss Isherwood's submission that the respondent  did
    not accept the appellant's evidence that Khyal Mohammed was a member of
    the Afghan judiciary.  The respondent clearly stated at paragraph 29 of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter  that  the  appellant's  claim  was  not
    accepted.  It is therefore troubling that the expert  would  have  been
    given instructions which included the  acceptance  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  In paragraph 2 of his report, the expert said he had  read  the
    Screeening Interview, Asylum Statement,  Substantive  asylum  interview
    and Reasons for Refusal letter.  If,  as  he  said,  he  had  read  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter, he would have been aware from paragraphs 28
    and 29 that the respondent did not accept the  appellant's  claim  that
    Khyal Mohammed was a member of  the  Afghan  judiciary.   The  expert's
    failure to take this on board leads me to agree with the judge that  it
    is troubling that the expert seems to have accepted, without challenge,
    the things that the appellant said, such as that Khyal  Mohammed  is  a
    member of the Afghan judiciary.

18.  I find that the absence of evidence to support  the  appellant's  claim
    that  Khyal  Mohammed  is  a  member  of  the  Afghan   judiciary   and
    consequently has the reach to persecute him using agents of persecution
    undermines the credibility of his claim.  I disagree with the  argument
    in the grounds that the fact  that  the  appellant  could  not  produce
    evidence to show that Khyal Mohammed was a member of the judiciary  was
    not a relevant reason for rejecting the appellant's credibility.   This
    issue is at the heart of the appellant's claim and without evidence  to
    support it, his claim does not stand up to scrutiny.
19.  I find that the judge's adverse credibility finding at paragraph  31(d)
    is not sustainable because it did not take into account the naivety  of
    a twelve-year old child.  I also find  that  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs 31(e) and (f) are not reasoned. Nevertheless I do  not  find
    that these errors undermine the judge's finding  that  the  appellant's
    core claim was not credible.

20.  The judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's  behaviour  in  absconding
    damaged his credibility and did not accept his excuse of fearing  being
    returned to Greece, was a sustainable finding.

21.  I find that the grounds do not disclose a material error of law in  the
    judge's decision.

22.  The judge's decision dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  shall  stand.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
