
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00175/2014
                                                               AA/06122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                          PATIENCE THEMBELIHLE MOYO
                                PRUDENCE MOYO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnrose for Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin promulgated on 6 October 2015 which dismissed  the
    Appellants appeals against a  decision  to  remove  them  from  the  UK
    following a decision to refuse their claims for asylum .

Background

 4. The Appellants are sisters born on 18 March  1993  and  29  April  1997
    whose claim to be Zimbabwean nationals was disputed by  the  Respondent
    who believed them to be South African.

 5. On 4 August 2011 the first Appellant applied for asylum and on 7  April
    2014 the second Appellant applied for asylum in her  own  right  having
    initially been a dependent in the appeal of her sister.

 6. The Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants  applications.   The
    refusal letter in respect of the first Appellant was dated 19  December
    2013 and in respect of the second Appellant dated 6 August 2014  .  The
    reasons for refusal were, in essence:

      a) The Respondent did not accept that the Appellants  were  Zimbabwean
         as claimed because they  applied  for  transit  visas  in  2009  in
         Pretoria and produced South African passports giving their place of
         birth as Johannesburg where they lived with their parents;  in  her
         asylum interview the first Appellant sated she  spoke  English  and
         Zulu and not Shona or Ndebele; the first Appellant  demonstrated  a
         lack of knowledge about the area of Zimbabwe where she  claimed  to
         live.

      b) The first Appellants credibility was undermined by her claim in her
         screening interview that she had never been fingerprinted when  she
         had been fingerprinted in Pretoria in 2009.

      c) Considering their claim at its highest those who sought to harm the
         Appellants in Zimbabwe were opportunistic and would  be  unable  to
         locate them if they relocated. The second Appellant was a minor but
         could return with the first Appellant and her parents whose  claims
         had been refused.

      d)  In  relation  to  Article  8  the  Appellants  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and there  were  no
         exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  outside  the
         Rues. The best interests of the second Appellant were  best  served
         by her returned to South Africa with her sister and her parents.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Levin  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeals   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) The issue in the case was whether the Appellants were Zimbabwean as
         they claimed as Ms Johnrose conceded they would not be at  risk  in
         South Africa.

      b) He did not find their claim  that  their  grandmother  in  Zimbabwe
         arranged for them to come to the UK after a friend  was  raped  and
         they were threatened by Zanu PF activists.

      c) He found they had travelled to the UK using genuine  South  African
         passports because they were citizens of that country.

      d) Even if her were wrong and they were Zimbabwean  he  did  not  find
         that they would be at risk in their home  area  as  they  were  not
         active MDC supporters.

      e) He found that the Appellants  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

      f) He considered the Appellants case under Article 8 outside the Rules
         and directed himself in accordance  with  the  guidance  in  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 27

      g) He accepted that family life existed between the two Appellants and
         with her parents and brother. He found that the  decisions  engaged
         Article 8.

      h) In considering the final question in Razgar, the proportionality of
         the decision he took into account s 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009  and  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   and   found   the   decision
         proportionate.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The Judge had given inadequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
         Appellant s were South African nationals in that he failed to  give
         sufficient weight to the age of the Appellants at the time  of  the
         events they described; he made a factual error in  respect  of  the
         subject access documents which were from the Home  Office  and  not
         Social Services as he asserted.

      b) In the assessment of proportionality, he failed to consider how the
         Appellants could continue family life with  their  mother  if  they
         were returned to South Africa and she were returned to Zimbabwe; he
         failed to take into account the  views  of  Prince  himself  as  to
         whether it was reasonable for him to leave the  UK;  he  failed  to
         take account of the fact that the  parents  could  not  be  removed
         while they had an outstanding  application;  failed  to  take  into
         account delay.

 9. Permission was initially refused and the grounds  were  renewed.  On  9
    February 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds gave permission to  appeal  on
    both grounds although she found that there was less merit in the  claim
    that the  Judge  had  given  inadequate  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellants nationality.

10. There was  a  Rule  24  response  which  argued  that  the  Judge  made
    reasonable sustainable findings that were open to  him  in  respect  of
    nationality. The findings in relation to  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision were open to the Judge and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  s
    parents and brother were granted discretionary leave after the date  of
    hearing did not render the Judge's decision in error.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants that:

      a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) She conceded that the ground in relation to the adequacy of reasons
         as to nationality had less merit and reiterated what was  contained
         n the grounds.

      c) In relation to the Article 8 assessment she argued that  the  Judge
         did not carry out a full assessment and did not give proper  weight
         to the fact that Prince was a  qualifying  child  and  why  it  was
         reasonable to remove him.

      d) The Judge did not consider that the parents would  not  be  removed
         while applications were still outstanding.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr McVitie submitted that :

      a) The decision to grant the Appellants parent's  discretionary  leave
         was not before the Judge.

      b) The Appellants bundle as it was before the First-tier Judge made no
         reference to Prince.

      c) As to where they lived that was a matter for the family to  decide,
         they were not British and their claim was not made out.

      d) A delay in relation to persons whose case was not before the  Judge
         was not relevant to these Appellants and there was  nothing  in  EB
         (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 to suggest that.  The  Appellants  in  this
         case had their appeals dealt with in 2 years.

      e) The  fact  that  the  Respondent  had  assisted  in  reuniting  the
         Appellant s with their parents did not prevent them being removed.

      f) In relation to the credibility findings the Judge had given  strong
         reasons for his findings. He was clearly aware that the  Appellants
         were minors as he mentions it several times.

      g) The factual mistakes were minor and not material.

13. In reply Ms Johnrose on behalf of the Appellants submitted:

      a) Delay was material if the Respondent was considering family life.

      b) The Judge was obliged to consider the reasonableness of removing  a
         'qualifying child'

      c) There was evidence in relation to Prince in the bundle.

The Law

14.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue.

16. In relation to challenging credibility findings it was said in  Mibanga
    v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

17. I remind myself that this is an error of law  appeal  and  therefore  I
    rely on the principles set out in Edwards  v  Bairstow  [1956]  AC  14.
    There, in an error of law  appeal,  the  House  of  Lords  applied  the
    standard of "the true and  only  reasonable  conclusion"  open  to  the
    Commissioners [at p10] and, notably, in doing so, employed the language
    of "perversity" [at p 6].  They defined the latter as a case in which -

         "... the facts found are such that no person acting judicially  and
         properly instructed as to  the  relevant  law  could  come  to  the
         determination under appeal."

    In the language of Viscount Simonds [at p 6]:

         "For it is universally conceded that, although it is a pure finding
         of fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have been  stated  in
         various ways but are, I think, fairly summarised by saying that the
         court should take that course if it appears that the  commissioners
         have acted without any evidence or upon a view of the  facts  which
         could not reasonably be entertained."

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. I will deal firstly with the challenge that  the  Judge's  findings  in
    relation to whether the Appellants were South  African  nationals  were
    adequate, a  challenge  that  was  identified  in  the  permission  and
    accepted quite properly by Ms Johnrose as being one with less merit.

20. The difficulty with this argument is that even if I were to accept that
    this was an error it  could  not  have  been  material.  The  Judge  in
    paragraph 46 considered the Appellants claim at its highest, that  they
    were, as they claimed, Zimbabwean nationals and found that in the light
    of the relevant country guidance given that they  did  not  claim  that
    either they or any members of their family were active  MDC  supporters
    they would not be at risk in North Matabeleland their home area.

21. Nevertheless I have  considered  their  argument  in  relation  to  the
    findings on their South African nationality and I am satisfied that the
    Judge gave ample findings against a  background  of  understanding  the
    ages of the Appellants at the time of the events described. He  did  so
    against the background firstly of findings in relation to the  separate
    asylum  claims  of  both  parents  which  were  refused  with   adverse
    credibility  findings  made  in  respect  of  their  claims  based   on
    Zimbabwean nationality and MDC activities. Both parents had used  South
    African passports to travel to the UK and in the father's appeal  there
    was a positive finding that the passport was genuine and in the mothers
    appeal a finding that it may or may not have been genuine.

22. Against this background it was open to the Judge to find  in  paragraph
    28 that their account of the circumstances in which they left  Zimbabwe
    in 2011, the costs of travel, an agent who obtained false South African
    passports could be covered by the sale of two cows was not credible.

23. Moreover their claim never to have  lived  anywhere  but  Zimbabwe  was
    inconsistent with the clear evidence he set out at paragraphs 29  -  31
    that South African passports in the names of the two Appellants stating
    that they were born  in  Johannesburg  were  produced  to  the  BHC  in
    Pretoria in April 2009 in support of visa applications. Both the names,
    dates of birth and fingerprints of the passport holders  matched  those
    of the Appellants. It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference from the fact that  both  Appellants  in  previous  screening
    interviews had denied ever being previously fingerprinted and  conclude
    that they had not been provided with fraudulent passports by the  agent
    in 2011 because there was clear evidence that they had the passports in
    2009. I reject the  suggestion  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the fact that the Appellants were being  asked  to
    recall events when they were minors as he set out with meticulous  care
    the chronology in this case nor does it alter the fact that their claim
    was that the  agent  produced  the  fraudulent  passports  whereas  the
    evidence was that the passports in their details were  in  existence  2
    years previously. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge gave adequate
    reasons for why he accepted  that  the  South  African  passports  were
    genuine and the weight he gave to each particular piece of evidence was
    a matter for him.

24. The Judge also gave a number of other reasons (paragraphs 36 - 45)  why
    he did not accept that the Appellants were Zimbabwean which clearly  he
    considered in the round with the passport evidence:

       . He attached limited weight to the  birth  certificates  which  were
         obtained a number of years after their birth;

       . He accepted they spoke Ndebele but noted they did not say  this  in
         their interviews. He rejected the  explanations  given  orally  for
         this and gave clear reasons for doing so.

       . He found the first Appellants claim of events both in  relation  to
         political events and the claimed rape of a friend in  Zimbabwe  and
         why they fled was confused and incredible.

       . There were discrepancies he noted in relation to where  they  lived
         between the evidence of the Appellants and their mother.(41 - 43)

       . He found the credibility of their claim generally was undermined by
         the failure of their father to attend court and  give  evidence  on
         their behalf. He rejected the explanation  given  for  his  absence
         that he was doing voluntary work

25.  I accept that there was a factual error in relation to  the  documents
    contained in the 'subject access request' in which the authors appeared
    to accept that the  Appellants  were  probably  Zimbabwean.  The  Judge
    stated incorrectly that these were social services documents when  they
    were in fact from case workers in the Home  Office.  Given  that  these
    were preliminary observations and that the  basis  of  the  Respondents
    case was, by the time  of  the  refusal  letter,  that  they  were  not
    Zimbabwean I am satisfied this made no material difference as the Judge
    was entitled to disagree just as the Respondent was entitled to  change
    their mind if reasons were given.

26. The Judge's assessment of proportionality was also challenged  in  that
    there was no assessment  of  where,  given  the  claimed  contradictory
    findings as to the nationalities of the Appellants and  their  parents,
    family life would be enjoyed. I  am  satisfied  that  this  was  not  a
    material issue: the Judge accepted  the  previous  decisions  that  the
    father and mother had links to both South Africa and Zimbabwe and  that
    they had passports for South Africa and that the Appellants were  South
    African therefore the venue for family  life  was  not  something  that
    rendered the decision disproportionate. The suggestion that they  could
    if they chose all live in South Africa was not  inconsistent  with  the
    findings made.

27.  I am satisfied having listened very carefully to the arguments  of  Ms
    Johnrose  and  reading  the  skeleton  argument  that   there   is   no
    identification of any fact that the Judge has failed  to  consider  the
    challenge is as to  the  weight  the  Judge  accorded  the  facts  that
    underpinned his analysis. And clearly that was a matter for him.

28. In asserting that the Judge in essence failed to give  adequate  weight
    to the best interests of the Appellants brother I am satisfied that  it
    was open to the Judge, given that at the time of the hearing while  the
    parents and the brother had cases outstanding with the home office they
    had not been resolved to conclude at paragraph 19 that it would not  be
    unreasonable  for  Prince  to  leave  the  UK  with  his  parents.  The
    suggestion that the Judge was requiring the parents to leave the UK  at
    a time when they could not be removed does  not  reflect  the  findings
    made by the Judge: he made clear at paragraph 65 that this was a choice
    that was open to them to leave with the two Appellants.

29. There was some argument before me and before Judge Levin that paragraph
    117B(6) applied and that  Prince  was  a  qualifying  child:  this  was
    properly rejected by the Judge on the basis that it was reasonable  for
    him to leave the UK. I am also satisfied that the Judge could also have
    found that for that section to apply the Appellant's would have had  to
    be in a parental relationship with Prince which clearly they were  not.



30. It was finally the Judge failed to take account of  the  delay  and  Ms
    Johnrose before me relied on EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  I
    have looked carefully at the decision of Judge Levin and  there  is  no
    reference to there being any argument as to delay before  him.  I  have
    also checked the notes of  evidence  he  made  as  I  accept  that  the
    decision itself may not record all of the submissions and I could  find
    no argument recorded in the notes that delay was of relevance  in  this
    case. An error of law hearing is not the time to reargue a  case  in  a
    way that was not before the Judge. This was not an obvious point  given
    that decisions in the Appellant's cases were made  relatively  promptly
    as they only arrived in the UK in 2011 and while  the  first  Appellant
    made a claim in her own right the second Appellant did not make a claim
    in her own right until 2014. The case of EB was moreover addressing the
    issue of delay in an applicant's case not  delays  in  another  persons
    case. I do not accept that delays in  addressing  the  appeals  of  the
    Appellants parents at a time when the Appellants were not even  in  the
    UK could be relevant to the Appellants appeal when at the time  of  the
    Judge's decision the parents and brother could have been removed.

31. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

32. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

33. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

34. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 20.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
