
[pic]
IAC-AH-krl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 March 2016                          |On 11 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                    Ahmed Mohammed hussEin Nady Al-Saffar
                       (ANONYMITY directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel, instructed by A2 Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 5 August 1990.   He  arrived
    in this country on 17 September  2014  and  applied  for  asylum.   The
    application was refused on 31 December 2014.  The  appellant  appealed
    and his appeal came before First-tier Judge Butler on 8 April 2015.

2.   Judge Butler helpfully summarises the appellant's case as follows:

         "3.  The appellant claimed that in 1991 his father was executed  by
             the  regime  of  Sadam  Hussein  for  participating   in   the
             "intifada" uprising. This led to his family moving in with his
             grandfather. His grandfather owned  a  restaurant  in  Karbala
             which was opposite the  government  buildings  taken  over  by
             American military  personnel  after  the  fall  of  the  Sadam
             Hussein regime in  2003.  US  Army  personnel  frequented  the
             restaurant and the appellant and his  family  became  friendly
             with them.


         4.   This  led  to  problems  for  the  family  with  other  locals
             targeting the family. Rocks were thrown at the restaurant, the
             appellant's uncle was threatened and a grenade was thrown into
             the house, the restaurant being at the front of the house. One
             American soldier converted to Islam and  married  one  of  the
             appellant's aunts.


         5.   Due to these continuing problems, the appellant's  grandfather
             moved the family to another area called Al  Mulhaq.  In  2010,
             the appellant began working as a photographer for the  Karbala
             Today newspaper. On a  date  in  March  2014,  he  attended  a
             meeting with other  journalists  who  were  interviewing  some
             authors. The appellant became involved in  a  discussion  with
             another journalist which became so heated they both had to  be
             calmed down by others. The discussion was about  the  American
             involvement in Iraq and  the  other  journalist  insulted  the
             appellant saying he was defending them because he  had  helped
             them in the past.


         6.   On a date in June 2014, the appellant claimed that an envelope
             containing a photograph of  members  of  his  family  with  an
             American soldier, a threat to his family and a  bullet  [sic].
             The appellant asked his uncle for advice and he told him to go
             to live with him at his grandmother's house in the  centre  of
             Karbala, which he did. The appellant then  left  Iraq  because
             the situation became unsafe with the rise of ISIS and the  Al-
             Mahdi Army."

3.   The respondent expressly accepted that the  appellant  and  his  family
    had established friendships with some  American  troops  but  otherwise
    took issue with the appellant's claim as lacking credibility.   It  was
    rejected that the appellant worked as a photographer for Karbala  Today
    Newspaper.

4.   The documents produced by the parties before the First-tier Judge  were
    listed in paragraph 15 of the determination as follows:

         "15. The respondent produced an appeal  bundle  and  the  appellant
             produced a bundle of 62 documents which  included  a  skeleton
             argument and statement dated 27  March  2015,  several  screen
             shots of the Karbala Council website featuring photographs  by
             the appellant, letters dated 8 February 2014 and  13  October
             2013 confirming the appellant was employed as  a  photographer
             by Karbala Today, confirmation of his membership of the  Iraqi
             Journalists' Syndicate from 23 October 2012 until  14  January
             2014,  his  written   commitment   for   membership   renewal,
             confirmation of the appellant's father's death and an  extract
             from his death certificate, his age  assessment,  confirmation
             of change of name, confirmation of his  inheritance  from  his
             father and a number of undated photographs with no  commentary
             or description."

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and having  summarised
    the submissions from the parties and having directed himself as to  the
    appropriate standard of proof  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness and his evidence was inconsistent and implausible  and
    he gives his reasons in the following extract from his determination:

         "36. In his screening interview, the appellant  said  he  travelled
             from Greece to Italy by boat but in  his  statement  dated  10
             November 2014 he said he made that journey by lorry.  Also  in
             his screening interview he said he had an uncle in the UK  but
             did not know where he was. In his asylum interview he said his
             uncle lived in London and he contacted him and was advised  to
             come to the UK.


         37.  I did not find the appellant's  evidence  of  his  work  as  a
             photographer for Karbala Today to be  credible.  His  evidence
             about his journalist's ID card was confused and  inconsistent.
             I consider it highly unlikely that a  card  would  record  his
             date of birth inaccurately or that his original application in
             2010 would be mislaid or destroyed resulting in his card being
             issued in 2012. Further, the accredited  photographs  produced
             by the appellant were taken from the Karbala Council  website,
             not that of a newspaper.  The  letters  from  the  editor  and
             deputy editor of the newspaper were  dated  October  2013  and
             February 2014 and issued "upon his  demand".  Both  dates  are
             well  before  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  received  the
             threatening letter from the Mahdi Army and I  find  it  highly
             unlikely the appellant would have had any  reason  to  request
             such confirmation before his problems began.  I  further  note
             the style of the dates on the letters, one being in the Arabic
             way and one in English, which further suggests  they  are  not
             authentic. Following the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed, I  do  not
             find that the appellant has established  the  authenticity  of
             any of the documents.


         38.  The appellant has produced Facebook conversations with several
             American troops. I do not accept Ms  Christopher's  submission
             that this corroborates his claim that he  will  be  persecuted
             for supporting the American forces. The conversations  show  a
             friendship, nothing  more.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant falls within the  category  of  risk  of  those  who
             actively supported the American  forces  while  they  were  in
             Iraq.


         39.  The appellant's account of moving from the restaurant premises
             to another part of the city is not credible. He  said  on  the
             one hand that the family then lived in safety but on the other
             that his mother was harassed at a market and he  was  degraded
             by a teacher in school. The  appellant  cannot  have  it  both
             ways. He either moved to another area and was safe or  he  was
             not. His evidence that one would always bump into someone  one
             knew in Karbala is completely at odds with the notion that the
             family moved area for their safety.


         40.  I did not find the appellant's account of  his  argument  with
             another journalist to be credible.  He  changed  his  evidence
             under cross-examination from having known  the  journalist  in
             question for some time to never  having  met  him  before  the
             argument.  He could not name that  journalist's  employer.  He
             said it was well known that he supported the  Mahdi  Army  but
             produced no evidence to support this. In particular, I find it
             highly unlikely that the journalist in question would know  of
             the appellant's relationship with the American forces if  they
             had never met before. The appellant  gave  evidence  that  his
             photography work was more about cultural matters and  he  knew
             little about fundamentalist groups. I find there is no  basis
             for suggesting his relationship  with  American  troops  would
             have been generally known.


         41.  The refusal letter made the point that the  appellant  changed
             his story in relation to the letter he alleged  was  delivered
             to his home. Initially he said  it  contained  more  than  one
             photograph and then produced the only photograph he  said  was
             in the envelope. He was also inconsistent in saying  initially
             that it was left outside the house and then that  it  was  put
             through or under the door. But the claim that  the  photograph
             was stolen some years previously and then fell into the  hands
             of  the  journalist  with  whom  he   argued   stretches   the
             imagination too far, especially since he did not mention  this
             in his asylum interview. He said he told his  solicitor  about
             it which I find highly unlikely since it was not mentioned  in
             his statements. This account is not credible.


         42.  The appellant said his whole  family  was  threatened  by  the
             letter. No evidence of any further targeting of any members of
             his family was produced apart from a reference to his sister's
             house being burned down, an event  I  consider  to  have  been
             highly  unlikely.  This  further  prejudices  the  appellant's
             credibility since if his family have experienced  no  problems
             since he left, there is no basis for him to fear  persecution,
             either before he left or if he returns.  He  said  his  family
             were not living, only existing but none of them  has  provided
             any evidence that this is the case.


         43.  I also find that the appellant has exaggerated the threat from
             the  Mahdi  Army.  As   the   refusal   letter   noted,   that
             organisation's threat  has  significantly  reduced  since  the
             indefinite ceasefire announced in 2008 and  its  effectiveness
             has been greatly  reduced  following  its  fragmentation  (COI
             Report 2011).


         44.  Having considered all the circumstances in the round,  I  find
             it highly likely that the appellant has fabricated all of  his
             evidence with  the  exception  of  his  friendship  with  some
             American troops. It follows that I do not find he has a  well-
             founded fear of persecution if he returns to Iraq and has  not
             established that he satisfies the requirements of the  Refugee
             Convention. His claims under Articles  2  and  3  fall  to  be
             dismissed in line with his asylum claim."

6.   The judge then found the appellant would not be at risk as a  returning
    failed asylum seeker and found  there  would  be  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Iraq  and  dismissed  his  appeal  in
    relation to Article 8.

7.   There was an application for permission to appeal out  of  time.   This
    was considered by First-tier Judge Levin on 16 June 2015.  Judge  Levin
    noted that the application was some three weeks late.  He  nevertheless
    extended time but granted leave on one point only which was set out  in
    paragraph 6 of the grounds of appeal.  This ground reads as follows:

         "The FTJ erred at paragraph 38 when he concluded that the  Facebook
         conversion [sic] is merely friendship.  The FTJ failed to take into
         account the  various  photographs  that  the  applicant  took  with
         various American soldiers at his grandfather's  restaurant.   These
         photographs were placed before the FTJ and had the  FTJ  considered
         these along with the Facebook conversation, he could have reached a
         different conclusion.  The applicant states that his family  had  a
         good and close relationship with the American  soldiers  which  the
         locals believe that the applicant's family supported the  Americans
         thereby putting them at risk [sic]."

8.   It was contended in paragraph 7 that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    applicant's  family's  relationship  with  the  American  soldiers  was
    inadequate and therefore flawed and erroneous.

9.   On 31 July 2015 the respondent filed her Rule 24  response,  issue  was
    taken with the fact that Judge Levin had granted permission  to  appeal
    out of time.  In relation to the point on  which  permission  had  been
    granted it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  clearly  recorded  the
    documents before him in paragraph 15 of the determination (which I have
    set out above)  and  it  was  difficult  to  see  how  random  "undated
    photographs with no commentary or description" could justify a grant of
    permission  bearing  in  mind  the  limited  evidential  value  of  the
    photographs.  The grounds were merely opportunistic in  nature  and  no
    more than mere disagreement  with  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   The
    judge's determination had been detailed and had taken all the  evidence
    into account.

10.  At the hearing it was confirmed that  there  had  been  no  attempt  to
    resurrect the rejected grounds and the appeal proceeded on the basis of
    the point identified by Judge Levin.

11.  Mr Balroop submitted that the judge had failed to  give  the  case  the
    required anxious scrutiny.   It  was  submitted  that  the  photographs
    corroborated the appellant's account.  He  submitted  that  photographs
    from Facebook were normally dated and timed.   They  were  moreover  in
    possession of the Secretary of State at the time of  the  decision  and
    were exhibited at G1 in the  respondent's  bundle.   The  reference  in
    paragraph 15 of the determination to a number  of  undated  photographs
    with  no  commentary  or  description  was  clearly  an   error.    The
    photographs in the respondent's bundle were dated.  Counsel referred to
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 and  submitted  that  inquiries  could
    have been made about the matter although he acknowledged the point  had
    not been taken in the grounds it was an obvious point.

12.   Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  confusing.    If   the
    photographs were from Facebook then the judge had  clearly  taken  them
    into account.  There was no need to  make  specific  reference  to  the
    photographs in Facebook.  There was no evidence he had  not  taken  the
    photographs into account.  The fact that the appellant had a friendship
    with US troops had been accepted by the respondent.  There was no error
    in paragraph 37 of the determination that showed the judge had erred in
    applying the case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed.   The  judge  had  given  proper
    consideration  to  the  documentary  and  oral  evidence  and   reached
    conclusions that were open to him.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision if I find a material
    error of law.  In this case the grounds were  limited  to  paragraph  6
    which I have set out above.  It was acknowledged by  Counsel  that  the
    point in relation to Tanveer Ahmed had not featured in the grounds  and
    I see no merit in the  argument  in  any  event.   The  judge  properly
    directed  himself  on  the  material  before  him  and  there  was   no
    misapplication of the guidance.

14.  There was no dispute in this case that the  appellant  and  his  family
    had established friendships  with  some  American  troops.   The  judge
    refers to the bundles lodged at both sides and it is not arguable  that
    he failed to have regard to the contents of the bundles.  In  paragraph
    28 the judge summarises the  submissions  made  by  the  advocate  then
    representing the appellant which includes the following point:

         "... his relationship with American troops  was  evidenced  by  his
         Facebook conversations with some of them.  They related  to  issues
         which backed up his credibility as did his request to them  not  to
         post photographs of his family as  he  was  concerned  about  their
         welfare.  ...".

15.  It is plain that the judge was dealing with  the  submissions  made  by
    the appellant's representative about the Facebook conversations and  it
    is quite unarguable that he failed to have regard  to  the  photographs
    included in the conversations or overlooked any  other  photographs  in
    the respondent's bundle or indeed in the appellant's  bundle.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that there was no evidence that the appellant
    fell within the category of risk of those who  actively  supported  the
    American forces while they were in Iraq.

16.  The judge properly considered all the evidence before him, applied  the
    correct burden and standard of proof and it is  not  demonstrated  when
    the determination is read as  a  whole  that  the  judge  neglected  to
    consider any salient evidence upon which reliance was placed.  For  the
    sake of completeness I should mention  that  no  attempt  was  made  to
    resurrect the original grounds and rightly so.  They go no further than
    expressing disagreement and the point on which permission  was  granted
    discloses no material error of law either.

17.  For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.


     Decision:

     Appeal Dismissed

Anonymity Order

I was not invited to make an  anonymity  direction.   The  First-tier  Judge
made none.  I make no anonymity direction in this case.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable.




Signed                                  Date 23 March 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

