

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00583/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Date Sent                    |
|On 10 July 2013                               |On 22 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MR AMADOU DIARRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dickson dismissed his appeal  on  asylum
   and human rights grounds.  The appellant was  absent  from  the  hearing,
   which took place on 20 February 2013.

2) In the grant of permission to appeal it was noted that according  to  the
   appellant he was unable to attend the hearing  because  on  the  relevant
   date he was in prison.  He did not receive  notice  of  the  hearing  and
   because of  language  problems  and  his  inability  to  access  relevant
   documents he was unable to communicate with  his  solicitors  and  inform
   them of his whereabouts.

3) It was further noted in the  grant  of  permission  that  the  notice  of
   hearing was sent to the  appellant's  last  known  address  and  returned
   undelivered.  The judge decided to determine the appeal on the  basis  of
   the documents before him but it was arguably unfair for the appellant not
   to have had the opportunity of attending the hearing of his appeal.

4) At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Mangion  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
   correspondent that there was a record of the appellant's arrest  but  not
   of the length of his detention.  He was  arrested  by  British  Transport
   Police on the night of 22-23 December 2012.  It is not clear  whether  he
   was subsequently remanded in custody on a criminal charge or detained  in
   immigration detention.

5)  In  response  Mr  Selway  referred  to  a  chronology  prepared  by  the
   appellant's solicitors.  This stated that the appellant was taken to  HMP
   Wormwood Scrubs on 23 December 2012 and his son was taken  into  care  by
   the social services.  The appellant's son has a  separate  appeal  before
   the Tribunal and there was a Case Management Review hearing in respect of
   this on 4 July 2013 in Bradford.

6) Mr Mangion's submission for the Secretary of State was that there was  no
   documentary evidence to support the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  in
   custody on the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  20
   February 2013.  I note, however, that there is  documentary  evidence  of
   the appellant's arrest.  In consequence of this the appellant's  son  was
   taken into care and the appellant lost contact with his  solicitors.   It
   appears that he also lost his accommodation as  he  was  given  different
   accommodation by NASS when he was released from detention.  Taking  these
   factors  into  account,  together  with  the  language  difficulties  the
   appellant experienced while he was in detention, I am satisfied  that  it
   was impractical to expect him to attend the appeal hearing.

7) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had no knowledge of  these  matters.
   It is the responsibility of an appellant to keep the Tribunal informed of
   his address.  Under Rule 56(2) of the Procedure Rules, until a  party  or
   representative  notifies  the  Tribunal  of  a  change  of  address,  any
   documents served on him at the most recent address which he has  notified
   to the Tribunal shall be deemed to have  been  properly  served  on  him.
   Having regard to this rule, the judge was entitled to  rely  upon  deemed
   service of the notice of hearing.

8) The judge recorded in his determination at paragraph 25  that  there  was
   no appearance on behalf of the appellant  at  a  Case  Management  Review
   hearing at Bradford on 6 February 2013.  His  solicitors  had  previously
   written to the Tribunal to say they were no longer acting for him and did
   not know his current  address.   The  address  originally  given  to  the
   Tribunal for the appellant was stated by Royal Mail to be inaccurate.

9) Having recorded these matters the judge then went on to hear  the  appeal
   on 20 February 2013 in the absence of the appellant.   In  proceeding  in
   this way the judge does not appear  to  have  consciously  exercised  his
   discretion under Rule 19(1) of the Procedure Rules.  This states that the
   Tribunal  may  hear  an  appeal  in  the  absence  of  a  party  or   his
   representative if satisfied that the party has been given notice  of  the
   date, time and place of the hearing and there is no good reason for  such
   absence.  Although the judge recounted some of the circumstances relating
   to the non-appearance at the Case Management Review hearing,  there  does
   not appear to have been any exercise of discretion by the  judge  at  the
   substantive hearing.

10) I am satisfied that there was an error of law by the Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal and, although the judge was not aware of the  circumstances
   giving rise to the appellant's absence, the appellant's absence  was  for
   reasons which were largely outside his control,  although  the  appellant
   himself contributed by his conduct to the situation  in  which  he  found
   himself.  Nevertheless, for the appeal hearing to have proceeded in these
   circumstances was procedurally unfair.

11) This is an appeal in which  the  appellant  has  been  deprived  of  the
   opportunity of putting his case before the First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
   consideration  and  accordingly  the  appropriate  course,  in  terms  of
   Practice Statement 7.2, is for the appeal to be remitted  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

12) It may further be appropriate for this appeal to  be  heard  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal with the appeal by the appellant's son, which is also
   pending.  For this reason I would propose that this appeal be listed  for
   a Case Management Review hearing in North Shields before it is listed for
   a substantive hearing.

Conclusions

13) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point
   of law such that it is set aside and will be remade upon remittal to  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

14) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


