

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00649/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court                      |Determination Sent           |
|On : 30th July 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                    l m a
                       (Anonymity Direction Continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Jag Singh of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 21st December 2011 a decision was taken to remove the  appellant  as
    an illegal entrant, consequent upon the refusal of  his  asylum  claim.
    An  appeal  against  that  decision  was  lodged  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and on 27th  February  2012  it  came  before  Judge  Wilbert
    Harris.  The appeal was dismissed, but the Cambridge Immigration  Legal
    Centre, to whom the appellant now  turned  for  help,  identified  such
    glaring errors in the judge's determination that Judge Plumptre readily
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Unfortunately,  it
    was not until 22nd January  2013  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  a
    'Decision   and   Directions'   setting   aside   the    first-instance
    determination.  It should have been possible for Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor to proceed on the same day (actually the  hearing  was  on  24th
    September 2012) and re-make the decision on the appeal,  but  a  Pushtu
    interpreter was not available, and so the hearing had to be adjourned.

2.    It seems to me that Judge Harris failed completely to  carry  out  the
    judicial task required of him.  He set out almost in their entirety the
    contents of the 'Reasons for Refusal'  Letter  (except  for  a  passage
    which seems to have been 'cut and pasted'  from  elsewhere,  and  which
    refers to the appellant entering the UK with a visit visa, when in fact
    he entered clandestinely).  Only two paragraphs out of the  56  in  the
    determination contain any findings by the judge, and those findings are
    completely vitiated by misapprehension of the appellant's  account  and
    by the absence of any reasons.  The judge supposes that  the  appellant
    has been detained and tortured by the police, which is no part  of  his
    account, and also thinks that the police have issued a warrant for  his
    arrest and have been going to various places in search  of  him,  which
    again is no  part  of  the  appellant's  account.   Judge  Harris  even
    reverses  the  standard  of  proof,  when  he  says  that  "there   are
    substantial grounds for believing that, if the Appellant is returned to
    Afghanistan, he would not face a real risk ..."

3.   The 'second stage' of the Upper Tribunal process,  i.e.  the  re-making
    of the decision on the appeal, has been delayed by subsequent  listings
    which were then adjourned.  In response to a notice of hearing for  8th
    July 2013, posted to the appellant and  to  the  Cambridge  Immigration
    Legal Centre on 21st May, the representatives  sent  a  letter  on  1st
    July, saying that they were without instructions. Their client had  not
    replied to letters which they had sent to him by Special Delivery,  and
    they had been unable to contact him.  They accordingly wished  to  come
    off the record.

4.   Notice of today's hearing was sent to  the  appellant  by  first  class
    post on 2nd July, to the same address in Peterborough as has been  used
    for correspondence since the present appeal was lodged at the beginning
    of 2012.  The notice has not been returned undelivered, but  there  was
    no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant  today.   In  accordance
    with rule 38  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2008,  I  was
    satisfied that it was in the interests of justice  to  proceed  in  the
    absence of a party.

5.   I heard submissions from Mr Singh, who pointed out that, at  paragraphs
    28-29 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter, cogent reasons were given  for
    not believing the core of the appellant's claim.  The  appellant  bases
    his fear of return on an incident which took place some ten  or  twelve
    days before he left Afghanistan in 2008.  Some Taliban fighters  called
    at the family home in Logar, seeking help for a  wounded  comrade,  but
    the appellant's father  refused  to  let  them  in.   Then  the  police
    arrived, and there was a shoot-out.  The appellant left  the  house  by
    the back door, and went to stay at his  uncle's  house,  which  was  in
    walking distance.  His uncle assisted him to leave the country, because
    the Taliban were accusing him of helping the police, while  the  police
    suspected him of helping the Taliban.

6.   This story is rejected by the author of the refusal letter.  There  was
    no reason for the Taliban to blame  the  appellant,  when  it  was  his
    father who had refused to  help  them.   The  Taliban  could  not  have
    supposed that the  appellant  summoned  the  police,  who  had  arrived
    shortly afterwards, as there was no land line in the house, and  mobile
    telephones do not work in that mountainous district.   If  the  Taliban
    had really wanted to get the appellant, they could have got him  during
    the ten or twelve days when  he  was  residing  at  his  uncle's  house
    nearby, or when he went home to say goodbye to his family.  No harm had
    befallen the appellant's family since he left, which  was  inconsistent
    with Taliban practice when someone betrays them.  Nor  had  the  police
    taken any adverse interest in the appellant's family.  I might add that
    ten or twelve days would be too short a time to organise  from  scratch
    and fund a journey to the other side of the world.

7.   The above reasons are good enough for the appellant's asylum  claim  to
    be rejected on credibility grounds.  But as Mr Singh adds, even if  the
    appellant were at risk from the local Taliban  in  his  home  area,  he
    would not be hunted down elsewhere in the country, and could reasonably
    be expected to relocate to, for example, Kabul.  He is a fit young  man
    of 29 who has shown enough contrivance to keep body and  soul  together
    on a year-long journey from Afghanistan to England.  He could certainly
    do likewise in a country where he knows the language and the customs.


     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.

     The  direction  for  anonymity  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    continued.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              30th July 2013



