
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00751/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date sent                    |
|on 8 July 2013                                |On 10 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                TRACY CHANDA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Zambia, born on 2 February 1992.  She  says
   she is at risk of persecution on  return  to  Zambia  because  she  is  a
   lesbian.

2) The respondent refused the claim for reasons explained in a letter  dated
   22 November 2012.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
   determination promulgated 11 March 2013.  She did not find evidence  from
   the appellant, from her mother, and from  her  alleged  lesbian  partner,
   Ardia Banzouzi, to be credible.

4) The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
   first ground is that the  judge  overlooked  a  concession  made  by  the
   respondent's representative that if found credible, the  appellant  would
   qualify  for  protection.   The  further  grounds  dispute  the   adverse
   credibility findings  for  wrongly  identifying  inconsistencies  in  the
   evidence; for failing to give the appellant the opportunity to respond to
   various points; and for inadequacy of reasoning.

5) On 3 April 2013, First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman  refused  permission
   to appeal.  The judge identified in the record of proceedings a  note  of
   the concession, but that did not effect  the  overall  decision,  as  the
   appellant had not been found credible.  The other grounds were thought to
   be  no  more  than  disagreement  with  adequately  reasoned  credibility
   findings.

6) On 24 April 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted permission  on  a
   renewed application, made on the same grounds.  It was  thought  that  as
   the judge had not summarised the appellant's oral  evidence  it  was  not
   possible to identify the claimed inconsistencies referred to at paragraph
   29 of the determination.  While there seemed to be little  merit  in  the
   other challenges, permission was not restricted.

7) Mr Ruddy said that the first category of challenge  was  that  the  judge
   overlooked the concession.  (Mr Mullen was able to identify the making of
   the concession from the record on his file.)  However, Mr Ruddy  accepted
   that this was irrelevant unless other error was shown.

8) Mr Ruddy's second category  of  challenge  was  as  to  absence  of  fair
   notice, issues mentioned at paragraphs 3, 4 and 8 of the grounds.

9) The third category of error in the remaining grounds  was  inadequacy  of
   assessment of the evidence, coupled with mistakes as to what the evidence
   actually  was.   Cumulatively,  these  were   said   to   undermine   the
   determination.

10) At paragraph 29, the judge says that there was an inconsistency  in  the
   appellant's evidence as to whether she had a row with the father  of  her
   child on 25, 26 or 27 December 2012.  Mr Ruddy submitted that  there  was
   no such inconsistency.  Both in her statement  and  at  the  hearing  the
   appellant said that the row took  place  on  Christmas  Day.   The  judge
   failed at paragraph 35 to explain why the appellant's  mother's  evidence
   was rejected, and why she was thought to have been "pulling  the  strings
   all along".  There was no explanation  of  why  her  evidence  should  be
   disregarded to that extent.  At paragraph 36, the judge  did  not  accept
   that the appellant  frequented  gay  nightclubs.   That  was  misleading,
   because the appellant never said that she did frequent gay  night  clubs.
   At paragraph 37, the judge found it bizarre that the appellant's partner,
   Ardia, began a lesbian relationship shortly after  having  a  child,  but
   there was no reason for finding that to be bizarre.  Having had  a  child
   was not a factor which discredited the witness's  evidence  of  being  of
   lesbian orientation.  At paragraph 40, the judge found  it  adverse  that
   the appellant was diagnosed with chlamydia only  in  2012,  although  she
   claimed to have had no sexual relations with a man since  the  conception
   of her daughter towards the end of 2007.  There was no reasoning for that
   conclusion.   The judge went on to use very strong  wording,  saying,  "I
   simply cannot believe a word that the appellant  and  her  two  witnesses
   have told me.  It was quite the most extraordinary account of fabrication
   I have ever heard."   There  was  nothing  to  justify  such  an  extreme
   rejection of the  evidence.   Nothing  emerged  in  cross-examination  to
   discredit Ardia as a witness.  The determination should be set aside  and
   the case reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

11) Mr Mullen accepted that there  was  nothing  to  show  an  inconsistency
   about whether the row with the father of the appellant's child was on 25,
   26 or 27 December 2012.  However, in the same paragraph  the  judge  also
   founded  on  a  much  more  significant  discrepancy,  over  whether  the
   appellant had an ongoing relationship with the father of her child man or
   whether the pregnancy was the result of a "one night stand".  That was  a
   good reason for rejecting her  evidence.   At  paragraph  30,  the  judge
   explained in detail why  she  rejected  evidence  concerning  an  alleged
   previous lesbian partner of the appellant in Zambia.  The judge got  that
   right.  There was no duty to put all matters which occurred  to  a  judge
   when considering the evidence to the appellant for further  comment.   It
   had not been suggested that the appellant had any  further  responses  to
   offer.  Paragraph 31 disclosed in further detail that the  appellant  had
   maintained through her solicitors that she was in an ongoing relationship
   with the father of the child, contrary to her later claim that this was a
   one night stand.  The appellant's mother  was  a  thoroughly  discredited
   witness through prior proceedings, and the judge was entitled  to  reject
   her evidence and to conclude that she was manipulating matters further in
   efforts to remain in the UK.  At paragraph 36 the judge was  entitled  to
   find the appellant did not frequent gay night clubs, a matter of at least
   potential relevance.  The judge was entitled to find evidence from  Ardia
   about entering into the relationship with the  appellant  bizarre.   When
   the paragraph was read as a  whole,  this  was  in  the  context  of  the
   appellant, despite being allegedly in a serious relationship with  Ardia,
   knowing nothing about contact between Ardia's child and his father.   The
   judge was entitled to conclude that there was not demonstrated  to  be  a
   relationship or indeed that the appellant and Ardia even knew each  other
   very well.  Mr  Mullen  accepted  that  paragraph  40,  relating  to  the
   chlamydia diagnosis, did not explain why any adverse inference  followed.
   He said that was a minor element which could be excised, leaving the rest
   of the determination to stand.   Paragraphs  42  and  43  contained  good
   reasons for rejecting the evidence of the alleged relationship.   Ardia's
   evidence as to  the  relationship  had  been  vague,  including  lack  of
   discussion of the future, and lack of knowledge of when  they  last  went
   out as a couple.

12) Mr Ruddy in  response  submitted  that  in  evidence  it  had  not  been
   explored what knowledge the appellant and Ardia had regarding the care of
   their respective children, or what the appellant knew of Ardia's  child's
   contact with her father.  The appellant had said that she was  not  aware
   of the extent of the child's contact with his father, not  that  she  was
   unaware of the child care arrangements.  The judge failed  to  provide  a
   sufficient analysis of why adverse  conclusions  were  reached  upon  the
   whole evidence.  Paragraph 40 could not simply be disregarded, because it
   was  an  example  of  the  judge's  insufficient  justification  of   her
   conclusions throughout the determination.

13)  I reserved my determination.

14) The judge overlooked the concession made.  That was an  error,  but  (as
   agreed) it is relevant only if the credibility conclusions  must  be  set
   aside.

15) The points on which the appellant  complains  of  not  having  had  fair
   notice are of no substance.  They are all observations of shortcomings in
   the evidence which the judge was entitled to make.  Also,  the  appellant
   has not put forward  any  further  proposed  information  or  explanation
   bearing on these matters, without which there cannot be material error.

16)  The plainest error identified is at paragraph 40.  It is not  explained
   why the  late  diagnosis  of  chlamydia  yields  an  adverse  credibility
   conclusion, and it is not a matter to be taken implicitly  from  judicial
   knowledge.  The question is whether the  determination  remains  adequate
   when that reason is taken out.

17) The rest of the challenges seek to make too much  of  such  inaccuracies
   as can be found.  The appellant may not  have  been  inconsistent  as  to
   whether she had a row with the father of  her  child  on  25,  26  or  27
   December 2012 but she was plainly inconsistent as to whether  she  had  a
   long term  relationship  or  a  one  night  stand  with  that  person,  a
   contradiction redolent of fabrication.  The judge was  entitled  to  find
   the evidence from the appellant and Ardia inadequate  to  establish  that
   they had a genuine  lesbian  relationship,  and  she  set  out  why  that
   evidence, also crucial, was vague  and  unsatisfactory.   The  judge  was
   entitled to reject the evidence from the appellant's mother, the starting
   point being that she  was  previously  found  to  be  a  very  untruthful
   witness.

18) Reading the determination fairly and  as  a  whole  it  is  an  adequate
   explanation to the appellant of why her case failed.

19) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                9 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
