
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
aa/00314/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 April 2018                           | On 18 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                   MRS NB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Aly, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Adam
                    Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Behan who, in a determination promulgated on  8
    November 2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State made  on  22  November  2014  to  issue  removal
    directions under Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
    following the refusal of her claim to asylum.

2.   The appellant's husband and her son, who was born  on  29  April  2001,
    are her dependants.  The appellant's brother-in-law came to Britain  in
    the late 1990s and it is asserted that he was granted asylum and is now
    a British citizen.  Her husband came  to  Britain  in  April  2001  and
    claimed asylum in  April  the  following  year.   His  application  was
    refused and  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  was  dismissed  by  an
    Adjudicator, Mr  Boyd,  in  a  determination  dated  23  October  2002.
    Permission to appeal further was refused and  the  appellant's  husband
    became appeal rights exhausted.  He has  remained  in  Britain  without
    authority ever since.  Although he  states  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain under  the  Legacy  Programme  in  2011,  that  application  was
    refused.  The appellant had herself visited Britain in 2006,  2008  and
    2013 returning to Pakistan within the currency of the first  two  visas
    but remaining without authority after she entered in  May  2013  before
    she claimed asylum in March the following year.

3.    The  appellant  does  not  claim  that  she  suffered  persecution  in
    Pakistan.  Her claim is based on that of her  husband  because  of  her
    husband's profile in a Shia organisation called Fiqa Jafriya (FJ) which
    had made him a target for violence while he lived  in  Pakistan.   That
    had culminated in his being shot in the leg and waist.   The  appellant
    stated that she had not come to Britain with her husband  when  he  had
    come to claim asylum  because  it  was  her  duty  to  look  after  her
    husband's family. She also said that it was not in her son's  interests
    to leave Britain now because of threats to his life and because he  was
    doing well at school here.

4.   The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant was  a  Shia  Muslim
    but did not find the appellant's claim to be credible and  stated  that
    the background to the claim was vague and inconsistent.  The judge  had
    before her a copy of the determination  in  the  appellant's  husband's
    appeal and also evidence that there  was  a  letter  to  him  from  the
    respondent giving a notice of  a  decision  to  issue  further  removal
    directions.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and from  her  husband.  In
    paragraphs 47 and 48 she set out the appropriate burden and standard of
    proof.  In paragraphs 49 onwards  the  judge,  having  noted  that  the
    standard of proof was a low one, considered the  appellant's  evidence.
    She noted the determination of Mr Boyd in which he had stated  that  he
    did not find that the appellant's husband  was  credible  and  did  not
    believe that he had been the subject of persecution  or  harassment  in
    the manner he had suggested or that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution should he return to Pakistan.  Mr Boyd had stated that that
    conclusion was enhanced by the fact  that  his  wife  (this  appellant)
    appeared to have had no difficulty in Pakistan since  her  husband  had
    left.

6.   Mr Boyd found that the appellant's husband's evidence was  inconsistent
    and lacked detail and noted that he had  stayed  in  Pakistan  for  two
    years after he had first had problems  and  that  he  had  then  waited
    thirteen months before claiming asylum, claiming that he  had  not  had
    any contact with his wife  because  of  safety  concerns  although  his
    brother's wife had been  back  to  Pakistan  and  met  her.  The  judge
    correctly reminded herself that she was not bound by Mr Boyd's findings
    and moreover in any event she was not hearing an appeal against them.

7.   The judge noted the appellant and her husband had  been  consistent  in
    saying that the appellant and his  brother  had  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of anti-Shia groups because of their position in FJ and noted
    that there was some background evidence to show  that  there  was  some
    violence perpetrated against the Shia community by Sunni  militants  in
    Pakistan and therefore if the  appellant's  husband  had  held  a  high
    profile position in a Shia organisation it was not implausible that  he
    became the target of anti-Shia militants.  The judge  stated  that  she
    was prepared to accept that the appellant's husband's brother played an
    active  part  in  organising  religious  processions   and   that   the
    appellant's husband had been asked by his father to look  out  for  his
    younger brother.  She said that beyond that it was difficult to discern
    from the evidence presented what their claimed  "leadership"  involved.
    The judge went on  to  say  that  she  had  found  there  were  several
    unsatisfactory elements to the accounts given by the appellant and  her
    husband and that she  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    husband had suffered the injuries he appeared to claim that he suffered
    at the hands  of  anti-Shia  militants  or  that  he  was  specifically
    targeted by such militant groups or  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm should he return to  Pakistan.   Overall,  she  found  the
    evidence presented by the appellant and  her  husband  about  precisely
    what had happened to him and why he had been targeted to be  incoherent
    and inconsistent and that there was an absence  of  evidence  that  was
    clearly relevant to the appellant's case in circumstances where it  was
    reasonable to expect such evidence to be presented.   The  judge  found
    the explanation of why the appellant remained in Pakistan with her  son
    in circumstances in which she said she feared for her  life  and  which
    were traumatising to her son to be implausible.

8.    The  judge  stated  that  the  exact  circumstances  under  which  the
    appellant's husband was shot were unclear.    The  appellant's  husband
    told the respondent he had been captured and interrogated by  anti-Shia
    groups several times and that he was beaten and his  leg  injured.   He
    was recorded as saying that his brother had been the assistant chief of
    the group and the judge stated that that was not what  the  appellant's
    husband had said in evidence.  The appellant's husband  had  said  that
    there had been an attack with gunfire  on  his  brother  and  they  had
    driven to a hospital in Rawalpindi but  there  was  no  record  in  his
    determination of him saying he had been shot in  his  leg.   The  judge
    said that she was told about a time when the appellant's husband  could
    not get to a hospital to have his leg wound  treated  but  it  was  not
    clear if these were the same incidents or different ones.  It  appeared
    from the determination of Mr Boyd that  there  was  some  link  to  the
    appellant's  husband's  brother's  involvement  and   difficulties   in
    politics as opposed to his leadership role in FJ.

9.   The judge went on to point out that the appellant's husband  had  given
    no detail about the circumstances under which he was  shot  or  why  he
    waited two years to leave and also pointed to the discrepancies in  the
    evidence as to whether or not FJ was a political party or  a  religious
    grouping.  The judge  stated  that  the  discrepancy  was  most  likely
    explained by someone making up the evidence and in  view  of  the  fact
    that there was no  mention  of  being  shot  at  in    the  appellant's
    husband's signed statement which was adopted by him at the hearing  she
    concluded that either he had wilfully  invented  the  evidence  or  was
    extremely careless about what evidence he was prepared  to  put  before
    the Tribunal.  Moreover, the appellant's husband had signed a statement
    saying that FJ had been outlawed many times by the government but  this
    was simply not true.  The judge noted that the appellant had said  that
    her life was in danger in Pakistan but pointed out that she had come to
    Britain, with her son, four or five times but had  always  returned  to
    what she claimed was an extremely  dangerous  situation  and  that  the
    explanation for this was that she had to do  this  to  look  after  her
    parents-in-law.   The  judge   found   that   inherently   implausible.
    Moreover, she placed weight on the  delay  in  the  appellant  claiming
    asylum.

10.  The judge pointed to the fact that the appellant's brother-in-law,  who
    lived in Britain and, it was claimed, had had asylum here,  would  have
    been a key  witness  but  he  did  not  attend.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant's husband had said that if he returned to Pakistan  he  would
    resume his previous activities but that there was scant evidence as  to
    what they were:  it appeared that he  may  have  been  responsible  for
    making arrangements for processions and for protecting his brother  but
    it was not clear how many processions or over  what  period  these  had
    been arranged, nor was it clear what activities he would take up if  he
    returned to Pakistan now.   He  could  hardly  go  back  to  being  his
    brother's bodyguard as his brother was here.   The  judge  went  on  to
    state that although the  roles  of  the  appellant's  husband  and  her
    brother-in-law were unclear she was prepared  to  accept  that  in  his
    locality the appellant's husband's father and uncle  had  taken  active
    roles which were passed on to the appellant's husband and  his  brother
    but it was not clear what role that was as it  was  certainly  not,  it
    appeared, a religious role.   She  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's
    husband did not say that he had taken any role in  the  Shia  community
    here, nor was there even any evidence  of  regular  attendance  at  the
    mosque or religious activities.   His  role  had  been  linked  to  his
    locality and to his family.  It was  not  reasonably  likely  that  her
    husband would continue his activities in Pakistan now if he feared that
    he would be in danger.  There was no evidence to  show  what  he  would
    wish to do so on return.

11.  The judge therefore found that the appellant and her  husband  did  not
    qualify for asylum here.   Detailed  consideration  was  given  to  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR and in particular to the
    rights of the appellant's son.  The judge found that the  family  would
    be able to return to Pakistan as a unit.

12.  The grounds of appeal on which Ms Aly relied are lengthy and Mr  Clarke
    made brief submissions thereon.  Firstly, it was argued that the  judge
    had  failed  to  state  in  what  way  the  appellant's  evidence   was
    inconsistent and incoherent  and  should  have  set  out  her  specific
    concerns regarding the ways in which the evidence  of  the  appellant's
    husband  that he had been shot were unclear.  It was  stated  that  the
    judge should  have  made  clear  findings  about  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's husband had been shot and should  have  explained  why  the
    claim was rejected and should have taken into account the fact that the
    incidents  which  had  been  described  had  taken  place  before   the
    appellant's husband fled to Britain in  2001  and  therefore  that  the
    inconsistencies related to events sixteen or more years ago.

13.   I consider that there is no merit  in  that  ground  of  appeal.   The
    reality is that it was the appellant's evidence and that of her husband
    which  was  inconsistent  and  incoherent.   The  judge  clearly   very
    carefully considered the evidence before her  and  did  point  out  the
    inconsistencies therein.   The  judge  did  also  of  course  have  the
    determination of Mr Boyd - the Adjudicator who  heard  the  appellant's
    husband's appeal - before her.   It is impossible for a judge  to  make
    clear findings as to what happened if the evidence of  the  witness  is
    itself unclear.  What the judge wrote in the determination reflects the
    evidence before her.  There is no clear submission in  the  grounds  to
    show that the appellant's husband's evidence  was  coherent  throughout
    and that the judge had misunderstood the evidence being put before her.
     Moreover, the judge  should  not  have  accepted  incoherent  evidence
    merely because it related to issues many years  ago.   The  reality  is
    that Mr Boyd did not find the appellant's husband was credible and that
    he heard evidence  very  shortly  after  the  incidents  on  which  the
    appellant's husband relied.

14.  It was then argued in the grounds that the judge should  have  accepted
    the inconsistent evidence as to what FJ was because when the  appellant
    and her husband had made those statements to their solicitor  they  had
    done so through an interpreter and that effectively it was the fault of
    the solicitor or legal representative that a coherent account  was  not
    taken when the statements were produced.

 15. However, there was simply no evidence before me to  indicate  that  the
    appellant's   legal   representatives   were   anything   other    than
    conscientious and taking down as clearly as possible the evidence which
    they were given  through  the  interpreter  when  the  statements  were
    prepared.

16.  The third ground argued that the judge had placed undue weight  on  the
    fact that the appellant  had  visited  Britain  and  then  returned  to
    Pakistan.  The grounds argued that the judge was wrong to find  it  was
    implausible that if the appellant was in fear of persecution she  would
    have returned to Pakistan.  I do not accept that ground of appeal.  The
    conclusion of the judge was fully open  to  her.   She  did  take  into
    account that the appellant had said she had to look after her  parents-
    in-law but the conclusion that the appellant would not be  expected  to
    return if there  was  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  she  would  face
    persecution  was fully open to the judge.

17.  The fourth ground asserts that the judge was wrong to place  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant's  brother-in-law  did  not  give  evidence
    stating there may have  been  many  reasons  for  that.   However,  the
    reality is that the appellant's brother-in-law is in England and he  is
    in contact with the  appellant's  husband.   It  appears  that  it  was
    claimed that he was the  principal  target  and  that  the  appellant's
    husband acted as his bodyguard.  The appellant's  brother-in-law  would
    surely have his own elder brother's interests  at  heart  but  did  not
    attend and no  persuasive reasons were given for that.  I consider that
    the judge was entitled to place weight on his non-attendance.

18.  The fifth ground of appeal questioned the conclusion of the judge  that
    the fact that the appellant's husband did not play a religious role  in
    FJ and differentially stated his position from that of an  imam  was  a
    distinction not open to the judge  given  the  hostility  to  Shias  in
    Pakistan.  It was stated that if the appellant's husband had  played  a
    leading role of whatever description there would be reason  to  suppose
    that he would be at risk.  The reality is that  there  is  no  evidence
    that the appellant's husband played a leading role, what  was  asserted
    was that he was his younger brother's bodyguard and that  he  may  have
    arranged marches.  The judge again reached a conclusion which was fully
    open to her.  That ground of appeal  went  on  to  argue  that  if  the
    appellant's husband had played such a role in the  past  then  that  of
    itself was reason to suppose that he would seek to  play  such  a  role
    again.  I consider that the judge was fully entitled to conclude, given
    that there was no evidence whatsoever that the appellant's husband  had
    played any role in any Shia organisation since coming  to  Britain  and
    indeed there was no evidence in the background  documentation  relating
    to FJ, that the appellant's husband  would  face  any  difficulties  on
    return or would wish to take up any role.

19.  Finally, the grounds argued that the judge was wrong to state that  the
    appellant and her husband could relocate within Pakistan, stating  that
    the fear arose from the appellant's husband's active  role  in  a  Shia
    organisation and hostility to Shias  was  nationwide  in  Pakistan  and
    therefore wherever they went the appellant's husband would be  at  risk
    of  further  involvement  with  an  organisation  which  would   arouse
    hostility towards him from the Sunni majority.

 20.  There is no evidence in the background papers before the judge of  the
    existence of FJ in Pakistan  and  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  the
    appellant's husband was in any way  a  prominent  figure  or  would  be
    recognised anywhere outside his home area let alone,  if  he  would  be
    recognised at all after  sixteen  years  away.   There  is  nothing  to
    indicate  that  he  would  take  up  any  further  role  in  any   Shia
    organisation on return.  I consider that the appellant and her  husband
    could relocate, should they not wish to  return  to  their  home  area,
    without difficulty although the  reality  is  that  the  appellant  has
    returned to her home area on a number  of  occasions  after  visits  to
    England.  In all, I consider that there is no merit whatsoever  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

21.  This was a detailed determination in which the judge properly  grappled
    with the somewhat incoherent and unsubstantiated  evidence  before  her
    and reached conclusions  which  I  consider  were  fully  open  to  her
    thereon.  The reality is that the incident  on  which  the  appellant's
    claim is based was now almost twenty years  ago.   There  has  been  no
    involvement of her husband with FJ for at least sixteen years  and  his
    involvement  with  that  organisation  was  of  little  importance  and
    furthermore, it must be remembered that  this  appeal  relates  to  the
    appellant and not to her husband - his appeal as  dismissed-   and  she
    herself, although she claims that she lived in fear  in  Pakistan,  did
    return there on a number of occasions and was able to give no  concrete
    examples of any form of persecution which she had suffered there, or at
    least no specified claims of any such persecution.

22.  In these circumstances I  consider  that  there  is  no  error  of  law
    whatsoever in the determination of the judge in the  First-tier  and  I
    dismiss this appeal.


 Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity direction made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy                               Date:  13
    April 2018












