
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/00194/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th April 2016                        |     On 22nd April 2016             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iran born on 13th  December  1982.
    Her immigration history is set out in my Decision dated 25th  September
    2015.  On that occasion, I found an error of law  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M Khan  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights  grounds.   The  appeal
    was then adjourned for the re-making of the decision of the Judge.

Hearing

 2. At the adjourned hearing before me,  there  was  no  further  evidence.
    However, I did hear submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Kandola
    addressed me first when to begin with he said that he relied  upon  the
    comments made in the refusal letter.  The findings  of  the  First-tier
    Judge as to credibility were retained, and therefore the issue  in  the
    appeal is whether the Appellant's sur place activities in the UK for  a
    political group known as MEK placed her at risk  on  return.   In  this
    respect, Mr Kandola argued that  the  Appellant  was  not  at  risk  on
    return.  Her activities in the UK had received only a limited  coverage
    in the media, for example, a report in the Southern Echo.  The  Iranian
    Embassy had been asked to comment upon that report, but had declined to
    do so.  There had been reference to the  Appellant's  activities  on  a
    website, but that was  not  a  mainstream  website  and  may  not  have
    attracted the interest of the  authorities  in  Iran.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had doubted the reasons for  the  Appellant's  political
    activities in the UK, but that was irrelevant.  The Appellant  had  not
    been  a  prominent  political  activist  in  the  UK  and  her  limited
    activities and low exposure meant that she was not at any real risk  on
    return to Iran.  The Appellant did not meet the criteria for  those  at
    risk on return given in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - Risk on  Return)
    Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  The Appellant held no genuine  political
    beliefs and therefore the decision in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31  had  no
    application.

 3. In response, Mr  Chakmakjian  argued  that  the  Appellant's  political
    activities in the UK would put her at  risk  on  return  to  Iran.   He
    referred to the expert report of Ms  Enayatt  and  said  that  the  MEK
    attracted special interest from the authorities  in  Iran.   It  was  a
    small group, but that  would  facilitate  the  Iranian  authorities  in
    monitoring the activities  of  new  members.   The  activities  of  the
    Appellant had already been brought to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    Embassy by the  approach  of  the  Southern  Echo.   In  addition,  the
    Appellant's Iranian passport had now expired.  To return to  Iran,  the
    Appellant would have  to  apply  for  a  travel  document  which  would
    disclose her immigration history.

Findings

 4. The facts which are not in dispute are that during her time in  the  UK
    the Appellant has been a sympathiser and a supporter of the MEK who has
    attended a number of their demonstrations.   One  of  them,  which  had
    taken place on 25th March 2015, had involved  a  demonstration  outside
    Westminster and a march through Parliament Square.  The expert evidence
    is that the Iranian intelligence services have a  particular  focus  on
    the MEK.  Anyone returning to Iran who is suspected of being associated
    with the MEK will be detained and interrogated.  Such interrogation  is
    reasonably  likely  to   include   torture   and   eventually   lengthy
    imprisonment or even the death sentence.

 5. It was established in BA  that  the  Iranian  authorities  go  to  some
    lengths  to  identify  political  activists  in   the   UK   supporting
    organisations opposed to the Iranian Government.  Although  it  may  be
    the  case  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been  a  leading   activist,
    nevertheless I find that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  this
    Appellant will have come to  the  attention  of  the  authorities.   As
    already mentioned, the MEK is an  organisation  in  which  the  Iranian
    authorities take a particular interest.  The Appellant's existence  and
    beliefs have already been brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    Embassy through the approach of the  Southern  Echo.   In  addition  in
    order to return to Iran the Appellant will have to approach the Iranian
    Embassy for a travel document and enquiries there may well  reveal  her
    position.  Of lesser significance,  the  Appellant's  photograph  at  a
    demonstration has appeared on a news website.

 6. In my view,  this  is  a  sufficient  level  of  involvement  in  anti-
    Government activities to bring the Appellant to the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities thereby satisfying the criteria  given  in  BA.   I
    therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

 7. I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity which I  continue  as  a
consequence of allowing the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


