
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00536/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 20th August 2014                           |28th August 2014             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   S S N A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M McGarvey, Legal Representative



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  Neither party invited me to  rescind
      the order and I continue it  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   2. I will refer to the parties in the style in which they appeared before
      the First-Tier Tribunal.

   3. The appellant is a female citizen of Egypt born 28 August  1983.   She
      claimed asylum in October 2013, having arrived in the  United  Kingdom
      earlier that month.  In a decision letter dated 14 January  2014,  the
      respondent refused her application to asylum and gave  directions  for
      her removal.  The appellant appealed against that decision.

   4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Harmes sitting
      at Newport in February 2014.  The appellant was not  represented,  but
      the respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer.  The appellant
      gave evidence.  The refusal letter questioned the credibility  of  the
      appellant, but the determination shows that  Judge  Harmes  found  the
      appellant to be credible for the reasons given.  Judge Harmes  allowed
      the appeal on asylum and on Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds.

   5. The respondent sought leave to appeal  alleging  that  the  judge  had
      failed to give  reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
      material matters.  It further alleged that the judge  failed  to  take
      into account and/or resolve conflicts of facts or opinion.

   6. Specifically it was alleged that  the  judge  had  failed  to  provide
      adequate reasons for making  findings  regarding  the  arrest  of  the
      appellant's husband prior to the overthrow of the Morsi Regime.  It is
      also alleged that the judge failed to give reasons for  accepting  the
      appellants claimed membership of the "FJP" and  criticises  the  judge
      for comments that the respondent had based a decision on a biased view
      of the evidence.

   7. Finally, it was suggested that the  judge  had  failed  to  deal  with
      matters raised in the refusal letter regarding the arrest  of  members
      of the Muslim Brotherhood and  with  regard  to  whether  or  not  the
      appellant was wanted by the Police.

   8. The application came before another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      who refused the application saying this:

         "1.   It  is  submitted  that  the  objective  evidence  quoted  at
      paragraph  36  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letters  states   "Many
      Brotherhood members are already in detention and warrants are said  to
      have been issued for hundreds more".

     2.  Further paragraph 39 of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  states
      "When it was put to you how you know for certain that you are  wanted,
      you answered that you 'believe' because you were told (AIR q106)".  It
      is submitted that  there  is  no  conflict  of  fact.   The  objective
      evidence states  warrants  are  said  to  have  been  issued  and  the
      respondent believes because she has been told  she  is  wanted.   Both
      statements are based on hearsay and  have  equal  weight  and  do  not
      conflict.   The  respondent's  answer  accords  with   the   objective
      evidence.

     3.  At paragraph 24 of the determination the learned  judge  stated  "I
      am satisfied that she believes she  is  wanted  as  a  result  of  her
      membership of the FJO, but she cannot show that  there  is  an  actual
      warrant for her arrest".  It is submitted that the learned  judge  has
      found the respondent to be credible and further he is  satisfied  that
      the respondent believes that she is wanted in  Egypt.   The  objective
      evidence referred to by the appellant supports that  finding.   It  is
      submitted that it is immaterial that the judge is unable to come to  a
      firm conclusion about an arrest warrant in relation to the  respondent
      particularly in light  of  the  objective  evidence.   It  is  further
      submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph   26   of   the
      determination are sound".

   9. The respondent then renewed the application for  leave  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  The respondent relied on exactly the same grounds that  had
      been submitted to the First-Tier Tribunal.

  10. A judge of the Upper Tribunal granted leave and in doing so said this:

         "1.  The grounds of appeal assert, in essence, that  the  judge  of
      the First-Tier Tribunal did not  engage  with  the  reasoning  in  the
      letter of refusal and that he had not given clear reasons for  finding
      that the appellant was credible.

      2. I consider that the grounds of appeal are arguable".

11. Hence the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

  12. At the commencement of the hearing I  obtained  confirmation  from  Mr
      McGarvey that his client was  present  and  that  she  understood  the
      nature of the proceedings.

  13. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds seeking leave and he drew  special
      attention to paragraph  18,  wherein  the  judge  had  said  that  the
      conclusions reached by the respondent were "based on a biased view  on
      her evidence, not an objective analysis".   Mr  Richards  referred  to
      this as an unwarranted attack on the respondent and that as  a  result
      the judge's conclusions were infected by  that  attitude.   It  was  a
      serious allegation.  It was not material to the decision, nor  was  it
      adequately explained.

  14. The reasons for a refusal letter,  said  Mr  Richards,  were  a  fully
      reasoned decision, whereas at paragraph 22 of  the  determination  the
      judge refers to his view being "a matter of common sense".   This  was
      not reasoned.  The Secretary of State  relied  on  objective  evidence
      throughout.  A central issue was the challenge to the question  of  an
      arrest warrant  and  at  paragraph  24  the  judge  came  to  no  firm
      conclusion.  He had therefore declined to  make  a  finding  that  the
      appellant would be at risk.  The judge had failed to resolve an  issue
      dispute and this amounted to a material error of law.

  15. Mr McGarvey (who had not represented the appellant before  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal) referred to a skeleton argument. That document suggests
      that the  respondent's  grounds  seeking  leave  amounted  only  to  a
      disagreement with the judge's  findings.   It  was  accepted  that  in
      certain limited circumstances inadequate reasons could  amount  to  an
      error of law and Mr McGarvey referred to two authorities.

  16. The skeleton argument produced by Mr McGarvey goes on at paragraphs 10
      and 11 to suggest that both parties contention regarding the existence
      (or non-existence) of an arrest  warrant  should  carry  equal  weight
      because they are both based on belief, and  at  paragraph  24  of  the
      determination the judge deals with that conflict.

  17. In his  verbal  submission,  Mr  McGarvey  relied  upon  his  skeleton
      argument confirm that the appellant believed she was wanted  and  that
      had been accepted.

  18. In response Mr Richards said it was not sufficient to  show  merely  a
      belief, it had to be well-founded.

  19. At the end of the hearing I announced my decision  that  I  considered
      there to be no material error of law for the reasons that I now give.

  20. I have to  say  straightaway  that  I  am  critical  of  Judge  Harmes
      regarding the comment  that  he  has  made  in  paragraph  18  of  his
      determination.  He has concluded that the Secretary of  State  made  a
      decision "based on a biased view of [the appellants]  evidence".   The
      judge could well be entitled to reach such a conclusion, but there  is
      nothing contained within  his  determination  which  explains  how  he
      reached that  conclusion.   In  the  circumstances  that  was  a  very
      unhelpful comment and the Secretary of State, through Mr Richards,  is
      perfectly right to challenge it.

  21. However, I have to consider whether that, in  itself,  amounts  to  an
      error of law which is material to the outcome.  Mr Richards says  that
      such a view by the judge has infected his ultimate decision.  I do not
      agree.  There is nothing  contained  in  the  determination  which  in
      anyway punishes the respondent for bias.  The conclusions  reached  by
      the judge are based on his findings as to the appellant's credibility.
       He was clearly satisfied to the required standard that the  appellant
      had experienced her stated problems whilst in Egypt and  at  paragraph
      26 the judge came to  a  conclusion  regarding  a  fear  upon  return.
      Whilst accept that the judge has not explained (in paragraph  26)  the
      fear on return, this is clear from a reading of the determination as a
      whole why he came to that view.

  22. The judge is criticised for referring to "common sense"  in  paragraph
      22.  A judge is perfectly entitled to  use  common  sense  and  it  is
      something that is expected of a judge.  Judge Harmes goes onto explain
      the logical steps in arriving at the conclusions that he did.

  23. I have to agree with Mr McGarvey that the challenges  to  the  judge's
      views are more  a  matter  of  disagreement  with  the  findings  than
      anything else.

  24. The issue regarding the arrest warrant has been adequately reasoned by
      the judge.  It is a question of "belief".  Paragraph 36 of the refusal
      letter does contain  the  words  "are  said"  and  this  supports  the
      appellant's contention that she believes in the existence of an arrest
      warrant.  This supports the judge's conclusions as to future fear.

  25. When read as a whole the determination shows that the judge has  taken
      care and has given adequate reasons for his findings.  The main issues
      have been adjudicated upon and conclusions reached.  Those reasons are
      supported by explanation. In the light of  other  findings  I  do  not
      consider it an error  of  law  to  fail  to  make  findings  upon  the
      husband's arrest. The judge has addressed the basic  legal  test  that
      has to be met by this appellant  and  I  am  conscious  of  the  views
      expressed by the reported Upper Tribunal case of  Budhathoki  (Reasons
      for Decisions) [2014] UKUT 00314 (IAC).  To quote from the  head  note
      "It is, however, necessary for judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
      conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their
      reasons, so that parties can understand why they have  won  or  lost".
      Judge Harmes has done this.

  26. In the example of the arrest warrant the judge was unable to  reach  a
      firm conclusion (24), but he has accepted the  appellant's  belief  in
      the existence of such a warrant.

  27. I am also conscious  of  the  reported  Upper  Tribunal  case  of  VHR
      (Unmeritorious Grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC).  Again  Judge
      Harmes has dealt with the core issues and has adequately given reasons
      for reaching his conclusions.

  28. The respondents appeal is dismissed. I am therefore satisfied that  no
      material error of law exists in Judge  Harmes  determination  and  his
      decisions must stand.



Signed                                  Date 26/8/14

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

