
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00288/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 20th December 2017  On 09th February 2018



                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   MR M. H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr.D.Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


      1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
         First-tier Judge C M Phillips who dismissed his claim for
         protection.


      2. He is an Albanian national, born in March 1998. His claim was that
         he was at risk from a criminal gang because of his father's work as
         a policeman. He claims that he was kidnapped so pressure could be
         put on his father. Whilst captive he was forced to deliver drugs.
         He made his claim for protection in September 2014 by which stage
         he was 16 years of age. A referral was made to the Competent
         Authority who found he had been trafficked.


      3. The respondent accepted his father had been in the police but had
         since left. Consequently, the respondent concluded he was no longer
         at risk from the gang. Furthermore, there was sufficient State
         protection available and the reasonable option of relocation.


      4. At the time of his appeal hearing in August 2016 he was 18 years of
         age. His evidence at hearing was that he remained in contact with
         his mother who told him that his father was in hiding.


      5. First-tier Judge C M Phillips did not accept that his father was in
         hiding, pointing out that up until the hearing he had not mentioned
         any problems. He had earlier said he had been in touch with both
         parents. He has a large immediate and extended family who remain
         safely in Albania, including six sisters. There was no evidence
         they had been targeted. The judge said there was no evidence to
         show that the gang still operated. In conclusion, the judge did not
         accept the gang presented as a threat.


      6. The judge also found that there was sufficiency of protection and,
         if necessary, internal relocation was viable.


The Upper Tribunal


      7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that
         First-tier Judge C M Phillips did not make sufficient allowance for
         the appellant's age and the fact it was accepted he had been
         trafficked. It was also arguable the Judge failed to give adequate
         consideration to the appellant's claim in relation to previous
         attempts to obtain assistance from the authorities and the
         reasonableness of relocation, bearing in mind his circumstance.


      8. Mrs A Mughal, for the appellant, referred to the fact is that been
         accepted his father was in the police; that he had been kidnapped;
         and trafficked. She submitted there was no proper assessment of the
         risk for him on return and whether he was likely to be re-
         trafficked. She submitted it was not logical to reject these
         aspects of his claim in light of what had been accepted.


      9. Mr.D.Clarke, on behalf of the respondent, submitted he was no
         longer at risk as his father had left the police. The rationale
         behind his kidnapping was to make his father do the gang's wishes:
         that reason had now disappeared. There was no evidence the men had
         approached his family. There had been no reference to his father
         being in hiding until the hearing. To the contrary, he has said in
         a witness statement lodged shortly before the hearing he was in
         contact with both parents. By the time of hearing the appellant was
         an adult and the judge was entitled to reject this claim. There was
         no evidence his family had been threatened. The judge at paragraph
         41 pointed out that with the passage of time since his escape in
         September 2014 there was nothing to suggest he remained of interest
         to any malefactors. Mr.D.Clarke accepted that the judge at
         paragraph 47 had not gone into detail on the question of internal
         relocation beyond saying it was viable. However, the finding was
         that he was not a risk in his home area and so the question of
         relocation was not material.


Consideration


     10. The appellant's claim had been considered by the respondent under
         the protocol in relation to children. When he was interviewed in
         May 2015 a responsible adult was present. He had provided a
         statement and had been assisted by a solicitor. In it, he indicated
         he was kidnapped in August 2014 because of his father's position as
         a high-ranking officer combating drugs. His statement was that the
         men told him they were using him to put pressure on his father to
         facilitate their activities. He then managed to escape the
         following month and returned home. He provided documentation to the
         effect that his father resigned from the police in December 2014.


     11. The respondent carried out checks with the British Embassy in
         Tirana. Their sources confirmed that the appellant's father who was
         born in 1961 ended his employment with the police in December 2014.
         It states he specialised in serious crimes. His employment ended at
         his request but no specific reason is given. In the appellant's
         interview he indicated that he was taken by criminals so that they
         could get at his father who was involved in combating their crimes.
         The point made by the respondent is that now his father is no
         longer in that position there is no reason for criminals to have a
         sustained interest. The Competent Authority has accepted the
         appellant was trafficked. However, his activities were limited to
         delivering packages and manual work. As such he would be
         replaceable and there is nothing to indicate why he would be of
         ongoing interest. The respondent has also made the point that the
         appellant's family remain in Albania. It is clear that at a late
         stage the appellant has sought to counter this by claiming his
         father is in hiding. However, this is in contradiction to his
         statement of 26 July 2016 submitted days before the hearing. In it,
         he states he continues to be in contact with his parents.


     12. Given the facts which are not disputed I cannot see any error of
         law established on the part of the judge on the basis the appellant
         was his claim was being considered was a minor who had been
         trafficked. Rather, the assessment of the risk followed from the
         facts which were not contentious. This indicated that the gang if
         they still existed would have no reason to pursue the appellant.
         Allied to this was the acceptance there was sufficiency of
         protection. As acknowledged by the presenting officer, the judge
         could have dealt in greater depth with the issue of relocation.
         However the primary finding was that the appellant did not face a
         risk in his home area. I find no material error established in
         respect of that and so the question of relocation is superfluous.


Decision.


    No material error of law has been established. The decision of First-
    tier Judge C M Phillips dismissing the appeal shall stand.




   Francis J Farrelly
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
   Dated 07 February 2018

























