
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/00050/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 11 March 2016                          |On 12 April 2016            |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                SIMIN SALIMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Johnrose agent for GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  Designated
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Baird  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Wedderspoon  ('the Panel') promulgated on 30 April 2015  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against a decision  to  remove  her  from  the  UK
   following a refusal of her claim for asylum on all grounds .
Background


4. The Appellant was born on 21 March 1986 and is a national of Iran.
5. On 26 December 2013 the  Appellant  applied  for  asylum.  The  Appellant
   claimed that she was at risk on return because of her political  opinions
   as a women's rights activist at University and her religion.
6. On 4 December  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons for why  it  was
   not accepted that the Appellant was at risk on return:
   a) There were discrepancies in her account of how her activities came to
      the attention of the authorities.
   b) The  Appellants  account  of  what  aspects  of  women's  rights  she
      discussed with other students was vague.
   c) The Appellant had not heard of Parvin Ardalan an award winning female
      Iranian activist.
   d) The Appellant could not meet the family or private life  requirements
      of the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Panel  dismissed
   the appeal against the Respondent's decision. The Panel found :
   a) They did not accept the Appellants account of her political activities
      or that she had come to the attention of the authorities as  a  result
      of this and gave reasons for this conclusion(paragraph 17)
   b) They did not accept her evidence that her uncle made her aware of  her
      friends arrest and gave reasons for this conclusion (paragraph 18)
   c) They did not accept that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity and gave reasons for this conclusion (paragraph 19)
   d) They considered the country guidance case of SB Iran (risk of  return-
      illegal exit) Iran CG UKAIT 00053  and  did  not  accept  given  their
      rejection of the basis of her claim that she was at risk on return.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued that :
   (a)The Panel failed to give any weight to material evidence  in  relation
   to her political activities giving too much weight to a peripheral issue,
   the fact that she had not heard of Parvin Ardalan.
   (b) The Panel failed to make a clear finding as to whether her  political
   activities after 2013 put her at risk.
   (c) The Panel failed to make a clear finding as to whether the  Appellant
   left Iran illegally only finding that she entered the  UK  illegally  and
   therefore failed to apply SB (Iran) properly.
   (d) The Panel failed to make adequate findings in rejecting  the  genuine
   nature of her conversion placing too much weight on what they categorized
   as the short period before she was baptised.
9. On 21 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  gave  permission  to
   appeal on al grounds.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) In relation to ground  1  the  Panel  based  their  rejection  of  the
      Appellants claim to have been a political  activist  on  her  lack  of
      knowledge  of  Parvin  Ardalan.  They  failed  to  consider  what  the
      Appellant said in her witness statement and put this issue in context.
      There was no correlation between the lack of knowledge of Ardalan  and
      being an activist.

   b) In relation to ground 2 the Panel's approach was inconsistent in  that
      they rejected her claim to be politically active then found  that  she
      was limited and irregular in her activities.

   c) In relation to ground 3 she accepted that if the Panel  did  not  find
      that the Appellant account of her activities in Iran was credible they
      may have rejected her explanation for how she exited Iran.  They  made
      no clear finding on this issue.

   d) In relation to the Appellants conversion to Christianity  Ms  Johnrose
      had raised at the CMR that the Church of the Latter Day Saints do  not
      attend court. The basis of the rejection of her conversion appeared to
      be the period of time  that  had  elapsed  before  she  was  baptised.
      Factually the Panel was incorrect as  the  Appellant  attended  for  8
      months not 4 before being baptised. The reasoning was inadequate.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) The decision was brief.

   b) If the only basis on which the Panel rejected the  Appellants  claimed
      political activism was her lack of  knowledge  of  Parvan  Ardalan  he
      would accept it was harsh but it was not the only  reason  they  gave.
      They set out a number of reasons.

   c) He accepted that the finding in relation to her  political  activities
      was somewhat confused but in essence they found her involvement to  be
      limited and therefore she was not at risk.

   d) The Panel did not find her account credible  and  therefore  were  not
      bound to accept that she left Iran illegally.

   e) The Panel were entitled  to  find  that  her  consideration  of  being
      baptised after 3-4 months was a very short period  of  time.  He  also
      suggested that the Appellant could not have succeeded as she  did  not
      meet the Dorodian 01THO1537 guidelines.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

      "Where, as in this case, complaint is made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
      adjudicator in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
      credibility),  particular  care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that   the
      criticism is as to the fundamental approach of  the  adjudicator,  and
      does not merely reflect  a  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  appellate
      tribunal that it might itself have  taken  a  different  view  of  the
      matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."
14. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
   held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed clearly the
   reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal found oral evidence
   to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no
   weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in  the  determination  and
   for such findings to be supported by reasons. A  bare  statement  that  a
   witness was not believed or that a document was afforded  no  weight  was
   unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. The first and second grounds argue that the Panel failed to give  weight
   to material matters and made findings that were unclear. Ground 1  argues
   that in rejecting the Appellants claimed political activities  'The  only
   reason given for this is because A had no knowledge  of  Parvin  Ardalan'
   who was described by the Respondent as 'an award winning  female  Iranian
   rights activist.'

17. I am satisfied that this argument misrepresents the basis on  which  the
   Panel rejected this part of the Appellants claim as set out in  paragraph
   17. Albeit the reasons given are  brief  they  encapsulate  a  number  of
   reasons: they found that although the Appellant claimed to be an activist
   that she took from 2009 until 2013 to actually  do  anything  which  must
   reflect adversely on the claim to be an 'activist'; they then noted  that
   although  she  claimed  to  be  an  activist  her  claimed  activity  was
   'irregular' 'limited to allegedly leafletting  occasionally  ,  attending
   some lunch time meetings and a demonstration and creating a  CD  about  a
   female political activist.'  These  were  matters  that  the  Panel  were
   entitled to weigh in the balance in determining whether they accepted her
   claim to be a political 'activist'. I am satisfied that the Panel made  a
   clear finding that they did not  accept  her  account  of  her  political
   activity: they were not stating they accepted her  activity  was  limited
   they were stating that the limited  nature  of  what  she  described  was
   inconsistent with her claim to be an 'activist' at all.

18. In relation to the weight given to  the  fact  that  she  did  not  know
   Parvin Ardalan I note that it was never argued that this lady was  indeed
   a leading rights activist. The Panel took  into  account  the  Appellants
   claim that she came from a reformist family  and  in  that  context  were
   entitled to reject her explanation for  why  she  had  not  heard  of  Ms
   Ardalan. The weight they gave to that was a matter for them.

19. I also note that the Panel  at  paragraph  18  gave  other  reasons  for
   finding that the Appellant was not a credible witness  which  related  to
   her claim that her uncle made her aware of her friend's arrest  and  that
   these findings are unchallenged. Again these are matters that  the  Panel
   was  therefore  entitled  to  weigh  in  the  balance  in  their  overall
   assessment of whether the Appellant had given a credible account  of  why
   she fled from Iran

20. It is argued that the Panel failed to apply SB  in  that  they  made  no
   clear finding as to whether the Appellant had exited Iran illegally. I am
   satisfied that having rejected her claimed political activities  and  her
   conversion to Christianity they had in essence concluded that she was not
   a credible witness as to the circumstances in which she fled  from  Iran,
   which included the claim that she exited illegally  and  they  made  this
   clear at paragraph 22.

21. The final challenge was in relation to the finding  made  by  the  Panel
   that they did not accept that the Appellants conversion  to  Christianity
   was genuine which was at paragraph 19. There is no factual error  in  the
   decision as suggested by  Ms  Johnrose:  the  Appellant  was  considering
   baptism after 4 months of attending church albeit she  was  not  baptised
   until November 2014 8 months after she started attending Church.  It  was
   open to the Panel to find that the period that elapsed before she started
   to consider baptism undermined the  genuine  nature  of  her  conversion.
   Although no reference was made to the absence  of  a  minister  from  the
   Church of the Latter Day Saints attending court it would have  been  open
   to the Panel to also  find  that  the  Appellant  had  not  followed  the
   guidance in Dorodian where it was suggested that a  statement  or  letter
   giving  the  full  designation  of  the  minister  supporting  a  claimed
   conversion should be sent to the Home Office at least a fortnight  before
   the hearing of any appeal, which should give the Home Office time to make
   a basic check on the minister's existence and standing.  Unless the  Home
   Office accepted that the appellant was  a  committed  church  member,  in
   writing in advance, the minister should  invariably  be  called  to  give
   evidence. Such a witness could have course have shed light on the genuine
   nature of the Appellants conversion and the time scale involved. While Ms
   Johnrose argued that the Church of the Latter Day Saints would not attend
   court to  give  evidence  this  has  not  been  my  experience  but  more
   importantly there was no evidence before the Panel confirming this. There
   was not even evidence from another member of the congregation, if  not  a
   minister, to shed light on the Appellants attendance at  the  Church  and
   her engagement with the religion.

22. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote  (1):  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Panel's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
26.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
