

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00658/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 6 June 2016                              |On : 7 June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     P T
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, instructed A P Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  PT's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom  following  the
refusal of his asylum claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and PT as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil  ethnicity,  born  on  [  ]
1984. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 April 2013 with leave to  enter
as a Tier 4 student migrant,  valid  until  9  September  2014.  He  claimed
asylum on 7 May 2013.  His  claim  was  refused  on  12  November  2013.  He
appealed against that decision. His appeal was  allowed  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on  12  April  2016.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  been  granted
permission to appeal that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

In August 2003 the appellant was arrested together with  his  friend  J,  on
the basis of suspicion that J had been involved  in  bomb  blasts,  and  was
released from detention in 2004 after being questioned and  ill-treated.  On
8 June 2008 he was arrested with others in a routine round up and  was  held
overnight and released without charge. From 2008 to 2012 he worked  for  the
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS). As part of his work  for
UNOPS he had access to Global Positioning Satellite (GPS), which was  banned
by the government, but from which he was able  to  find  locations  of  army
camps and provide information to the LTTE, which he did from April 2008.  On
26 November 2009 he was caught when going home from work and was stopped  at
a checkpoint and taken for questioning. He was  held  in  an  unknown  place
until 19 January 2010. He was tortured. One day he took  some  tablets  with
the intention of committing suicide  and  lost  consciousness.  His  captors
thought he was dead and dumped his body. He was found by  people  and  taken
to hospital. He was also of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan army and  CID
because he had helped a work colleague,  JJ,  who  was  wanted  by  the  Sri
Lankan authorities. The Sri Lankan authorities came to his home looking  for
him on 26 November 2012. He was not at home but his brother  phoned  him  to
tell him and he fled  to  Killinochchi  and  then  left  the  country  after
obtaining a student visa. Since his  arrival  in  the  UK,  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities had come to his home looking for him several times.  JJ  is  now
in the UK.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's  claim,  accepted  that  he  had
been attached to the Applied Research Unit (ARU) of UNOPS  as  a  researcher
from 29 November 2009 to 25 December 2011 but did not  accept  that  he  had
been involved in updating database and mapping and did not  accept  that  he
had assisted the LTTE as claimed. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was arrested and detained in 2003 or in November 2009 and did  not
accept that he was of continuing interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  It
was considered that he would be at no risk on return to Sri Lanka.


The appellant's appeal against that decision  was  initially  heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal on 11 February 2015 and was  dismissed  in  March  2015.
However the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  subsequently  set  aside  in
the Upper Tribunal, on 24  November  2015,  and  the  appellant's  case  was
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith on 21 March  2016.
Judge Griffith referred to the appellant's claim  to  have  participated  in
diaspora activities but recorded his representative, Mr Muquit's  concession
that those  activities  would  not  in  themselves  create  a  risk  to  the
appellant. The judge heard from the appellant as well as from his  colleague
JJ, who had also worked for UNOPS and whom he had accommodated in  his  home
after his (JJ's) escape from detention and whom he had assisted  in  leaving
Sri Lanka. JJ had since been recognised as a  refugee  in  the  UK.  It  was
clarified on behalf of the appellant that the core  of  his  claim  was  his
relationship with JJ.


The judge accepted that the appellant  and  JJ  had  met  when  working  for
UNOPS. She accepted that the appellant had been able to  access  GPS  during
his work for UNOPS and that the Sri Lankan authorities  had  therefore  been
interested in him on that basis. She accepted that he had been arrested  and
detained by the authorities in November 2009, as well as in 2003  and  2008.
She accepted that JJ had been hiding in the appellant's home after  escaping
from detention and she accepted the appellant's account of  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities' adverse interest in him after JJ's departure  from  Sri  Lanka.
The judge noted the appellant's attendance at certain  diaspora  events  and
she considered that those activities could serve to raise his profile  above
that of a person simply attending rallies and demonstrations. She  concluded
that the appellant would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  she
accordingly allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge Griffith's decision on  the
grounds that she had made a material  misdirection  in  law  by  failing  to
adhere to the risk categories in GJ (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka
CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319, as reaffirmed in MP & Anor v Secretary of  State
for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829  and  by  relying  on  the
dissenting view of Lord Justice Underhill in MP.

Permission was granted on 4 May 2016.

At the hearing before me Mr Tufan submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  by
finding that the appellant's sur place activities, which had  been  conceded
by Mr Muquit in the First-tier Tribunal did not put him  at  risk,  elevated
his profile to being at risk when he did not otherwise fall  within  any  of
the risk categories in GJ.


Mr Muquit submitted that the grounds were wrong in considering Lord  Justice
Underhill's comments at [50] of MP as a dissenting view and that  the  judge
was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  fell  within   the   all-
encompassing risk factor as being perceived as a risk to the state.


I advised the parties that, in my view, there was  nothing  in  the  grounds
justifying the setting aside of the judge's  decision.  My  reasons  for  so
concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

The grounds challenging the judge's decision and upon which  permission  was
granted assert, in essence, that the judge failed to follow the guidance  in
GJ, as confirmed in MP, and instead favoured the minority, dissenting,  view
in MP. However, as Mr Muquit properly pointed out, and as Mr  Tufan  agreed,
Lord Justice Underhill's view was  not  a  dissenting,  minority  view,  but
merely clarified the majority view. What  he  emphasised,  at  [50]  of  the
judgement in MP, was that paragraph 365(7)(a) of GJ should not  be  read  as
prescribing that diaspora activism was the only basis on which  a  returning
Tamil might be regarded as posing a current or future threat. He  considered
that there may, albeit untypically, be cases where  an  applicant  would  be
regarded as posing a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state
even if not involved in diaspora activity.

As Mr Muquit submitted, what Judge Griffith  was  saying,  in  relying  upon
Lord Justice Underhill's comment at [50], was  that  the  ultimate  question
was whether or not an  applicant  would  be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities as a threat to  the  integrity  of  the  state,  and  that  that
question could be answered by having regard  to  a  range  of  various  risk
factors taken together which may not individually  fall  neatly  within  the
risk categories  at  paragraph  356(7)  of  GJ.  She  found  that  that  was
particularly relevant in the circumstances of the appellant's case.


The core issue in the appellant's claim was that the Sri Lankan  authorities
were aware that he had assisted a person of interest to  leave  the  country
and, furthermore, that there had been ongoing  interest  in  him  since  his
departure from Sri Lanka, and visits to his home, as  a  result.  The  judge
had accepted the appellant's account in that, and all  other  respects,  and
her  positive  credibility  findings  had  not  been   challenged   by   the
respondent. Following Mr Muquit's concession before the First-tier  Tribunal
that the appellant's diaspora activities, periods of detention and work  for
UNOPS would not individually amount to risk factors giving rise  to  a  risk
on return in line with the country guidance,  Judge  Griffith  had  accepted
his argument  that,  those  matters  when  taken  together  with  his  known
relationship with a person  who  had  been  accepted  as  being  of  adverse
interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  would  nevertheless  lead  the
appellant to be perceived by those authorities as a threat. The judge  found
that that was consistent with Lord  Justice  Underhill's  view  and  I  find
nothing inconsistent with the country guidance in either GJ or MP in such  a
conclusion.

Accordingly, it seems to  me  that  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
conclude that the appellant fell within  the  all-encompassing  risk  factor
identified in GJ and MP, of being perceived  as  a  current  threat  to  the
integrity of Sri Lanka and to conclude that he  was  therefore  at  risk  on
return to that country. I find that the respondent  has  not  made  out  her
grounds of appeal and that the judge did not  err  in  law  as  the  grounds
assert.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



















    Signed                          Date 7 June 2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
