
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: AA/00058/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 30th June 2014                      |On 3rd July 2014         |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Ethel Simon
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:      -
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Tanzania  date  of  birth  6th
       October 1971. She appeals against the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Brunnen) to remove her from the  United  Kingdom
       pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

    2.  The  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  followed  from   the
       Respondent's  decision  to  reject  her  claim  to  asylum.  The
       Appellant had initially  claimed  to  be  Somali  but  when  her
       fingerprints showed her to in fact be a  Tanzanian  student  she
       withdrew that part of her account. Instead she advanced a  claim
       based on the fact that since her arrival in the UK she had given
       birth to two children with a white  father,  Irish  national  Mr
       Anthony Hegarty. She  feared  return  to  Tanzania  because  her
       children may suffer persecution because  of  their  mixed  race.
       They may, for instance, be kidnapped by witches in order to  use
       their body parts.  Judge Brunnen noted  the  country  background
       material which indicates that  children  with  albinism  can  be
       subject  to  such  persecution  in  Tanzania,  but   since   the
       Appellant's children are not albino, he found  there  to  be  no
       such risk in this case.  At paragraph 21  of  the  determination
       Judge Brunnen goes on to say this:

         "I have considered whether there is any other basis  on  which  the
         Appellant has any  viable  claim  to  remain  in  the  UK.  I  have
         considered whether she has any right arising from European Law  but
         I am satisfied that she does not. Mr Hegarty is not residing in the
         UK so she has no rights based on the right to reside here with him.
         Her children are Irish citizens but none of the circumstances which
         give rise to a derivative right of residence applies in this  case.
         It may well be that the Appellant would  be  able  to  establish  a
         right to reside with her husband and children in  Ireland.  However
         that cannot assist her in the present appeal".

    3. There is no challenge to the findings on the human rights/asylum
       claim. The grounds of appeal seek to challenge paragraph  21  of
       the determination.   In essence the grounds  rely  on  Chen  (C-
       200/02)  and  Zambrano  (C-34/09).  It  is  submitted  that  the
       children are Irish nationals living in the UK and that if  their
       mother is forced to leave the UK they will be  forced  to  leave
       the  EEA;  the  decision  to  remove  their   mother   therefore
       interferes with their right of residence.


Error of Law

    4. There is no error in this determination. The grounds  of  appeal
       suggest that the Appellant should be given leave  to  remain  in
       the UK because her Irish children need  her  in  order  to  live
       here.  That is not the test. The  test  was  whether  her  Irish
       children need her to live within the EU.  Unlike the children in
       Zambrano, these children have one parent  who  has  a  right  to
       reside in the EEA, namely their Irish  father  who  "loves  them
       unconditionally" [paragraph 16 of  the  determination  recording
       the Appellant's evidence].  The decision cannot be said to  have
       the effect of compelling them to leave the EEA, since  they  can
       go to Ireland to live with their father. As Judge Brunnen  notes
       it may well be that the Appellant would be able to  establish  a
       right to reside there with them, however the UK is under no such
       obligation.  The First-tier Tribunal was therefore quite correct
       to find that "none of the circumstances which  give  rise  to  a
       derivative right of residence applies in this case".

Decision

    5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            30th  June  2014
