
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th August 2015                  |On 9th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                           AND JUDGE M HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     J M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Secretary of State
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Todd, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to an interlocutor dated 28 May 2015,  the  Court  of  Session
    found that the Upper Tribunal (UTJ MacLeman) erred in law by failing to
    find that the First-tier Tribunal (Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Murray) erred in law by (a) failing to take account of the whole  terms
    of the medical form from the Cure Medical Centre and Laboratory Service
    relating to the  appellant's  attendance  there  on  20  October  2007,
    including what was noted regarding physical condition, and (failing  to
    explain the relevance, if any, of the results of the HIV tests referred
    to in its reasons).   The  Court  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed as accords.

 2. This interlocutor was made after consideration of the terms of a  Joint
    Minute whereby the parties are concurred in moving the Court.

 3. As it is of assistance, we set out the terms of that minute.

    "(1) The appellant claims to be in fear of serious harm if returned  to
         Uganda by persecutors who seek to locate and harm her brother.  She
         claims to have suffered persecution in the past by reason of  this.
         In Particular, the appellant claims  to  have  been  raped  on  two
         occasions.  Her claim for asylum was refused by  the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) referred to oftentimes as
         an "Immigration Judge").

      2) The appellant produced what purported to be a medical report  dated
         20 October 2007 ("the medical report"). Ex facie, this  would  have
         related to the second occasion when the appellant claimed  to  have
         been raped.  That medical report narrated a complaint  of  rape  by
         the appellant, and the presence of physical injuries of a kind that
         indicated that rape  had  occurred.   The  terms  of  that  medical
         report, if accepted,  were  capable  of  lending  credence  to  the
         appellant's account of having been raped.

      3) The First-tier Tribunal in its decision of 24 May 2013  found  that
         the appellant's claims were not credible and that she would not  be
         at real risk if returned to Uganda.  In particular, the  First-tier
         Tribunal did not accept the appellant's account to have been  raped
         on two occasions (para. 55).

      4) The First-tier Tribunal did make  some  reference  to  the  medical
         report, but did not note its terms beyond that it was said  in  the
         report that the appellant was not found to be HIV positive, whereas
         a later test found her to be HIV positive (para 53).  No  reference
         was made by the Tribunal to the  physical  injuries  noted  in  the
         medical report.  The Tribunal did not discuss whether the terms  of
         the report were accepted, or why the appellant's account of  having
         been raped should  be  rejected  notwithstanding  its  terms.   The
         Tribunal did not explain what bearing, if any, the results  of  the
         HIV test had on the issues before it.

      5) Permission to appeal was granted to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground  5
         included the following:

             "Failure to take into account relevant evidence - at paragraph
             55 the Immigration Judge dismisses the appellant's account  of
             being raped several [sic - two] times in Uganda ... She  fails
             to make mention of the medical report  which  was  capable  of
             verifying at least one of the incidents.  This is in error  of
             law."

      6) The Upper Tribunal ought to have upheld Ground  5  insofar  as  the
         Upper Tribunal ought to have found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to consider a medical report which was  capable  of  lending
         credence to the truth to the appellant's  statement  that  she  had
         been raped on the second occasion  claimed.   It  should  therefore
         have found that the First-tier Tribunal the making of the  decision
         appealed against "involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of
         law" (Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, s12(1)).

      7) Instead the Upper Tribunal in its decision of 10 January 2014 held:

             "As to ground 5, the relevant medical report is  mentioned  in
             some detail. There was an abundance  of  material  before  the
             judge, and she did not have  to  expound  on  this  particular
             aspect to any greater extent that she did." (para. 27)

      8) The procedural judge of the Inner House, when  granting  permission
         to appeal to the Court of Session, observed that:

             "I consider that this response  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  does
             point to a complete failure by the Upper Tribunal  to  address
             the  ground  of  appeal  and  properly  consider  the  issue."
             (Opinion of 26 November 2014)

      9) The procedural judge's observation was correct.  It  might  be  the
         Upper Tribunal had confused the medical report of rape with certain
         psychological evidence authored by Dr Copstick, referred to by  the
         Upper Tribunal at paras. 23 and  24.   Whatever  the  thinking  the
         Upper Tribunal might have been, the fact is that the  Tribunal  was
         not correct to say that the relevant medical report was referred to
         in some detail.  Rather, the only detail  mentioned  was  that  the
         appellant was not found at the time to  be  HIV  positive.   It  is
         difficult to understand what possible bearing that  could  have  on
         determination of the case; The First tier Tribunal did not  explain
         what, if anything, it took from that.  In any event the  First-tier
         Tribunal's  reference  to  the  HIV  test  was  not   an   adequate
         consideration of the report's terms.

     10) The effect of remitting the case to the Upper Tribunal to find that
         the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and thereafter to  proceed  as
         accords will be as  follows.   The  Upper  Tribunal  must  consider
         whether to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007,  s.12(2)(a)).   If  it
         does set aside the decision, it must then decide whether to  remake
         the decision itself or remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (s.12(2)(b)).  The appropriate disposal of the case will depend  on
         a variety of considerations including the materiality of the  error
         of law.  The appropriate  disposal  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal is a discretionary matter (as  is  the  disposal  of  this
         appeal to the Court of Session) (Saber v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department 2008 SC (HL) 132).  It is expedient that  once  the
         error of law regarding the medical report has been corrected, it is
         left to the specialist tribunal to decide  what  further  procedure
         would be apt in this case.

 4. By way of background, the appellant is a national  of  Rwanda  and  was
    granted refugee status in Uganda in December 2009 where she had arrived
    some three years previously.  She claimed to  have  unlawfully  entered
    the United Kingdom on 24  January  2012.   She  claimed  asylum  on  21
    February 2012.  On 11 January 2013 she was  served  with  notice  of  a
    decision to remove her as an illegal entrant, her asylum  claim  having
    been refused.  That  claim  was  based  on  a  fear  from  the  Rwandan
    authorities who had  pursued  and  ill  treated  her  in  Uganda.   The
    Respondent did not accept this account of adverse  interest  which  the
    appellant had claimed had been based on the activities of her  brother.



 5. As well as the Refugee Convention, the grounds relied in the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal included a consideration of the claim that  the
    appellant had been trafficked,  Articles 2 and 3 as well as  Article  8
    based on the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.

 6. After considering submissions from the parties who were in agreement as
    to the approach to be taken, we set aside the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  in  the  light  of  the  error  of  law  identified  in   the
    interlocutor.  As to the remaking of the decision, having regard to the
    findings of fact that are required to be made, the proper course is for
    the case  to  be  remitted  to  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Ms Todd confirmed that the extent of the  remaking  will  be
    confined to grounds under the Refugee Convention  and  Article  8,  the
    claim based  on  trafficking  no  longer  being  pursued  and  likewise
    Articles 2 and 3 not being relied on.

 7. It will be for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  give  directions  for  the
    future conduct of the appeal.  However, we make these observations.  As
    acknowledged by Ms Todd, the most recent evidence of  adverse  interest
    by the Rwandan authorities and its nationals who are living  in  Uganda
    is a reference to a journalist encountering harm in 2011.  It  will  be
    necessary having regard to the nature of the challenge  raised  in  the
    decision letter by the  Respondent  to  consider  whether  the  Ugandan
    authorities are able to offer a sufficiency  of  protection  if  it  is
    established that the appellant was subject to that adverse interest  as
    claimed.  A further matter that will need to be  addressed  relates  to
    the explanation by the appellant in the SEF that her three children who
    are understood to be currently living in  Uganda  were  born  there  in
    2000, 2001 and 2003.  This is in the context of  the  appellant's  case
    that she did not move to Uganda until 2006.

 8. By way of summary therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
    set aside and the  case  is  remitted  for  its  further  consideration
    pursuant to section 12 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007.


Signed   Date 26 August 2015

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
