
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL


                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Decision Promulgated:
On: 15 May 2014                         On: 29 May 2014


                                   Before

                               Lord Bannatyne

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   between

                            Juma Ahmed Al Abbasi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Smyth of Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Malone
dated 11 March 2014. The decision of Judge Malone allowed the appeal  as  he
found that the respondent's decision  dated  24  January  2014  was  not  in
accordance with the law but  refused  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.

The appellant challenges only  the  decision  to  refuse  the  appeal  under
Article 8 of  the  ECHR.  He  argues,  following  Article  8  (2),  that  an
interference with family and private life cannot be compliant  with  Article
8 if the decision giving rise to the  interference  is  not  "in  accordance
with the law". Having found the  respondent's  decision  not  in  accordance
with the law, the appellant maintains that it was not open to  Judge  Malone
to refuse the Article 8 appeal as he did.

Mr Avery conceded the point entirely and we saw no reason to go  behind  the
agreement of the parties.

We  therefore  find  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
disclosed an error on a point of law to  the  extent  that  it  refused  the
appellant's Article 8 claim outright.

We substitute a decision finding that the Article 8 claim is allowed to  the
limited extent that the decision of the respondent  was  not  in  accordance
with the law.

DECISION

The Immigration Judge made an error on a point of law regarding the  Article
8 decision and that part of the First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside.

We re-make the Article 8 claim as allowed  on  the  limited  basis  set  out
above.


Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 16 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
