
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00381/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 19th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                   H T T B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel, instructed by Norton,
Folgate Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born in 1990. She left  Vietnam
       on 11th November 2012  and  was  taken  first  to  Poland,  and  then
       overland to France. On 24th July 2013 she left France and arrived  in
       the UK. On 30th July 2013 she applied for asylum in the  UK,  and  on
       4th March 2014 there was a referral to the Competent Authority on the
       basis that she was a victim of trafficking. On 2nd December 2014  the
       Competent Authority made a conclusive decision that the appellant was
       a victim of trafficking. However on 17th December 2014 a decision was
       made refusing her asylum claim. Her appeal against  the  decision  to
       refuse asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge N J  Osborne
       on all grounds in a determination promulgated on the 21st May 2015.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on
       20th August 2015 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing adequately to consider  issues
       of sufficiency of protection,  internal  relocation,  amenability  to
       being re-trafficked, pursuit  by  her  former  traffickers,  lack  of
       contact with her family members in considering whether a real risk of
       serious harm existed if the appellant was returned to Vietnam.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

Submissions

    4. The grounds contend firstly that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
       by being procedurally unfair as the judge had  not  read  the  papers
       prior to the hearing and because the  appellant's  toddler  was  very
       disruptive in the hearing. Secondly it is argued that the  First-tier
       Tribunal wrongly assessed the risk of re-trafficking if the appellant
       were returned to Vietnam because the judge did not seem to comprehend
       such a risk and had closed his mind to such a risk existing prior  to
       the hearing. Consideration  was  not  given  to  the  fact  that  the
       appellant's  parents  had  disappeared  due  to  threats   from   the
       trafficker, Mr B, (see appellant's witness statement at paragraphs 26
       - 30 which is not apparently contested by the respondent);  the  fact
       that the respondent's OGN on Vietnam accepts there are re-trafficking
       risks; and that the appellant's evidence (see Qs 31, 34 and 64 of the
       asylum interview) was that her traffickers were  linked  to  a  gang.
       Further irrelevant considerations regarding the lack of contact  with
       the appellant by the traffickers in the UK  were  also  brought  into
       consideration.

    5. Mr Melvin argued, in summary, that it was not material whether  Mr  B
       was linked to a gang; and there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
       would be traced on her return. He argued that the moving away of  the
       appellant's parents was also of no material significance as there was
       no evidence of their whereabouts or motivation for moving. The First-
       tier Tribunal had relied upon objective evidence to  say  that  there
       was sufficiency of  protection  and  an  option  to  find  safety  by
       internal relocation, and thus there were no material errors of law in
       the decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6.  It  is  not  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  conducted  a
       procedurally unfair hearing.  This  ground  was  not  pursued  by  Ms
       Malhotra at the hearing. Counsel before the First-tier  Tribunal  did
       not apply to adjourn the hearing due to the noise of the  child,  and
       it was not relevant that the judge had not read the papers in advance
       of the hearing. In any case  it  would  appear  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal believed the appellant  in  all  material  respects  so  the
       situation in the hearing had no negative outcome for  the  appellant.
       It  is  not  disputed  that  the  applicant  has  been  a  victim  of
       trafficking. The First-tier  Tribunal  finds  the  applicant  has  no
       relatives outside  her  home  area  where  she  could  be  housed  at
       paragraph 19 of the decision and accepts on lower standard  of  proof
       that the appellant's parents had to move  due  to  threats  from  her
       traffickers at paragraph 23 of the decision, and so fully accepts the
       factual matrix put by the appellant.

    7. I find that the assessment of risk is flawed for a number of  reasons
       however.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to  make  a  finding  as  to
       whether the appellant was trafficked by an  individual  or  a  person
       with links to wider criminal organisations, see paragraph 23  of  the
       decision, which I find to be essential to an assessment  of  risk  on
       return. There is also no evidence to support the contention that  the
       appellant would be "less amenable to being trafficked" and  would  be
       "likely to be of less interest to traffickers" due to  have  a  young
       child, as is contended at paragraph 31 of the decision.  Further  the
       lack of pursuit of the appellant in the UK does not  rationally  lead
       to the conclusion that she would not be pursued in Vietnam and  there
       is no evidence to support such a conclusion, but this is relied  upon
       repeatedly in the decision, see paragraphs  23,  27  and  34  of  the
       decision. In addition there is no consideration given to the accepted
       fact at paragraph 23 of  the  decision  that  her  parents  had  been
       pursued by the trafficker and whether this has implications  for  the
       appellant's safety. I therefore find that in  the  circumstances  the
       conclusion that "the Appellant had broken free from her  traffickers"
       at paragraph 23 and later relied upon to find  that  there  would  be
       sufficiency of protection/ no real risk at paragraphs 27  and  34  is
       insufficiently reasoned.

    8. It is also clear (and accepted by Mr Melvin)  that  the  findings  on
       humanitarian protection at paragraph 36 relate to another  case,  and
       are wholly erroneous.

    9. I therefore informed the parties that I set aside the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal but preserved the findings of Judge Osborne which
       were not argued by any party to be subject to error: namely that  the
       appellant had no relatives with whom  she  could  find  accommodation
       outside her home area and that her parents had been threatened by her
       trafficker, Mr B, and had been forced to move away from their home in
       2013.

   10. The parties  were  happy  to  proceed  with  the  re-making  hearing,
       although  I  granted  Mr  Melvin  a  one  hour  period   to   prepare
       submissions. It was agreed that the only issues were risk on  return,
       and thus the focus was on whether there was sufficiency of protection
       in Vietnam for the appellant or whether she had  an  internal  flight
       alternative by which she could find safety.

Re-making - Submissions

   11. Mr Melvin  relied  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  the
       objective evidence in that letter. In  summary  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's particular case he submitted that the appellant  had  not
       shown that Mr B was influential or powerful. She had not shown  there
       was any evidence he would find her in a country of 92 million people.
       It was now two years since he had any contact with her. There was  no
       evidence as to how far the appellant's parents had had to move. There
       was no evidence that traffickers would take a woman with a child.

   12. In relation  to  the  country  of  origin  evidence  Mr  Melvin  drew
       attention to the OGN on Vietnam,  section  at  3.11  on  trafficking,
       dated June 2013 and material in the refusal letter. He submitted that
       it was clear that significant funds  had  been  allocated  to  combat
       trafficking by  the  government;  since  2012  there  had  been  more
       criminal penalties; that there were prosecutions of traffickers;  and
       there were three shelters in the largest urban areas  for  trafficked
       women. As such there is  sufficiency  of  protection  and  reasonable
       options for the appellant to internally relocate.

   13. Ms Malhotra submitted in summary that the credible  evidence  in  the
       appellant's witness statement and interview record was that Mr B, her
       trafficker, was a rich and influential man with contacts  with  gangs
       who had threatened her father, whilst she was in Paris, and said that
       he would sell her as a prostitute in China. As a  result  of  Mr  B's
       threats her parents had left their local  area.  There  could  be  no
       evidence going to this risk other than the appellant's  testimony  as
       evidence from a  trafficker  that  they  intended  to  re-traffic  an
       appellant would be very unlikely to be available  and  would  not  be
       credible. The appellant had said that she could not  find  safety  by
       going to a shelter as these were inadequate and might be  checked  by
       Mr B, or by approaching the police, and had no relatives to go to who
       could assist her. She maintained that there was no  reason  to  think
       that because Mr B had not contacted her in the UK he would  not  wish
       to do so if she returned to Vietnam or that he would  not  force  her
       into prostitution because she had a child.

   14. Ms Malhotra relied upon the background evidence  in  the  Country  of
       Origin Information Report dated  9th  August  2013  and  the  OGN  on
       Vietnam. She argued, in summary, that this evidence showed that there
       was a very significant trafficking problem in Vietnam and  that  this
       problem was increasing. Some of the traffickers also used children to
       carry out begging on their behalf. The Vietnamese laws on trafficking
       did not comply with international standards, and did not address  the
       problem  of  debt  bondage  (the  background  to   this   appellant's
       trafficking)  sufficiently.  There  was  insufficient  use   of   law
       enforcement and insufficient use of prosecution of  traffickers,  and
       overall the protection for victims was inadequate too. There were far
       too few facilities and shelters for victims of trafficking, and there
       would be issues for an appellant with children in  these  places.  It
       was clear that a real risk of re-trafficking had been  shown  to  the
       required standard of proof.

   15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Re-making Conclusions

   16. The appellant's description of  Mr  B  is  that  he  is  a  rich  and
       influential loan shark who lives in HP, which  is  a  major  city  in
       Vietnam near to H in the north of the country near to CB town  (which
       is on the small island of CB) where the appellant used to  live  with
       her parents. Mr B had a number of successful businesses in  different
       cities in Vietnam  and  business  links  abroad.  The  appellant  was
       trafficked into the sex trade by Mr B to repay a loan provided to her
       parents. It is clear from the history of  the  appellant,  which  has
       been believed, that Mr B worked together with a trafficker called  Mr
       C based in Vietnam, another trafficker  called  G  based  in  Poland;
       another Vietnamese trafficker called D who was based in France, and a
       couple of others who ran the brothel in the UK. The appellant says in
       her evidence that Mr B knows gangsters, which is consistent with this
       history. It is also  accepted  that  he  threatened  the  appellant's
       parents after she had been taken to Paris that she would be  sent  to
       China as a prostitute if she  returned  to  Vietnam;  and  that  they
       subsequently had to leave their home due to his threats. I note  that
       the COIS Vietnam 2013 at paragraph 24.09 notes the connection between
       money lenders and traffickers, and that family members who cannot pay
       off debts have been subjected to violence.

   17. I find that Mr B should be seen as an influential, wealthy  and  well
       connected trafficker  with  internal  and  international  trafficking
       associates. I will therefore assess risk on this basis. I do not find
       that the fact that Mr B has not contacted the appellant in the UK  to
       be of any significance as he  may  well  fear  the  effectiveness  of
       British law enforcement or the  UK  may  beyond  his  reach  in  this
       respect. I also do not find that it is a  protective  fact  that  the
       appellant has a young child. As is clear from the country  of  origin
       materials  (COIS  Vietnam  2013  paragraph  24.04)  children  can  be
       exploited by traffickers for begging purposes, and in any case  there
       is no reason  to  assume  that  anyone  prepared  to  engage  in  the
       trafficking of human being for sexual  exploitation  would  show  any
       compassion to the fate of the  child  of  a  person  they  wished  to
       traffic - and this is reflected in the fact that children and  babies
       may be trafficked for adoption too, see paragraph 22.36 of  the  COIS
       Vietnam 2013. I find that Mr B would have  the  capacity  (given  the
       history of trafficking the appellant to the UK) and motive (given the
       outstanding debt owed by her parents which equates  to  approximately
       �10,000) to traffic the appellant to China for prostitution, and note
       from the material on trafficking that there  is  a  very  significant
       trafficking of women and children to China from northern provinces of
       Vietnam, see paragraph 24.02 of the COIS Vietnam 2013.

   18. The appellant claims that the police would not  assist  her  as  debt
       bondage agreement is seen as a private matter  by  them  in  Vietnam.
       This is consistent with the COIS Vietnam 2013 report,  which  relying
       upon the US  State  Department  TiP  Report  2013,  states  that  the
       Vietnamese government has failed  to  provide  adequate  remedies  to
       those who experience debt bondage. The COIS Vietnam 2013 concludes at
       paragraph 24.12 that prosecutions  were  inadequate  to  address  all
       forms of human trafficking in Vietnam; and that victim identification
       is poor, see paragraph 24.15. It is clear that Vietnam has  a  large,
       and quite  significantly  unquantified  problem  of  trafficking  for
       prostitution, see paragraph 22.34 of the COIS  Vietnam  2013.  It  is
       also clear from the US State Department Report on  Vietnam  for  2012
       cited in the reasons for refusal letter (p.4 of 10 at bottom of page)
       that police investigative capabilities are generally very limited.

   19. The appellant says she would be at risk throughout Vietnam from Mr B;
       and would not be able to access a shelter  or  have  other  means  to
       support herself as a single mother with a young child as a woman  who
       has only ever worked helping her parents fishing business; and in the
       context that it is accepted that she does not have relatives to  turn
       to for such help.

   20. It is clear that Vietnam is a country with a large population  and  a
       number of major cities, some of which are  at  a  distance  from  the
       appellant's home area. There are also some NGOs working with  victims
       of  trafficking  and  at  least  three  shelters   for   victims   of
       trafficking.

   21. I find however on the  facts  of  this  particular  case  that  I  am
       satisfied on the lower standard of proof that Mr  B  would  have  the
       motivation, wealth and skills to seek out the appellant if  she  were
       in Vietnam, and that his targeting of her parents  is  indicative  of
       this fact, as he would wish to recover his debt. I am  not  satisfied
       that there would be sufficiency of protection in  Vietnam  given  the
       facts set out above, Mr B's wealth and connections and his history of
       trafficking this appellant relatively recently. I am  satisfied  that
       the appellant  would  not  be  able  to  find  safety  by  relocating
       internally, particularly given that she would be very likely to  have
       to seek reliance on shelters (which are relatively few in number), as
       she is a single mother  without  previous  experience  of  employment
       beyond helping her parents, without relatives she  can  turn  to  and
       would thus be relatively easy to locate for Mr B.

   22. I find that the appellant has been subject to persecution and threats
       of very serious harm in her previous  trafficking  by  Mr  B.  Having
       considered all of the  evidence  presented  by  the  parties  to  the
       Tribunal, in accordance with paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules,
       I am not satisfied that there would be sufficiency of  protection  or
       that the appellant could find safety through internal relocation so I
       do not find that there are good  reasons  why  that  persecution  and
       serious harm would not  be  repeated  were  she  to  be  returned  to
       Vietnam.

   23. It is accepted by the respondent in the reasons  for  refusal  letter
       that the appellant raises a claim which falls within the auspices  of
       the Refugee Convention and that former victims  of  trafficking  from
       Vietnam can form a particular social group. I find that the appellant
       would face a real risk of serious harm by reason of her membership of
       a particular social group if returned to Vietnam, and is entitled  to
       be recognised as a refugee.

Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal on asylum
       and human rights grounds.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  her
    protection claim.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley Date: 18th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I  have  decided
to make a whole fee no fee award because no fee was paid.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley Date: 18th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

