
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00986/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th November 2014                           |On 8th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     TA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin of Counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pirotta promulgated 20th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born 1st January 1969 who
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002, and made a claim for  asylum  in
    November 2011, after he  was  apprehended  working  illegally  in  this
    country.  His asylum, humanitarian protection, and human  rights  claim
    was refused on 29th January 2014.  The Appellant's appeal was heard  by
    Judge Pirotta (the judge) on 16th May  2014.   After  hearing  evidence
    from the Appellant and two  witnesses  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's account was a fabrication, and the appeal was dismissed  on
    all grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon two grounds which are summarised below.

 4. Firstly the judge had erred in considering the Appellant's  explanation
    for various discrepancies in his account, which included the fact  that
    his mother had  passed  away  shortly  before  the  substantive  asylum
    interview, which the Appellant said had affected his ability to  answer
    questions during the interview.  The judge is said  to  have  erred  by
    recording that the Appellant's representatives  had  not  suggested  in
    their  letter  to  the  Respondent  following  the  substantive  asylum
    interview, that the Appellant was  in  mourning  at  the  time  of  the
    interview.  It is contended that the judge  had  erred  by  overlooking
    part of the letter dated 10th February 2011 which recorded;

         "It should also be noted that the client's mother  recently  passed
         away which he has found very distressing.   He  mentioned  this  in
         response to question 196.
         We should be grateful if the above representations could  be  taken
         into consideration when reaching a decision."

 5. The second ground contends that  the  judge  carried  out  an  improper
    assessment of a medical report submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    It was accepted that the medical report provided no confirmation of the
    age of the scars, but it was contended that it did provide some support
    for his account to have been shot in the hand and to have been attacked
    with a knife, and therefore the report provided a  measure  of  support
    for the Appellant's account.

 6. It was also contended that in  assessing  the  report,  the  judge  had
    failed to assess the evidence in the round stating in paragraph 40 that
    the report is;

         "not capable of providing supporting evidence of such  strength  to
         counter  the  dubious  accounts  and  errors,   discrepancies   and
         contradictions disclosed in other evidence."

 7. Reliance was placed upon Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367, and it was
    contended that the judge had treated the medical evidence  as  an  "add
    on" to the evidence and had not considered it in the round.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal J M Lewis in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that in the chain of reasoning  which  led  to  the
         rejection of the Appellant's evidence the judge did not  take  into
         account evidence that the Appellant's ability to  answer  questions
         at his interview was impaired by his distress at the  recent  death
         of his mother, which he mentioned at question 196 of his interview.
          It is also arguable that in rejecting  the  medical  evidence  the
         judge applied an incorrect principle in finding  that  it  did  not
         outweigh other evidence rather  than  considering  it  on  its  own
         merits."

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the  judge  had  considered  the  subject  of  the
    Appellant's mother's death at paragraphs 32-33 of the determination and
    had done so adequately.  It was contended the judge had not  materially
    erred in law in considering the medical report, which had not given any
    dates in relation to the injuries.

10. The Tribunal issued directions making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

11. Mr Martin relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  He submitted that the judge had erred,  in  that
    the Appellant's representatives had mentioned the death of  his  mother
    in their letter dated 10th February 2011.  It is common ground that the
    representatives incorrectly dated the letter, in that the  date  should
    be 10th February 2012, and should refer to an interview that took place
    on 3rd February 2012, and not February 2011.

12. Mr Martin also submitted that the judge had erred in her  consideration
    of the medical evidence.  The correct approach would be for  the  judge
    to assess the medical report, and then consider this in the round  with
    the other evidence, rather than refer to the medical report  not  being
    sufficient to counter other adverse points that arose in evidence.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. Mr  Mills  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that
    paragraphs  32-33   of   the   determination   contained   a   thorough
    consideration of the Appellant's explanation for discrepancies  in  his
    account,  and  Mr  Mills  pointed  out  that  the   letter   from   the
    representatives did not assert that the Appellant had  been  unable  to
    properly answer questions because of his mother's death.  The Appellant
    had not made such a claim in interview, and this explanation, that  his
    mother's death had caused him to give  inaccurate  evidence,  had  only
    arisen after his application had been refused on 29th January 2014.

14. Mr Mills did not accept that the judge had reached a conclusion on  the
    evidence before consideration of the medical report.  In any event  the
    value of that report was limited as  no  age  could  be  given  to  the
    scarring.  Mr Mills submitted that the judge had looked at the evidence
    in the round.  In the alternative, if it was found that the  judge  had
    reached a conclusion before considering the medical  report,  Mr  Mills
    submitted that this did not amount to a material error of  law  as  the
    medical report did not demonstrate that the Appellant would be at  risk
    on return.  The medical  report  was  considered  in  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter, and Mr Mills submitted that even if it  was
    found that the Appellant had been shot, as he claimed while in a  crowd
    in 1999, this could not lead to a risk on return in 2014.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I deal firstly with the contention that the judge erred  by  neglecting
    to take into account an explanation in the Appellant's representative's
    letter.  I find no error of law for the following reasons.

17. I note that in paragraph 25 of his witness statement which was made  on
    8th May 2014 the Appellant made reference to finding  it  difficult  to
    concentrate in his  asylum  interview.   He  referred  to  finding  the
    interview stressful,  and  his  primary  reason  for  being  unable  to
    accurately remember everything that happened  in  Bangladesh,  was  the
    time that had elapsed since the events in Bangladesh which had occurred
    in 1999, and the interview taking place on 3rd  February  2012.   As  a
    secondary explanation the appellant stated;

         "Moreover, my mother has passed away at that time and I  was  still
         grieving her death."

18. In interview in answer to question 195 when  the  Appellant  was  being
    asked when he was assaulted he stated;

         "Some time after this.  I have difficulty with vision i.e. I  can't
         read writing."

19. The following question, 196, consisted of the  interviewer  asking  the
    Appellant why, and his reply was;

         "Due to stress and tension - lost father and  mother.   I  couldn't
         see them."

20. The  judge  noted  in  paragraph  31  of  her  determination  that  the
    Appellant's account in interview was not consistent  with  his  witness
    statement.  In paragraph 32 the judge recorded the Appellant's evidence
    that he had not been able to remember details in interview because  his
    mother died that day, and goes on to record the Appellant also  stating
    in evidence that his mother  had  died  two  months  before,  and  also
    stating that she had died three years previously.  The  judge's  record
    of that evidence has not been challenged.

21. The judge noted in the Appellant's screening interview (6.6) which took
    place on 12 November 2011, that he had declared  that  his  mother  was
    still alive.  The judge also noted that the Appellant in interview  had
    confirmed that he was fit, and well, and able  to  participate  in  the
    interview.  He did not contend that he was  emotionally  distressed  or
    unable to understand or answer questions,  and  he  made  no  complaint
    about the interview at its conclusion.

22. The judge at paragraph 31 recorded;

         "Even after the interview,  his  solicitor's  submissions  did  not
         raise the explanation that his memory was at fault."

23. The judge did not err  on  this  issue  because  the  letter  from  the
    representatives did not raise the explanation that his  memory  was  at
    fault because of his mother's death, but stated  that  his  mother  had
    recently passed  away  which  he  found  distressing.   The  judge  has
    carefully considered the contents of the  interview  and  compared  the
    interview record with  the  statement,  and  carefully  considered  the
    Appellant's explanation at the hearing before her,  that  his  mother's
    death caused his inaccurate evidence.  The judge was perfectly entitled
    to reject that explanation and she gave adequate reasons for so  doing.
    The judge did not overlook any material considerations.

24. Dealing with the second ground raised on behalf  of  the  Appellant,  I
    find no error of law for the following reasons.

25. I do not find that the determination discloses that the judge reached a
    conclusion upon the evidence before considering the medical report.  In
    addition  to  considering  Mibanga,  I  have  considered  HH   (medical
    evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164.  At paragraph
    21 of that decision the Tribunal found  that  there  was  a  danger  of
    Mibanga being misunderstood, and that the Court of  Appeal  in  Mibanga
    were not intending to  place  judicial  fact  finders  "in  a  form  of
    forensic straight jacket."  The Tribunal found that the Court of Appeal
    decision was not to be regarded as laying down any rule of  law  as  to
    the order in which judicial fact finders are to approach the evidential
    materials before them, and when considering facts  "one  has  to  start
    somewhere."

26. If the judge had reached a conclusion as to the Appellant's credibility
    before considering the medical report that would be an  error  of  law,
    but I do not find that to be the case here.

27. The judge in paragraph 7 of her determination recorded:

         "I have read all the documents,  statements,  reports,  submissions
         and exhibits with care and have given them  all  consideration.   I
         have recorded the proceedings and made notes of  the  evidence  and
         exhibits,  submissions  from  both  parties  which  have  all  been
         carefully considered and analysed.  In reaching this  determination
         I have  considered  each  item  of  evidence  individually  and  in
         totality, if not referred to specifically in the determination,  it
         does not mean that the evidence was not considered."

28. The judge also refers to having read the medical  report  in  paragraph
    19, and in paragraph 20(x) refers to the medical report and the  reason
    why  the  Respondent  took  the  view  that  it  did  not  support  the
    Appellant's account.





29. I am satisfied that the medical report was considered in the round  and
    that the judge had not  reached  a  conclusion  on  credibility  before
    considering that report.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal determination does not disclose an error of law.   I
do not set aside the decision, which stands, and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction.   The  Upper  Tribunal
continues that order pursuant to rule 14 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date 1st December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 1st December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



