


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/00911/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Sent        |
|On 1 July 2014                         |                          |
|Prepared on 2 July 2014                |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    Y. W.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  who  travelled  to  the
           United Kingdom on 12 May 2013 by air, using a  passport  and  an
           identity that she said was not her own. She  claimed  asylum  at
           port and on 19 January 2014 the Respondent  refused  the  asylum
           claim and in consequence made a decision to refuse her leave  to
           enter the UK, and to remove her to Zimbabwe.
        2. The Appellant lodged an appeal  with  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against  those  immigration  decisions,  which  was  heard   and
           dismissed by Judge Doyle in a Determination  promulgated  on  17
           March 2014.
        3. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for  permission
           to appeal, which was refused on 9 April  2014.  The  application
           was then renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  in  consequence
           permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 12  May
           2014 on the basis it was arguable the Judge had failed  to  take
           into account evidence that the  situation  within  Zimbabwe  had
           deteriorated since the decision in the country guidance case  of
           LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  UKUT  487,  which  in  turn
           might impact upon the adequacy of the Judge's  consideration  of
           the issue raised by HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.
        4. The Respondent filed no Rule 24 Notice  and  the  Appellant  has
           made no Rule 15(2A) application.
        5. Thus the matter comes before me.


           The grounds
        6. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  Documentary
           evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the
           light of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does
           not carry with it a presumption of authenticity, which  specific
           evidence must  disprove,  failing  which  its  content  must  be
           accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of  the
           evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and  background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the case,
           especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly  be
           said for a claimant's oral evidence.
        7. The Judge made a number of positive  findings  of  fact  in  the
           Appellant's favour. He accepted that the Appellant had given  an
           honest account of her experiences in Zimbabwe, and that she  was
           indeed a lesbian, as she claimed  to  be.  She  had  experienced
           escalating domestic violence at the hands of her husband,  which
           had culminated in her rape in January 2013. That rape had led to
           her conceiving the child with whom she was pregnant upon arrival
           in the UK. In the course of the breakdown of her  marriage,  and
           subsequently, her husband had told anyone who  would  listen  to
           him that she  was  a  lesbian,  and  thus  some  of  her  family
           perceived her to  be  a  lesbian.  She  had  pursued  a  lesbian
           relationship in Zimbabwe, and she was "now  more  interested  in
           women than she had been in the past" and "wants to  pursue  same
           sex relationships in the UK".
        8. Nonetheless in reliance upon the guidance to be found in LZ  the
           Judge concluded that whilst she might face  discrimination  upon
           return to Zimbabwe, the Appellant would not face persecution.
        9.  Mr  Schwenk  pursued  two  arguments   that   challenged   that
           conclusion, in line with the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
           First he argued that the Judge had either failed to engage  with
           the evidence that  showed  the  situation  within  Zimbabwe  had
           deteriorated significantly since October 2011 when LZ  had  been
           decided, or,  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
           decision to follow LZ. Second, that in the light of the findings
           of primary fact, the Judge had failed to  deal  adequately  with
           the Appellant's circumstances in the event she were to return to
           Zimbabwe and to seek to live there as an openly  lesbian  woman.
           His argument was that the Appellant's  evidence  had  been  that
           through fear of persecution, she would genuinely feel unable  to
           do so; HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. He argued  that  her  case  was
           therefore that she had to date lived a discrete life in relation
           to her sexuality, but only because of a  fear  of  serious  harm
           should she do otherwise.
       10. I accept that it is not entirely clear  from  the  Determination
           what view the Judge reached about the prospect of future risk to
           the Appellant from her husband in the event  of  her  return  to
           Zimbabwe. Since he appears to have accepted the entirety of  the
           Appellant's account of his past  violence  towards  her,  it  is
           perhaps implicit that the Judge accepted that her  husband  also
           posed a future risk of harm to her in the event of  her  return.
           Certainly I accept that unless he had since died,  or  had  left
           Zimbabwe, and there was no evidence to that  effect  before  the
           Judge, the Appellant  must  be  taken  to  have  discharged  the
           applicable burden and standard of proof, and to have established
           that her husband did pose a future risk of harm to her.
       11. Whilst there is little to be found in the Determination  by  way
           of analysis of that risk,  Mr  Schwenk  accepts  that  the  only
           sensible inference to be drawn from the evidence  was  that  any
           future risk of harm from her husband would be  confined  to  the
           locality in which they had lived as a  married  couple,  and  in
           which it was to be assumed he continued to live. Whilst her home
           was not identified in the Determination, Mr Schwenk accepts that
           the evidence showed that her  home  area  was  the  district  of
           Sunningdale, in Harare. However real the  risk  of  future  harm
           from her husband might be, there  was  no  evidence  that  would
           permit the conclusion that he  would  learn  of  her  return  to
           Zimbabwe, unless she returned to live in the same locality.
       12. The evidence showed that although the police  had  arrested  the
           Appellant's husband in the past and had spoken to him about  his
           violence towards her, they had not pursued  any  prosecution  of
           him  despite  the  severity  of  that   violence.   Their   past
           interventions had  not  therefore  dissuaded  her  husband  from
           violence towards her.
       13. Mr Schwenk accepted that the evidence showed that  any  risk  of
           harm that her husband might  pose  to  the  Appellant  could  be
           avoided were she able  to  relocate  within  Zimbabwe  upon  her
           return to that country. Mr Schwenk argued however  that  it  was
           not reasonable to expect the Appellant as a Shona speaker with a
           young child to relocate to Bulawayo, and that in  the  light  of
           the currently available evidence there was nowhere  in  Zimbabwe
           to which a woman who wished to live openly as a lesbian could in
           safety relocate. Mr Schwenk accepted that this  argument  rested
           upon his attack on the Judge's approach to the relevant  country
           guidance decision of LZ. It was argued that the evidence  before
           the Judge showed that the situation  within  Zimbabwe  for  both
           homosexual men and women had deteriorated significantly with the
           passage of time since the decision in LZ (October 2011), and  it
           was argued that the Determination did not show  that  the  Judge
           engaged adequately with that evidence. Thus it  was  argued  the
           guidance to be found in LZ about internal  relocation  had  been
           overtaken by subsequent developments within Zimbabwe and was  no
           longer appropriate.


      Did the evidence before the Judge show that the situation in  Zimbabwe
      had deteriorated significantly since October 2011?
       14. Mr Schwenk placed great reliance in his drafting of the grounds,
           and in his argument before me, upon  the  Respondent's  OGN,  as
           issued in November 2013. It is not in dispute that this OGN  was
           in evidence before the Judge,  and  that  there  is  no  express
           reference to it in the Determination. (It is accepted that there
           is no material difference to the terms  of  the  OGN  issued  in
           February 2014). The guidance to be found in  the  November  2013
           OGN does not however in my judgement do any more than to seek to
           summarise the decisions in HJ (Iran) and in  LZ  and  to  remind
           caseworkers that in the light of the  continuing  use  of  anti-
           homosexual rhetoric  by  public  figures  within  Zimbabwe  they
           should be careful to ensure  they  have  considered  the  latest
           country of origin information. Nothing  turns  in  my  judgement
           upon that guidance, and viewed in isolation  it  certainly  does
           not establish that the situation in  Zimbabwe  has  deteriorated
           since October 2011 when the Tribunal heard the appeal in LZ.
       15. I therefore asked Mr Schwenk to  take  me  through  all  of  the
           evidence that was before the Judge, and which was relied upon to
           show that the situation faced by lesbian women in  Zimbabwe  had
           deteriorated to any material extend  since  October  2011.  Once
           that  exercise  was  completed  it  became  obvious  how  little
           material had been placed before the Judge  that  addressed  this
           issue.
       16. I  accept  that  the  evidence  before  the  Judge  is  entirely
           consistent with the sadly all too typical picture of an increase
           in anti-homosexual rhetoric in the period immediately  prior  to
           Zimbabwean elections. Elections were held in Zimbabwe on 31 July
           2013, but the hearing of this lady's appeal  occurred  in  March
           2014, over six months later. Very little of the evidence  placed
           before the Judge related to any incident, or  to  any  utterance
           that had occurred after those elections.
       17. Mr Schwenk placed particular  reliance  upon  evidence  that  an
           attack upon  the  offices  of  Gays  and  Lesbians  of  Zimbabwe
           ["GALZ"] had occurred on 6 June 2013. Mr Dewison did not dispute
           that there was an attack upon the GALZ offices on this date, but
           he argued that the attack must be placed in its proper  context,
           which included the contemporary report of the incident from GALZ
           itself. That  report  recorded  that  the  police  had  attended
           promptly when called to the offices of GALZ, and that the police
           were both able, and willing, to arrest the perpetrators  of  the
           attack. Thus the  report  published  by  GALZ  itself  upon  the
           incident, on the same day stated [ApB p42];
                 At  around  11  am  ......five  unidentified  men  wielding
           hammers  violently  forced  entry  into  the  GLAZ  offices   in
           Harare........the men rounded up all staff and board members and
           locked them in the guard Room whilst they ransacked the  offices
           collecting all personal property  including  cellphones  laptops
           and bags.
                  We commend the Police's  swift  reaction  as  they  arrive
           promptly at the scene and promptly arrested the men who are  now
           in custody at Harare Central Police Station. A GALZ board member
           is currently at Harare  Central  Police  Station  assisting  the
           Police. All members present at the office were unharmed and  one
           cellphone and some cash belonging to a board member is allegedly
           missing
                 GALZ is not  taking  this  incident  as  a  random  act  of
           attempted robbery but that of a deliberate attack by  the  youth
           militia acting on the orders of someone superior. The  men  were
           constantly making communication with an individual addressed  as
           "Machacha" of an unknown "security wing" over the phone
                 We applaud the conduct of the Zimbabwe Republic  Police  in
           apprehending these men who were bent on creating a situation  of
           lawlessness in Zimbabwe.
       18. No other evidence from GALZ in relation  to  this  incident  was
           placed before the Judge. The only other evidence from GALZ was a
           document published on 14 July 2013 by GALZ on its  own  website,
           headed Position on General  Elections  2013"  [ApB  p46-].  This
           document makes no reference to the incident of 6 June  2013,  or
           to any subsequent event. It does not suggest that there has been
           any  deterioration  in  the  circumstances  of  the   homosexual
           community  within  Zimbabwe  since  October  2011,  and  in   my
           judgement there is nothing in  that  document  which  materially
           modifies or alters the evidence given to the Tribunal in  LZ  by
           GALZ.
       19. The document does contrast the position within Zimbabwe in  1996
           with the current position, explaining that in 1996 the state was
           "after" homosexuals, whereas now they "are not the direct target
           but are being used as an instrument and MDC is the target.  Gays
           have become a secondary target. ZanuPF will keep  the  issue  on
           the go to castigate MDC."
       20. The document also makes direct reference to the phenomena of pre-
           election rhetoric as follows; "Given this background  the  LGBTI
           community faces an inundation of vitriol from ZanuPF through its
           leadership, trying to win over  a  despondent  electorate.  GALZ
           therefore realises that hat speech targeting the  gay  community
           will be intensified during the election campaign period".
       21. As to the current position of the  homosexual  community  within
           Zimbabwe the document states; "The violent  homophobic  language
           used  by  politicians  from   both   major   political   parties
           exacerbates the general stigma against gays and lesbians in  the
           community.  Political  leaders  must  immediately  cease  making
           statements that in any way vilify dehumanise  abuse  or  slander
           LGBTI individuals.  State  authorities  have  an  obligation  to
           address violence both  the  investigate  and  punish  those  who
           attack others, but also to prevent abuse in the first place. The
           Zimbabwe Republic Police routinely turn a blind eye to the abuse
           and violence of LGBTI  individuals,  thus  contributing  to  the
           overwhelming sense of impunity"
       22. GALZ was one of the NGOs that provided  evidence  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal in LZ, and a group with whom  Dr  Oliver  Phillips  had
           been connected, and its ability to operate, and  the  nature  of
           the support it provided to individuals in Zimbabwe seeking  help
           were the subject of the expert evidence of  Dr  Oliver  Phillips
           [8, 32-4, 41, 44-7, 54-7, 67-72, 82-3, 104-110, and 116].
       23. Since GALZ did not provide evidence in this appeal to update the
           evidence offered in  LZ  the  Judge  was  entitled,  and  indeed
           probably obliged, to consider in the light of the evidence as  a
           whole that there was no change to the evidence reviewed  in  LZ.
           The evidence before him did  not  indicate  that  GALZ  were  no
           longer able to organise social events for its members in Harare,
           or  that  the  9  different  regional  groups  and  associations
           affiliated to it had ceased to  function.  Moreover  the  public
           expressions of homophobia remained politically inspired, and  as
           GALZ itself  has  recently  re-stated,  a  political  tool.  The
           finding  in  LZ  was  that  the  background  to   these   public
           expressions   of   homophobia   was   public   indifference   to
           homosexuality, rather than societal homophobia, and  that  there
           was a clear distinction to be drawn with the  culture  of  other
           countries such as Jamaica.
       24. There was no evidence before the  Judge  that  suggested  either
           WOZA, or Dr  Oliver  Phillips  had  been  asked  to  review  the
           evidence that they had offered to the Tribunal in LZ.
       25. The Tribunal's conclusion in LZ [106]  was  that  there  was  an
           absence of  evidence  to  suggest  that  either  the  Zimbabwean
           authorities, or non state agents, persecuted homosexuals to  any
           significant extent. Extortion, sometimes with police connivance,
           was the best documented risk, but even that was not very common,
           and GALZ in particular had developed  effective  strategies  for
           dealing with it when its assistance was sought. The formality of
           the law, and the vehemence of some of the public  rhetoric  were
           not matched by the reality. Whilst GALZ had always been  careful
           to operate within the law, if  the  authorities  had  wished  to
           close GALZ down no legal impediment would  have  prevented  them
           from doing so. Thus although it led an uncertain existence, GALZ
           was able to  continue  to  operate  within  a  degree  of  tacit
           official and social tolerance.
       26. Without repeating the summary of the evidence set out in LZ,  it
           is plain that the evidence that was placed before the  Judge  in
           the course of this appeal did not  come  close  to  establishing
           that there had been a significant deterioration in the  position
           of the homosexual community within Zimbabwe since October  2011.
           Accordingly there was no error of law in the Judge's decision to
           apply the guidance of LZ to the evidence before him.


      The relevant findings of primary fact
       27. The Judge plainly accepted on the applicable standard  of  proof
           that the Appellant had told the truth. Accordingly I  can  infer
           that the relevant findings are (or should have  been)  that  the
           following elements of the Appellant's account were accepted.
       28. The Appellant is a woman of 35, who speaks both Shona and fluent
           English. She grew up, and was educated in, Sunningdale 1,  where
           her parents and  two  elder  daughters  continue  to  live.  She
           married in 1996, and the matrimonial home was in Sunningdale  3,
           a 30 minute walk away from her parents home.
       29. The Appellant's marriage broke down seriously in August 2010, in
           circumstances  of  violence,  alcohol  and  drug  abuse  by  her
           husband. The Appellant reported her husband to  the  police  for
           violence,  and  he  was  arrested,  but  not   prosecuted.   The
           circumstances were her husband's discovery that she  had  stayed
           out all night on the occasion of  his  birthday,  when  she  had
           believed that he would also be out  all  night  celebrating  the
           occasion with others. Unwilling to tell him where she had  been,
           he had beaten her up. The Appellant was unwilling  to  tell  him
           where she had been, because she had been to the  birthday  party
           of a male  homosexual  friend,  and  had  decided  to  take  the
           opportunity to have a "one night affair" with a woman she met at
           that party.
       30. In December 2010 the Appellant  decided  to  leave  her  husband
           permanently, and she duly left the matrimonial home with her two
           daughters, and went to live with her parents in  Sunningdale  1.
           The trigger for this decision being her belief that her  husband
           had attempted to rape her elder daughter, when she had been away
           from the matrimonial home helping at a family funeral.
       31. Whilst living with her parents in Sunningdale, Harare, following
           the  breakdown  of  her  marriage  the  Appellant  was  able  to
           discretely  conduct  a  lesbian  affair  with  C.  Her   husband
           discovered that affair in December 2012 and beat her up.  Up  to
           that point the Appellant believes that no-one other than  C  and
           two close friends knew of the affair. Since  that  incident  she
           has had no further contact with C, who was herself married  with
           children.  The  affair  with  C  was  therefore  conducted  with
           discretion, because neither she nor C were  prepared  to  openly
           acknowledge their sexuality.
       32. Following this assault, and the Appellant's report of it to  the
           police, her husband then attempted to  publicise  her  sexuality
           within her family  (including  her  daughters),  and  the  local
           community. Even so, his attempts bore no fruit because  even  on
           the Appellant's account his allegations about her sexuality  and
           her  conduct  of  that  affair  excited  no  discrimination   or
           persecution from either  her  parents,  her  family,  or  indeed
           anyone else.  The  Appellant  refers  to  only  two  individuals
           outside the family making any comment to her about her husband's
           allegations, and she accepted that neither of them believed them
           to be true. The only person she identifies  as  having  believed
           them to have any substance was a cousin T, who  advised  her  to
           leave Zimbabwe and claim asylum abroad.
       33. In January 2013 the Appellant was raped by her  husband  at  the
           home of her parents, having threatened to kill both herself  and
           her mother if she resisted him. She reported the incident to the
           police who were not interested  in  a  prosecution  because  the
           couple remained married, but said they would refer the matter to
           a civil court. The Appellant remained living at her parents home
           with her two daughters until she left Zimbabwe in May 2013.
       34. The Appellant would therefore without  more  be  perceived  upon
           return to Zimbabwe to be the single mother of a young  child  of
           some eight months. If she sought to make contact  with,  and  to
           live with her two daughters aged 9 and 16,  then  she  would  be
           perceived as the single mother of three children.
       35. The Appellant is genuinely a lesbian.


      The guidance of LZ
       36. The headnote in LZ reads as follows;
           (i) There has been much public expression of extreme  homophobia
           at the highest levels in recent years.
           (ii) Male homosexual behaviour is criminalised, but prosecutions
           are very rare. Lesbianism is not criminalised.
           (iii) Some homosexuals  suffer  discrimination,  harassment  and
           blackmail from the general  public  and  the  police.  Attempted
           extortion, false complaints and unjustified detentions  are  not
           so prevalent as to pose a general risk.  There are no records of
           any murders with a homophobic  element.   "Corrective  rape"  is
           rare, and does not represent a general risk.
           (iv) There is a "gay scene," within limitations.
           (v) Lesbians, living on their own or together, may face  greater
           difficulties than gay men.
           (vi) GALZ (Gays and Lesbians  of  Zimbabwe)  takes  a  realistic
           view: Zimbabwe is "not the worst place in the world to be gay or
           lesbian even though  the  President,  government  officials  and
           church  leaders  have  whipped  up  a  climate   of   hysterical
           homophobia."
           (vii) Applying HJ & HT [2010] UKSC 31, [2010] Imm AR 729,  there
           is no general risk to gays or lesbians.  Personal  circumstances
           place some gays and lesbians at risk.  Although not decisive  on
           its own,  being  openly  gay  may  increase  risk.   A  positive
           HIV/AIDS diagnosis may be a risk factor.  Connections  with  the
           elite do not increase risk.
           (viii)  The  police  and  other  state  agents  do  not  provide
           protection.
           (ix) A homosexual at risk in  his  or  her  community  can  move
           elsewhere, either in the same city or to  another  part  of  the
           country.  He or she might choose to relocate to where  there  is
           greater tolerance, such as Bulawayo, but the  choice  of  a  new
           area is not restricted.  The option is excluded only if personal
           circumstances present risk throughout the country.


      The HJ (Iran) point
       37. Since there was no error of law in the Judge's decision to apply
           the guidance to be found in LZ it is difficult to  see  what  is
           left of Mr Schwenks' secondary argument which depended upon  the
           argument that the Judge had failed to deal adequately  with  the
           Appellant's circumstances in the event she  were  to  return  to
           Zimbabwe and to seek to live there as an openly  lesbian  woman.
           His argument was that the Appellant's  evidence  had  been  that
           through fear of persecution, she would genuinely feel unable  to
           do so; HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. He argued  that  her  case  was
           therefore that she had to date lived a discrete life in relation
           to her sexuality, but only because of a  fear  of  serious  harm
           should she do otherwise.
       38. The guidance to be found in LZ was that the decision to live  an
           openly lesbian life in Zimbabwe did not translate  automatically
           into a real risk of persecution by either  the  authorities,  or
           non state agents, across the whole of Zimbabwe. The  Appellant's
           own evidence disclosed no threat of harm from the authorities or
           third party  non  state  agents  resulting  from  her  husband's
           assertions that she  was  a  lesbian.  She  experienced  on  her
           evidence no societal discrimination,  and  no  shunning  by  her
           community or by members of her family.  Thus,  absent  the  risk
           posed to her by her husband,  she  had  been  able  to  live  in
           Sunningdale as a single woman of two  children  in  her  parents
           home without difficulties. Whilst doing so she had been able  to
           conduct a discrete affair with a married woman,  who  wished  to
           continue  to  live  with  her  husband.  Their   discretion   in
           conducting that affair therefore appears to have had far more to
           do with the circumstances and wishes of her lover, than any fear
           of violence should the Appellant be identified as a lesbian - as
           indeed she had already been identified by her husband to anybody
           who would listen to him.
       39. That affair is now at an  end,  and  the  Appellant  denies  any
           contact with her lover for some time before she  left  Zimbabwe.
           The Appellant says that she would wish to pursue further lesbian
           relationships in the future, and there is  no  reason  why  that
           assertion should not be accepted.
       40. The Appellant has not to date pursued an openly gay relationship
           even in the UK, and so the evidence suggests strongly  that  her
           approach to her sexuality will by inclination continue to be one
           of discretion, notwithstanding the evidence that  was  led  from
           her to the effect that she would wish to live as an  openly  gay
           woman. She has the feelings of her children and her wider family
           to consider, alongside those of any future partner. Even if,  in
           the future, she were able to form a relationship in  which  both
           she and her partner wished to live a more openly  gay  lifestyle
           the evidence as reviewed in LZ indicates that this would not  of
           itself lead to  a  real  risk  of  harm,  particularly  if  that
           lifestyle were  one  pursued  within  the  more  tolerant  urban
           environments of Harare and Bulawayo.




      Internal relocation
       41. The Appellant's husband has been responsible for violent attacks
           upon her in the past, and he must be taken to continue to pose a
           real risk of harm to her in the future. There has  been  in  the
           past no effective state  protection  offered  to  the  Appellant
           against that risk, and there is no reason to  suppose  that  the
           situation would be any different in the future in the  event  of
           her return to Zimbabwe.
       42. The risk posed to the Appellant by her husband  is  confined  to
           the local area in which  the  family  have  lived  to  date,  of
           Sunningdale, Harare.  It  could  therefore  be  avoided  by  the
           expedient of relocation within Zimbabwe. No doubt upon return to
           Zimbabwe the Appellant would wish to resume a life that included
           her two elder daughters. I am not persuaded  upon  the  evidence
           before  me  that  relocation  within  Harare  itself  would   be
           ineffective in avoiding the risk her husband poses to  her,  but
           even if that were considered by the Appellant to be the case, it
           is plain that relocation to Bulawayo would be open  to  her  and
           her daughters, and that this would avoid the risk he poses.
       43. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that  relocation  to
           urban Bulawayo, for one who has always lived  in  urban  Harare,
           would  be  an  unreasonable  expectation.  Indeed  the  evidence
           suggests that urban Bulawayo  provides  an  even  more  tolerant
           community to the LGBTI community  than  even  urban  Harare.  Mr
           Schwenk argues that the Appellant would  be  unable  to  support
           herself and her  children  financially  in  Bulawayo,  but  this
           argument cannot succeed. She was able to do so in Harare without
           the assistance of her husband, following their  separation,  and
           there is no reason to infer (and she does not assert)  that  the
           support of her family would not be forthcoming in the  event  of
           her return to Zimbabwe. The evidence suggests that the Appellant
           has held employment in  the  past  in  Zimbabwe,  and  there  is
           therefore no reason to suppose that she would be unable to do so
           again.
       44. On this evidence the guidance of the Tribunal in AN & SS (Tamils
           - Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063 is applicable.
           In that decision the Tribunal held that it  was  appropriate  to
           take into account the availability of financial support from the
           Respondent  to  a  returnee,  through  the   Voluntary   Returns
           Programme;
        1. Much has been made of the undue harshness which AN will face  as
           a single mother without accommodation or employment and  without
           friends or family to turn to in Colombo, but this  is  to  leave
           out of account what even Dr Smith acknowledges to  be  the  very
           generous  support  package  offered  by  the  IOM  to  voluntary
           returnees.  After  "smoothing  the  re-entry  process"  the  IOM
           provides "a comprehensive package  of  support  for  five  years
           after arrival", which includes "five years shelter  guaranteed."
           We do not think it is open to the appellant to say that, if  she
           loses her appeal, she will not take advantage of  this  package,
           and to argue from that refusal that she will face destitution in
           Colombo which, accordingly, is not a  place  to  which  she  can
           reasonably be expected to relocate.
       45. The Appellant cannot therefore legitimately argue  that  in  the
           event of her return to Zimbabwe she would not take advantage  of
           the assistance that is now  provided  through  Refugee  Action's
           Voluntary Assistance Return  and  Reintegration  Programme,  and
           their grant schemes. She could not properly argue that she would
           face destitution upon return, or a  risk  of  a  breach  of  her
           Article 3 rights upon return as a woman with three  children  to
           care for. In any event she has family to  whom  she  could  also
           turn for shelter and support.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      17 March 2014 therefore contained no error of law in the dismissal  of
      the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 2 July 2014


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 2 July 2014




