
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/00916/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                           |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th March 2016                       |   On 20th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                              Mr MOHAMMED ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Sarwar, Counsel instructed by Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  dated  8  September  2015.   The
    appeal relates to a decision by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Garratt promulgated on 7 July 2015. The  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal against the  Respondent's  decisions  refusing  the  application
    based on protection and human rights grounds.

2.    The background  to  the  Appellant's  case  was  highly  unusual.  The
    Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom in  1999  and  had  claimed
    asylum the same day. The Judge noted that it had taken  the  Respondent
    fifteen years to make a decision to refuse that claim for  asylum.  The
    Judge concluded that despite the long  period  of  time  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom by the Appellant, it did not reach the 20 years required
    by paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Judge concluded  that
    in respect of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    removal would not amount to a disproportionate interference.


3.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal were broad  ranging  but  permission
    was only granted in respect of one. Namely,

      "Although the Judge took account the  length  of  time  the  Appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom it is arguable that the Judge failed  to
    apply the principles enunciated  in  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41  in
    respect of any reduction in the public interest  consequent  on  delay.
    Permission is granted on this basis."

4.    At the hearing before me Mr Sarwar said he had  just  been  instructed
    and had not drafted the grounds of appeal. He said  that  there  was  a
    Rule 15 application to adduce new matters. These related to the  asylum
    claim and were connected to the Appellant's  memory  problems.  It  was
    said in the letter from Mr Sarwar's instructing solicitors that,

      "For the  above  reasons,  we  would  submit  the  above  evidence  is
    admitted under Rule 15 to ensure  the  furtherance  of  the  overriding
    objective and to ensure parties are on a level playing field and giving
    the benefit of the  doubt  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  due  to  his
    particular vulnerability as a result of the memory confusion  and  lack
    of recall and depression leading to impairment of  his  mental  health.
    Otherwise it would be unfair and unjust in  the  circumstances  to  not
    admit the above said evidence".

5.    Having considered the matter, it is my clear view that it is  far  too
    late to now seek admission of this very late evidence.  The  claim  for
    asylum was in 1999. The First Incident Reports and the like  now  being
    produced have an air of unrealism about them some 17  years  later.  As
    for the  medical  notes  and  letters  and  the  medical  note  of  the
    Appellant's brother, the proper place and forum for raising all of that
    was at the hearing before the Judge. I cannot ignore  that  it  is  the
    same solicitors who now act for the Appellant as did before the  Judge.
    If the solicitors did not realise the importance of the First  Incident
    Reports previously or indeed the medical evidence then that is  not  of
    itself a good reason to now  admit  that  evidence.  I  would  be  very
    surprised if questions about documents were not raised and  I  find  it
    surprising that the  Appellant  just  happened  to  produce  the  First
    Incident Reports this  year  because  of  his  "illiteracy  and  memory
    problems".  Overall, the Appellant was represented by  Counsel  at  the
    hearing before the Judge. He also  appears  to  have  been  represented
    throughout the Tribunal proceedings by the same solicitors. In  reality
    this is an attempt to reargue the appeal differently in respect of  the
    protection claim and to broaden the basis of the grant of permission to
    appeal. Therefore despite Mr Sarwar's able submissions,  I  refuse  the
    Rule 15 application.

6.    Mr Sarwar's submissions in respect of the ground of appeal in  respect
    of which permission was granted said that the Appellant had built up  a
    strong private and family life. It was contrary to the findings of  the
    Judge who had failed to undertake a balancing exercise. In  respect  of
    delay there was a legitimate expectation that it would be dealt with in
    time. It was for some unknown reason that the claim for asylum was  not
    dealt with in a timely manner. The Appellant has developed a close  and
    personal bond. Had it not been for the delay by the  Home  Office  then
    the Appellant would not have done so. There was also  reference  by  Mr
    Sarwar to a legacy claim. Finally Mr Sarwar submitted  that  the  Judge
    had failed to ask himself whether the Appellant's case came within  the
    exceptional type of case where discretion ought to apply outside of the
    Rules.

7.    Mr Harrison in his submissions said he relied on the  Rule  24  Reply.
    He said that there were also a couple of factual aspects which ought to
    be mentioned. It was wholly accepted that there was a very  long  delay
    by the Home Office. The question was not always  "why"  but  "what  has
    happened". The Judge's decision suggested that some of this was due  to
    the Appellant's inaction and that of his previous solicitors. It was  a
    great disappointment that the Home Office decision was not  dealt  with
    more swiftly. Mr Harrison said he was content for the EB  (Kosovo)  and
    the section 117 Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  issues  to  be
    left to the Rule 24 Reply.

8.     I then heard further submissions from Mr Sarwar  in  reply.  Both  Mr
    Sarwar and Mr Harrison agreed that if I found that there was a material
    error of law in the Judge's decision then the matter ought to return to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.

9.     I had reserved my decision.

10.   Despite the Respondent's Rule  24  Reply  and  despite  Mr  Harrison's
    submissions, in my judgment there was an error of law  in  the  Judge's
    decision in respect of the issues arising out the assessment of Article
    8. The delay  of  15  years  in  dealing  with  the  asylum  claim  had
    consequences even though the asylum claim was  rejected  and  dismissed
    thereafter. That is because the Appellant's life for those 15 years  or
    so (now 17 years) has been in the United Kingdom. There can be no doubt
    that he has established private life but also family life  during  that
    lengthy period of time. It was against that background of this  unusual
    case that the Article 8 assessment had to take place.

11.   The Appellant's grounds of appeal refer in full to  paragraphs  14  to
    16 of the judgment Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo). As is clear, delay  may
    well be relevant in reducing the weight otherwise to be accorded to the
    requirements of firm and fair immigration control. In my judgment in  a
    case such as this with very long delay, the majority of  which  remains
    unexplained by the Respondent, these words were apt for full and proper
    analysis in the Article 8 and  Razgar  assessment  by  the  Judge.  The
    failure to do so was a material error of law.

12.   Therefore having found that there is a material error of law, in  line
    with the parties' joint position that the matter  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal that shall be the order I will make.

13.   For the avoidance of doubt, the protection claim  and  the  appeal  in
    respect of  the  Immigration  Rules  remain  dismissed.  Therefore  the
    findings of the Judge at the  First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to  those
    matters shall remain. The remitted hearing will only deal with  Article
    8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law.

The Appellant's appeal is remitted to be reheard at the First Tier  Tribunal
in respect of Article 8.

An anonymity direction is not made.



Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


