
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 January 2016                        |On 10 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     u k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughan, NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, U K, was born in [ ] 1988 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.
    He claimed asylum, his application  was  refused  and  directions  were
    issued for his removal from the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed
    against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Crawford)
    which, in a decision promulgated on  25  February  2015  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  The Judge has produced what is, on the whole,  a  detailed  and
    careful examination of the evidence, but,  in  certain  instances,  his
    analysis is problematic.  At [44] the Judge wrote that whilst assessing
    the documentary evidence produced by the appellant,

         in my judgment the newspapers produced by the appellant  do  little
         to further his case.  I have not seen the  original  newspapers  to
         confirm the veracity of the alleged contents.

 3. Clearly,  in  certain  instances  original  documents  may  carry  more
    evidential weight than copies.  However, it is not clear  here  whether
    the Judge is casting doubt  upon  the  authenticity  of  the  documents
    because they were copies.  It is also unclear as to how the  production
    of the original newspaper articles might be capable of "confirming  the
    veracity of the alleged  contents";  depending  on  the  circumstances,
    original  documents  will  not  always  be  genuine  whilst  copies  of
    originals may carry considerable evidential weight.  As a  consequence,
    I am not sure what weight, if  any,  the  Judge  has  attached  to  the
    newspaper articles.

 4. At [45] a more serious problem arises.  The  Judge  discusses  at  that
    paragraph the production of FIR documents adduced in  evidence  by  the
    appellant.  He noted that,

         [the FIR] was registered by the police themselves.   The  point  is
         made in the refusal letter that the FIRs are normally registered by
         members of the public and is only in limited circumstances that the
         police generate FIRs themselves.  ... I have not seen the  original
         of this document [the FIR] but the appellant left Pakistan on  14th
         May 2011.  ... my conclusion is that the  copies  of  the  FIR  and
         arrest warrant do not further the appellant's case in  the  absence
         of originals and then I cannot be sure where they originated.   The
         appellant says they were sent to this country but the issue is  the
         location of the originals.

 5. Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent,  did  not  dispute  the  appellant's
    assertion that, generally, an original  FIR  is  never  served  upon  a
    person charged or with an offence in Pakistan.  As the  grounds  state,
    "a photocopy was provided and  is  verified  by  the  attachment  of  a
    stamp".  A stamped copy was available at the hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.   Mrs  Pettersen  submitted  that,  notwithstanding  the
    Judge's apparent error, his  other  credibility  findings  were  sound.
    That may be the case but it is difficult in an holistic analysis of the
    evidence (as the Judge should conduct in an appeal  of  this  sort)  to
    separate out the various  findings  of  fact,  preserving  some  whilst
    discarding others, and to determine the extent to  which  a  particular
    finding may determined the Judge's conclusions on credibility.   As  it
    is, the Judge has, in effect, refrained  from  properly  assessing  the
    stamped FIR document because he was expecting that to see  an  original
    which was, for the reasons given in the grounds, be highly unlikely  to
    have been forthcoming in any event. It was the appellant's case that he
    had adduced the best evidence he had available and it was the  task  of
    the judge to assess that evidence.

 6. In the circumstances the only  proper  course  of  action  is  for  the
    decision to be set aside together with the findings  of  fact.   A  new
    fact-finding exercise will need  to  be  conducted  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to which the appeal is  now  returned  for  that  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  25
February 2015 is set aside.  The  findings  of  fact  are  set  aside.   The
appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Crawford) for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

