
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00109/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2017                                |On 10 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                      mohamid abduljalil yussuf hamida
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mohamid Abduljalil Yussuf Hamida, born on 1 October 1995
    and is a citizen of Egypt.  The appellant's age had  been  disputed  by
    the parties but it is agreed that he was over the age of  18  years  by
    the time his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard on 9  December
    2016 and subsequently dismissed by Judge GRJ Robson.  The appellant had
    claimed that he was at risk in Egypt on account of his family links  to
    the Muslim Brotherhood.  That claim had been rejected by a decision  of
    the respondent dated 1 December 2015.  The appellant now appeals to the
    Upper Tribunal, with permission,  Judge  Robson  having  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 January 2017.

 2. First, I acknowledge that the Upper  Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
    finding that a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  been  supported
    by adequate reasons.  The First-tier Tribunal is required to carry  out
    a robust fact-finding  exercise  and  it  is  trite  law  that  is  not
    necessary for the Tribunal to consider and make findings in respect  of
    each and every item of evidence.  Having said that, I find that this is
    a relatively rare example of a decision which is vitiated by a  failure
    of the judge to give cogent clear reasons to support his decision.   In
    addition, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  not  paid  sufficient
    attention to background material relating to Egypt which had  been  put
    before him by the appellant.

 3. At [59], the judge had written:

         "What is not clear, however, is why there should be any interest or
         the authorities in the appellant who was never arrested or detained
         despite the fact  that  had  happened  to  his  father  on  several
         occasions and to his brother at least once."

 4. The appellant had claimed that his father and brother had been arrested
    because of their membership of Muslim Brotherhood.  What  Judge  Robson
    did not clearly record in his decision is that  the  appellant  himself
    had been taken on demonstrations in support of the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    by his family members and that he claimed that  he  had  only  narrowly
    escaped arrest himself (see asylum interview, question 115).  The judge
    noted at [63] that the appellant claimed to have  "always  hidden  when
    there were demonstrations people were arrested ..." but he  appears  to
    have taken no account of the fact that the appellant  claims  that  his
    close family members had been arrested on more than  one  occasion  and
    that the appellant himself  might  be  wanted  by  the  authorities  on
    account of his family members' activities with the Muslim  Brotherhood.
    The judge had before him an Amnesty International Report of  July  2016
    which recorded that the Egyptian Government claimed that  its  security
    forces had arrested almost 22,000 suspects in 2013 and 2014, indicating
    a somewhat indiscriminate approach to a  perceived  threat;  it  is  at
    least arguable that an individual with a family history of support  for
    opposition politics but no direct involvement himself  might  face  the
    possibility of  arrest  and  detention.   Indeed,  the  Amnesty  report
    records that "family  members  of  the  government  critics"  had  been
    arrested.  It is against the background of  this  material  that  Judge
    Robson's incredulity at the  appellant's  claim  that  the  authorities
    might show an interest in him is to be considered.  I  do  not  suggest
    that the judge was compelled to find that the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk or that the background material conclusively proves the  existence
    of such a risk.  However, I do believe  that  Judge  Robson  should  at
    least have engaged with background material which  might  have  provide
    prima facie support for the appellant's claim if only to reject it.  As
    it is, Judge Robson has dismissed the claim as incredible;  whilst  the
    claim may not ultimately be proved or  real  risk  established  on  the
    evidence, the appellant's account perhaps deserved more respect than it
    was given in Judge Robson's analysis.

 5. Judge Robson had a number of letters before him which he  discusses  at
    [60-62].  These letters supported  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  a
    genuine fear in Egypt of arrest by the  authorities.   As  regards  one
    letter, the judge simply notes that, "I  do  not  know  how  [that  the
    author of the letter] can come to the conclusion that he did  do".   No
    further explanation is given by the judge.  Little weight  is  attached
    to another letter because it is "totally devoid of specific detail, for
    example when or how frequently raids [on the appellant's home] may have
    taken place".  The letter in question asserted that "[the  authorities]
    have been raiding the family home nearly every week to search  for  you
    ...".  It is not clear to me why necessarily that  letter  should  have
    contained more details of the raids and/or the exact  dates  when  they
    may have taken place; it seems to me that the author of the letter  was
    simply attempting to inform the appellant that his family was suffering
    persecution.  Likewise, another letter is dismissed on the  basis  that
    it is "so vague and lacking in detail as will need to place  no  weight
    on the same".  A letter lacking in detail may indeed not  attract  very
    much evidential weight but it would have been helpful if the judge  had
    set out his concerns in greater detail.

 6. As I say, it is unusual for the Tribunal to interfere  in  the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal but, in this instance, I find  that
    Judge Robson has failed to provide a thorough and  cogent  analysis  of
    the appellant's evidence. He has been too ready to reject evidence  out
    of hand without explaining his reasons for doing so. I stress that  the
    next Tribunal which hears this case may  also  reject  the  appellant's
    account as incredible; there is nothing in my findings and observations
    which should lead to the First-tier Tribunal to a particular outcome in
    this appeal.  However, the next Tribunal should  seek  to  analyse  the
    appellant's account thoroughly and in the  context  of  the  background
    material provided.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 19  January
2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
should be considered again by the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Robson)
and that Tribunal shall remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 7 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 7 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


