

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/00049/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 1st July 2013                              |On 3rd July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR FARHAD GHIYASI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown (instructed by Bolton District CAB)
For the Respondent:  Mr A Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 14th May  1984.  He  appeals
    to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Manuel) dated 20th March 2013 dismissing his appeal against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse him asylum and to remove him to
    Iran.

2.   Permission to appeal was originally refused by a Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane on 20th May
    2013. Judge Lane found it arguable that the Judge may have erred in law
    in respect of her adverse credibility findings.
3.   Thus the matter came before me. My first  task  is  to  decide  whether
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuel made an error of law and if so whether
    and to what extent her determination should be set aside.

4.   Mr Brown appeared to  represent  the  Appellant's  interests  at  short
    notice  as  Counsel  who   was   originally   instructed   was   booked
    simultaneously in another court. I allowed him time to prepare the case
    and speak to the Appellant and he indicated  that  he  was  content  to
    proceed, although in the event that I was to decide that there  was  an
    error of law, he was not in a position to  deal  with  the  substantive
    appeal. Mr Tan was in a similar position should  an  error  of  law  be
    found and so it was agreed at the outset  that  the  hearing  would  be
    limited to the issue of the error of law.

5.   The Appellant's claim was based on his imputed political opinion  as  a
    result of helping his cousin, Jafar escape  from  Sepah  and  Etela'at.
    Jafar was a member of the "Peoples Free Life Party of Kurdistan"(PEJAK)
    and wanted by the authorities.

6.   The Appellant lived with his parents and sisters. Although his  parents
    are Shia Muslims the Appellant does not practices his  faith  and  does
    not attend a mosque.

7.   In October 2012 the Appellant's cousin Jafar returned to  his  parents'
    home to attend his father's funeral  accompanied  by  a  friend  called
    Reza. The Appellant had also travelled to the funeral from Karaj  where
    he lived. Jafar's attendance was unexpected because his father's  death
    was a result of torture he had suffered at the hands of Sepah who  were
    trying to establish Jafar's whereabouts.

8.    While  they  were  present  at  the  funeral  an  old  friend  of  the
    Appellant's father telephoned at night informing him that Sepah were on
    their way to the house. That friend worked for/had links with Sepah.

9.   The Appellant's father instructed him to take his  car  and  get  Jafar
    and Reza away, which he did. As they were leaving the village they  saw
    another car entering the village and some 15 to 20 minutes  later  once
    they were on the main road, the other car caught up  with  them.  There
    was an exchange of gunshots between that car and the car the  Appellant
    was driving. Reza was shooting back at the other car.

10.  The Appellant managed to lose the other car and parked in a  side  road
    where he contacted his maternal uncle  and  explained  what  had  taken
    place. His uncle instructed them to stay where they were  and  that  he
    would come to them, which he did. The uncle  told  the  Appellant  that
    Sepah had found the car and that the persons from Sepah  in  the  other
    vehicle were badly injured.
11.  The Appellant's uncle then kept him in hiding for 4 to  5  days  before
    arrangements were made to leave Iran.

12.  In her determination Judge Manuel made a number of adverse  credibility
    findings and it is those that are challenged in the grounds.

13.  The first challenge  is  to  the  Judge's  finding  that  at  paragraph
    27(iii) of the determination where she states "It is difficult  to  see
    how the Appellant's father and uncle would be friends  with  this  man,
    particularly  given  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  uncle   was
    repeatedly detained, questioned and ill treated over a period of 3 to 4
    years regarding his son's political activities, and who died  following
    torture inflicted by  Sepah."  This  is  a  reference  to  the  warning
    telephone call received by a friend of the Appellant's father  who  was
    involved with Sepah. The grounds submit that the Judge did not seek any
    clarification concerning this at the hearing and  that  she  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's evidence that this  man  was  an  old  Kurdish
    friend of his father's and that it is perfectly plausible  for  an  old
    friend to warn them in this way. This person had attended the funeral.

14.  This grounds is simply a disagreement with the Judge's  findings  which
    on the basis of the evidence she heard were open to her.  She  had  set
    out that the Appellant said in  his  interview  that  this  friend  had
    telephoned to say "They are coming towards the  house".  The  Appellant
    was asked how he knew that the authorities were coming and he had  said
    that he didn't know exactly but he thought that his father's friend had
    a hand in Sepah.  In  cross-examination  the  Judge  records  that  the
    Appellant did not know the exact details of what this  friend  said  to
    his father but as far as he knew he was  in  contact  with  Sepah.  The
    Judge records that the Appellant was asked whether he was  saying  that
    this man was a friend of his uncle who the authorities had just  killed
    and he repeated an earlier answer without explaining how  it  was  that
    his man was a friend of the family and yet linked to those  responsible
    for his uncle's death and  who  were  hunting  Jafar.  It  is  entirely
    reasonable  for  the  Judge   to  query  the  friendship  between   the
    Appellant's father and uncle and a man who worked for  the  responsible
    for his uncle's death.

15.  The next ground challenges the Judge's finding at  paragraph  28  where
    she said that there was no evidence to show that the Appellant and  his
    cousin Jafar were particularly close. She said this in the  context  of
    the lack of credibility in the Appellant risking his life in  order  to
    help him. The grounds submit that the Judge's reasoning was irrational.
    The Appellant was related by blood to Jafar  and  therefore  how  close
    they were was irrelevant and furthermore his father told  him  to  help
    them. Again, that is a disagreement with what the Judge  concluded  and
    her conclusions were open to her on the evidence. The evidence was that
    the Appellant had not seen Jafar for some three or  four  years.  Jafar
    was not alone but with another  friend,  Reza.  The  Appellant  had  no
    connection with PJAK. It was clear that the Judge did not  accept,  for
    the reasons she gave that Jafar was unable to drive and therefore there
    was no reason why the Appellant should had been involved at  all.  That
    finding was properly open to her.  She  found  it  not  credible  thaeh
    Appellant's father would instruct his only son to risk his life  for  a
    virtual stranger when there was no need to do so.

16.  The next challenge relates to the same part of the determination  where
    Judge Manuel did not accept  as  credible  the  Appellant's  answer  at
    interview that it would not make any difference to his father if he was
    killed. Again, this is  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's conclusions. The Judge noted the  Appellant  was  his  father's
    only son. There were clearly alternatives to his being involved and she
    simply did not accept the entire claimed incident to be credible. While
    the  explanations  contained  in  the  grounds  offer  an   alternative
    conclusion, the Judge's conclusions were properly open to her.

17.  The next ground challenges paragraph 29 of the determination where  the
    Judge refers to discrepancies as to how Reza shot the occupants of  the
    Toyota vehicle and submits that the Judge, had she considered questions
    113 - 121 of the  interview  record,  would  have  noted  that  he  had
    clarified matters and that it was wrong  to  conclude  that  there  was
    inconsistency or discrepancy.

18.  That ground is wholly without merit. The Judge properly notes that  the
    Appellant's evidence was very inconsistent as to the entire  car  chase
    affair. The Judge noted differing evidence as to how Reza shot  at  the
    vehicle behind, whether he broke a window or whether the  windows  were
    broken by gunshots. She did not find it credible that the Appellant was
    unaware of the car chasing him until so late in the  incident  and  she
    did not find it credible that if the two vehicles were shooting at each
    other at close range the occupants of the vehicle behind were  severely
    injured whereas neither the  Appellant  nor  his  two  companions  were
    injured at all. The  explanation  in  the  interview  record  that  the
    grounds refer to is no more than the Appellant denying what he had said
    previously. It is not an explanation. The adverse credibility  findings
    by the Judge in relation to the incident are numerous. They  cannot  be
    explained away as Mr Brown suggested by the judge being mistaken as  to
    the circumstances whether they were the only two cars on  the  road  or
    not. A  high-speed  chase  taking  place,  and  if  the  Appellant  was
    concentrating on his driving as he claims he would have been  aware  of
    the car chasing him.

19.  The next challenge is to the Judge's finding at paragraph  29(vi)  that
    the  evidence  before  her  indicated   that   when   confronted   with
    discrepancies  the  Appellant  failed   to   provide   a   satisfactory
    explanation and instead blamed interpreters, former solicitors and Home
    Office interviewers or typing errors. The ground  suggest  that  in  so
    finding the judge failed to take  into  account  that  the  Appellant's
    previous solicitors had withdrawn because of  a  conflict  of  interest
    arising due to incorrect translations. In support of that they refer to
    a document at page 14 of the Appellant's bundle. That document does not
    assist the Appellant's case. That document is a letter to the Appellant
    from  his  former  solicitors  wherein  they  indicate  that  they  had
    concluded investigations into  the  Appellant's  allegations  that  the
    interpreter  used  during  his  first   appointment   with   them   had
    inaccurately interpreted what he had said.  That the issue  had  arisen
    due to a comment in the Letter of Refusal that there was a  discrepancy
    between what the Appellant had told the Home Office  and  what  he  had
    told his solicitors. Having  investigated  the  matter  the  solicitors
    concluded they could no longer  represent  the  Appellant  because  the
    interpreter denied there were any interpreting problems and that he had
    stated that he translated what the Appellant said accurately. This does
    not benefit  the  Appellant.  Clearly  the  conflict-of-interest  arose
    because the  Appellant  had  been  discovered  in  making  what  untrue
    allegations to his solicitors. The Judge's  conclusions  were  entirely
    reasonable in the circumstances.

20.  The next challenge relates to the  Judge's  finding  that  it  was  not
    credible that all three of the Appellant's group escaped without injury
    when the occupants of the other car were seriously injured. That  is  a
    perfectly reasonable finding in the circumstances.  The  other  grounds
    similarly challenged the Judge's findings in relation to the car  chase
    which I have dealt with above.

21.  Finally, the grounds refer to paragraph 33 of the  determination  where
    the Judge stated that the Appellant remained with a close  relative  in
    the same village which indicated that he authorities were  not  looking
    for him as he claimed. The grounds submit the Judge failed consider his
    evidence that he was in hiding at his maternal uncle's for a period  of
    seven days. Mr Brown expanded upon that submitting  that  the  evidence
    did not in fact point to the Appellant being at his maternal uncle's at
    all but rather that he was hiding with his maternal uncle. We  examined
    the evidence in the bundle and the interview record at the hearing  and
    it was impossible to ascertain precisely what the evidence  was  as  to
    where the Appellant was in hiding. It is certainly  the  case  that  he
    said that his uncle had hidden him and he does  seem  to  suggest  that
    they returned to the same place where the  funeral  had  been  and  the
    explanation for that had been that there  was  nowhere  else  that  his
    uncle could hide him.

22.  It is for an Appellant to put forward his case. The  burden  of  proof,
    remains with him albeit the standard of proof is low. The  evidence  in
    this case was clearly less than satisfactory. However,  the  Judge  has
    taken it all into account and has made properly  reasoned  findings  on
    the various aspects of the claim concluding that the  Appellant  lacked
    any credibility, had displayed an ability to be creative  and  had  not
    discharged the burden to show that  he  had  a  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution. I can discern no error of law in  the  way  in  which  she
    approached the evidence or in her findings.

23.  Mr Brown argued that taken cumulatively the grounds did show  an  error
    of law such that the determination could  not  stand.  However  despite
    their  number  the  grounds  individually  do  not  stand  up  and   so
    cumulatively they do not do so either.

24.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  error  of  law  in  its
    determination of this appeal and its decision shall stand.  The  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                 Dated 2nd July 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
