
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00023/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 April 2016                          |On 27 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Hirst, instructed by Camden Community Law
                    Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, A B, was born  in  1987  and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  She had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Callow)
    against a decision of the respondent dated 4 December  2014  to  remove
    her by way of directions having rejected her asylum claim.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 8 February 2016,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant appealed,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. In a Rule 24 notice dated 14 March  2016,  the  representative  of  the
    respondent indicated unequivocally that the respondent did  not  oppose
    the appellant's application and invited the Tribunal "to determine  the
    appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing"  (sic).   In  the
    circumstances, I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    although, with the agreement of both representatives before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the findings of fact contained in paragraphs 22 - 24 of  that
    decision are preserved.  The appeal will be returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Callow) for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision
    following a further hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8  February  2016  is
set aside.  The findings of fact contained in that  decision  at  paragraphs
22 - 24 are preserved.  The appeal is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
(not Judge Callow) for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  following  a
further hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 26 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

