
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00664/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2015                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     M I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 THE SECRETARY STATE FOR THE HOME DEPERTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Leonard & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal arising from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain which was promulgated on 26 November 2015. It is  brought  with
    the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  dated  18  December
    2015.  I will persist in the anonymity  direction  which  was  properly
    made in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   This appellant was born in January 1983. He is a national  of  Pakistan
    and his immigration history is fully set out in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The issues which fell to  be  determined  on  that
    occasion related to issues of asylum and humanitarian protection.   The
    appellant is a member of the Hazara community and it  was  accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he also held a position as a  police
    officer.

3.   Although this is a full and detailed decision, the difficulty  lies  in
    discerning what precisely the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided on  the
    issues which called for determination.  In particular it is conceded on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that there are inconsistencies in  the
    apparent  findings  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made.  The
    relevant part of the decision reads as follows:

         "27. Any persecution or ill-treatment to which the appellant may be
             subject would be no greater than that is levelled  at  members
             of his community generally.

         28.  I have no reason to doubt the appellant's evidence that except
             one of his brothers, the rest  of  have  left  Pakistan.  Such
             migration would be unsurprising  given  the  instability  that
             reigns in the  appellant's  home  country  but  it  is  not  a
             sufficient reason to find that the appellant personally is  at
             real risk of ill-treatment for a Convention reason.

         29.  If I am wrong in my conclusion,  then  the  question  that  is
             ultimately going to be determinative of whether the  appellant
             can relocate to another part of Pakistan. On  this  issue  the
             appellant's expert, unless I  have  misread  the  information,
             expressed no firm opinion.

         30.  What the expert does say in paragraph 24 is  that  whilst  the
             systematic attack and targeting of the Hazara  peoples  is  by
             now hardly disputable, it appears also evident that the  state
             is unable and perhaps unwilling to protect the Hazaras in  the
             wake of the increased  deterioration  of  the  law  and  order
             situation in Baluchistan. Baluchistan, especially  Quetta,  is
             by most described as a garrison town where the  army  and  the
             paramilitary forces such as  the  Frontier  Corp  struggle  to
             maintain  law  and  order.  The  expert  then  quotes  various
             extracts and objective evidence to support her opinion. As  to
             whether  Hazaras  could    relocate   elsewhere   outside   of
             Baluchistan, she cites at paragraphs   28  the  extracts  from
             some publication  which  states  that  whilst  a  majority  of
             Hazaras in Pakistan lived in around the city of Quetta,  there
             are Hazara communities elsewhere in Pakistan, notably Karachi,
             Lahore and Multan.

         31.  From the above, I conclude that the appellant  has  not  shown
             that he would not be able to relocate internally to a part  of
             Pakistan other than Quetta where he  can  live  in  reasonable
             safety.

         32.  The Secretary of State considered the appellant's human rights
             within the terms of paragraph  276ADE.   She  noted  that  the
             appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom for more than 20
             years and there were no insurmountable obstacles to his return
             there.  I have considered the  appellant's  oral  as  well  as
             written evidence in this regard  and  find  that  he  has  not
             demonstrated that there are any  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             his return.

4.   Paragraphs 33 and 34 include reference to the  Convention  and  Refugee
    Protocols and the judge's conclusions at paragraph 35 read as follows:

         "Given the above factual conclusions I find that the appellant  has
         discharged the burden of proof of having  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason.  I  come  to   my
         conclusion that the appellant's removal would not cause the  United
         Kingdom to be in  breach  of  its  obligations  under  the  Refugee
         Convention."

5.   Both the detail of the decision and an holistic reading  of  the  whole
    reveal it  to  be  both  confused  and  confusing.  I  agree  with  the
    representatives of the Secretary of State that  paragraphs  27  and  28
    cannot possibly hang together because of the  mutual  inconsistency  in
    their findings. I also find paragraph 35 very difficult to  comprehend.
    In common with the judge who granted permission  to  appeal,  I  cannot
    help wondering whether there is a typographical error in  paragraph  35
    where what is asserted by the judge seems to  be  the  reverse  of  the
    overall tenor in which the preceding paragraphs were phrased.

6.   In the light of these errors  of  law,  in  particular  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment of the  issue  of  relocation,  I  need  to
    consider whether they are material.  Clearly  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not apply the correct legal  test  when  considering  whether
    relocation internally to a part of Pakistan other than Quetta was  such
    that the appellant could live "in reasonable safety".  That is some way
    distant from the legal test which is to be applied.

7.   Equally there is significant confusion  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge as to whether  this  appellant  needed  show  that  there  was  a
    particular risk to him, greater than  that  to  other  members  of  the
    Hazara community generally.  I have been taken  to  extracts  from  the
    expert evidence which was before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which
    suggests that the material in question was either not considered by the
    judge, or if it was considered it was  misinterpreted.   Certainly  the
    passage which the judge summarises at paragraph 30 of the determination
    fails to take into account a key qualification  which  appears  in  the
    expert's report at page 59 of the supplementary bundle indicating  that
    'Hazaras' in other districts of Pakistan may not be ethnic  Hazaras  as
    is claimed.

8.   I do not consider that the fact these various  arguments  were  pursued
    in the alternative is a reason why the final conclusion of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge can be in  some  way  salvaged.   An  appellant  is
    entitled to know not only the conclusions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge but the reasoning which led to these conclusions.  In  this  case
    the progressive planks of the reasoning are so opaque that there  is  a
    failure in the judicial function of making clear what the findings  are
    and the reasons for those findings.  The judge ought properly  to  have
    approached this matter following the established approach as  commended
    by the House of  Lords  in  AH  (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL  49.   The  judge
    singularly failed to do that.

9.   I have given consideration  to  retaining  this  matter  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for further consideration but it seems  to  me  that  what  is
    essential here is  that  the  matter  be  remitted  and  reheard  by  a
    different First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  can  receive  oral  evidence,
    tested if necessary cross-examination, and apply the proper legal  test
    to that evidence making findings which are appropriate.

10.  It therefore follows that this appeal will be allowed  and  the  matter
    will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided de  novo.   I
    do not propose  preserving  any  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as I regard the decision to be flawed and  incoherent  and  it
    would not be appropriate to take such a course.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Case remitted to First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

