
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00156/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25 January 2017                   |On 26 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    [W K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms D. Revill, Counsel instructed by AH
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms Z. Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection claim. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 28 July 2016 on the ground that  he
    did not accept the credibility of the appellant's claim  to  have  been
    persecuted for reasons of his sexual orientation.

2.    The appellant appeals against the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to give anxious scrutiny to the claim in a  number
         of respects. Firstly, he refers to a witness and evidence that  was
         not in fact before the Tribunal. Secondly, he failed to have regard
         to aspects of the appellant's claim with reference to the Court  of
         Justice decision in A, B, C v Staatssecretaris  van  Veiligheid  en
         Justitie (C/148/13).


     ii) The judge failed to make  any  findings  relating  to  the  medical
         evidence as part of a holistic assessment of  credibility  contrary
         to the principles outlined by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga v SSHD
         [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions
    made by both parties  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law.

4.    It seems quite clear from the evidence and the  judge's  note  of  the
    proceedings that the appellant and two witnesses were  called  to  give
    evidence. The additional witnesses were the appellant's aunt,  Shakeela
    Iqbal, and  his  cousin,  Raheel  Iqbal.  The  judge  summarised  their
    evidence at paragraphs 23-24 of the decision. At the end  of  paragraph
    24 he stated:

         "The appellant's last witness also gave evidence that  he  believed
         the appellant to be gay and that he himself is  a  person  who  has
         associated with the appellant whilst in this country.  He  admitted
         that his situation is slightly different from the appellant  as  he
         has taken steps to have a change of gender but this process has not
         yet been completed."

5.    The judge made the following findings at paragraph 33:

         "33. ... I did not find the evidence of the  appellant's  witnesses
         to be credible ... I also make a finding that the evidence  of  the
         appellant's friend that he believed the appellant to be gay is  not
         supported by  the  evidence  hence  my  credibility  findings.  The
         position of the appellant's friend is different from  that  of  the
         appellant  in  that  he   himself   is   contemplating   a   gender
         transformation operation."

6.    I accept that the judge's reference to the  "last  witness"  does  not
    necessarily mean that he purported to be considering the evidence of an
    additional witness other than the appellant and his two family members,
    but on the face of it the appellant did  not  call  a  friend  to  give
    evidence. I am told that at no point was any  evidence  produced  of  a
    witness who was contemplating a "gender transformation operation".  The
    witness statements of the appellant's aunt and cousin outline  no  such
    evidence.

7.    Ms Ahmed argued that there was nothing in the decision  to  show  that
    the judge had placed undue weight on this point or that it  would  have
    made any material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  If  the
    factual error was confined to paragraph 24 it might be dismissed  as  a
    drafting error, but the fact that a second reference is made to a  non-
    existent witness in paragraph 33 gives me cause to  doubt  whether  the
    judge made the decision with the correct factual  matrix  in  mind.  It
    matters not whether the alleged evidence made any  material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal. If the judge  confused  evidence  from  a
    different case it is sufficient cause to doubt whether anxious scrutiny
    was given to the particular facts of this case.

8.    I am also satisfied that the  second  ground  of  appeal  discloses  a
    material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision. At paragraph
    32 the judge stated:

         "32. I have also taken  into  consideration  the  medical  evidence
         which has been provided by the appellant in relation to his present
         condition and physical  and  mental  state  of  mind.  The  medical
         evidence is not accepted because of the lack of credibility of  the
         account provided by the appellant in respect of his  appeal.  I  do
         make a finding that  the  mental  and  physical  condition  of  the
         appellant has been provided to the Tribunal in order to  bolster  a
         weak asylum claim made after all  avenues  available  to  him  have
         failed."

9.    While I acknowledge Ms Ahmed's submission that a judge does  not  have
    to make findings on each  and  every  aspect  of  the  evidence  it  is
    incumbent on a judge to make adequate findings on material  aspects  of
    the evidence. The decision in Mibanga makes clear that medical evidence
    should  form  part  of  a  holistic  assessment  of   the   appellant's
    credibility. In this case the medical  evidence  was  relevant  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's  account  of  past  detention  and  ill-
    treatment. Not only does the judge fail to engage with  the  nature  or
    quality of the evidence, which included a report as well  a  number  of
    other pieces of evidence relating to ongoing treatment, but it is quite
    clear that the only reason given for  rejecting  it  was  that  he  had
    already come to a negative decision in relation to the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account. While many of the judge's credibility findings
    were unarguably open to him to make on the evidence, the cursory way in
    which the judge rejected the medical evidence was  clearly  disapproved
    by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga.

10.   I am satisfied that  the  combination  of  the  above  two  points  is
    sufficient to conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law. The parties agreed  that  the
    matter would need to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and remitted for a fresh  hearing  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal


Signed   [pic]   Date   25 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
