
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
aa/00740/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 February 2018                        |On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     FJI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, born on 2 September  1971  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    M A Khan who in a determination promulgated on 8  June  2017  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum was that although  he  was
    married and was living with his wife and children he was  bisexual  and
    that over time he had had various sexual relations with men.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant with regard to  his  sexual
    experiences with men and noted a statement from the  appellant's  wife.
    He also heard evidence from two men, Mr  MW  and  Mr  SM  who  had  had
    relations with the appellant as well as other witnesses  who  spoke  to
    their knowledge of the appellant's bisexuality.  Finally, the judge had
    before him a letter from  Nottinghamshire  Health  Shop  Sexual  Health
    Service the author of which, Ms  S-G,  a  harm  reduction  worker,  had
    stated that he had reported to the Nottinghamshire Health  Shop  Sexual
    Health Service about his bisexuality in March 2010.

4.   The grounds of appeal argued that the judge had not  properly  assessed
    the evidence before him and had not given reasons for  his  conclusions
    as to why he dismissed the evidence of  the  supporting  witnesses  and
    that from Ms S-G.

5.   Mr Chirico argued that the lack of reason for the  conclusions  of  the
    judge was a clear error of law.  It was Ms Ahmad's submission  that  in
    fact the judge had not erred in that it was not  incumbent  on  him  to
    give reasons for each and every finding that he made.

Discussion

6.   The reality is that the judge heard evidence from three men who  stated
    that they had had sexual relations with  the  appellant.   The  judge's
    comment on that evidence was merely that he did not accept the evidence
    although in respect of the evidence from Mr W he stated that he did not
    accept that he and the appellant had been in a relationship since 2008.
     He did not state in  terms  that  he  considered  the  witnesses  were
    untruthful and what they were saying was  not  true.   The  reality  is
    that, of course, with regard to the  issue  of  whether  or  not  these
    individuals had had a sexual relationship with the appellant they  were
    either telling the truth or they were not.  This is not a matter  about
    which  there  could  be  any  question  of  nuance  or  interpretation.
    Similarly, two other friends of the appellant, Ms  B  and  Ms  D,  gave
    evidence regarding their knowledge of the appellant's sexual  identity.
    The  judge  makes  no  comment  on  their  evidence.   Again,  when  he
    considered the evidence from the appellant's wife he stated merely,  "I
    therefore give due weight to her statement".  That is unsatisfactory as
    it does not indicate what weight he did give to the appellant's  wife's
    statement - she had stated  that  she  was  aware  of  the  appellant's
    bisexuality and troubled by it but wanted him to remain with the family
    for the sake of her children.  There is no  comment  by  the  judge  on
    that.  Again, he does not state that he discounts in its  entirety  the
    evidence from Ms S-G.  The judge's own conclusions are  that  he  found
    that the appellant's actions were not  those  of  someone  in  fear  of
    persecution because he would have claimed asylum sooner  if  that  were
    the case.

7.   I consider that the lack of reasoning and lack of  findings  about  the
    evidence of the witnesses amounts to an error  of  law  and  similarly,
    given that this is a case where  the  appellant  is  claiming  to  fear
    persecution because of his sexuality that the judge placed undue weight
    on the delay in claiming  asylum  -  that  is  contrary  to  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines.  The reality is that this claim is based on the appellant's
    claim to be bisexual.  Bisexuality is treated in the same  way  as  any
    other form of sexual identity as is clear  from  the  judgment  of  the
    European Court of Justice in AB and C (C-148-9-50-13).

8.    Given the lack of reasoning I consider it is appropriate to set  aside
    the determination of the First-tier Judge and remit this appeal  for  a
    hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  It will be for  the  First-
    tier Judge to consider firstly whether or not the appellant is bisexual
    and then to consider whether  or  not  he  would  face  persecution  in
    Nigeria.   It will be for the Secretary of State to raise any arguments
    she considers appropriate that given the fact  that  the  appellant  is
    married, with children, he would be likely to act discreetly or that it
    would be appropriate for him to do so and therefore  avoid  persecution
    in Nigeria on return or to argue if she considered it appropriate  that
    married bisexuals do not face persecution in Nigeria. .

Notice of Decision

The determination of the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Directions

The appeal will proceed to  a  hearing  afresh  in  the  First-tier  on  all
issues.



Signed :      [pic]                     Date: 18 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



