

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
AA/00556/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 June 2017                           |On 23 June 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Tetty instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Saffer ('the Judge') promulgated on 30 November 2016 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal although granted on a  renewed  application  by
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman in the following terms:


   1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on  [  ]  1972.  She  seeks
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  dated  30  November  2016,  in  which  he
      dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  her
      asylum.


   2. The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal
      assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred materially in law: (i)
      at [21] in his consideration of the risk of  re-trafficking;  (ii)  in
      his finding at [26] that the Appellant  could  live  with  her  mother
      again in Ghana; (iii) at [28] in misdirecting himself  by  failing  to
      apply the guidance set out in EK (article 4) Tanzania [2013] UKUT  313
      (IAC).


   3. I consider that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer  does
      disclose arguable material errors of law in respect of the second  and
      third reasons he has provided at [21] for not accepting the Appellants
      evidence that the men who trafficked her reappeared  at  her  mother's
      village looking for her, for the reasons set out in the  first  ground
      of appeal. It follows that, with respect  to  ground  2,  the  Judge's
      findings at [26] is arguably flawed on the basis that if the Appellant
      is at risk of persecution from her former traffickers she would not be
      able to stay with her mother.  In  respect  of  the  third  ground  of
      appeal, whilst it is not clear whether the decision in EK  (Article  4
      ECHR: Anti-Trafficking Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT  000313  (IAC)
      is applicable, given that the Appellant has been granted discretionary
      leave and has thus arguably had "the benefit of the recovery aspect of
      the reparation to which she is entitled arising  from  the  breach  of
      Article 4 of the Convention" it is arguable that to return  her  while
      she is still in receipt of counselling would  "not  be  in  conformity
      with the obligation to return with due regard for her dignity" [67]. I
      also observe that at [22] the Judge failed to give any reasons  as  to
      why he did not accept the evidence of Dr Fumati.


   4. Permission to appeal is granted for the reasons set out at [3] above.


     3. The grant of permission is  opposed  by  the  Secretary  State  who
        asserts the First-tier Judge directed himself  appropriately,  that
        it had previously been found that the appellant could return to her
        mother and that the Judge rejected the latest  assertion  that  the
        appellant's traffickers had reappeared at her mother's house  which
        it is stated has been adequately reasoned. In relation to EK it  is
        asserted the appellant's  circumstances  are  very  different  from
        those in that case where that appellant  had  very  serious  health
        issues. It is not disputed the appellant had  received  counselling
        but the respondent refers  to  the  fact  it  was  limited  to  two
        sessions over five months and that her circumstances were not  such
        as to amount to a threat to her dignity  as  found  in  EK.  It  is
        stated in the Rule  24  response  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
        behaviour on return, that the Judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
        evidence of Dr Fumati and that  following  Devaseelan  this  was  a
        position properly open to him.



Background



     4. The decision under challenge before the First-tier Tribunal is  the
        refusal of an application for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
        grounds dated 24 March 2016. The appellant's immigration history is
        set out in Annex A of the reasons for refusal showing  she  entered
        the United Kingdom illegally on 1 November 2009 after which she was
        convicted and a deportation orders signed on 2 March  2010.  On  16
        June 2010, the applicant claimed asylum  and  on  10  July  2010  a
        referral was made on the basis the appellant was a potential victim
        of trafficking. On 9  December  2010,  a  conclusive  decision  was
        reached and on the  20  September  2011  asylum  was  refused.  The
        appellant's appeal against the refusal was dismissed and she became
        appeal rights exhausted on 20  January  2012.  The  appellant  was,
        however,  granted  three  years'  discretionary  leave  as  it  was
        accepted she is a victim of trafficking to give her the opportunity
        to remain in the UK and take advantage of the support open  to  her
        and to enable her to pursue her asylum claim.

     5. The decision-maker concluded that the conditions  of  the  previous
        grant no longer prevail  and  proceeded  to  consider  whether  the
        applicant qualified for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
        any other basis.

     6. It was noted by the decision-maker that the applicant  was  granted
        discretionary leave from 25 November 2011 to 24 July 2014 and  that
        the further application was submitted in  time.  Having  considered
        the matter in detail, the  decision-maker  was  not  satisfied  the
        appellant was entitled to any further period of leave.

     7. The Judge noted the nature of the appellant's claim  which  is  set
        out in the decision under challenge in the following terms:


        9.   The appellants claim  is  set  out  in  the  letter  with  her
             application, and her statement and oral evidence. I  will  not
             summarise  the  evidence  that  predated   the   determination
             following the hearing  on  14  December  2011  (AA/11118/2011)
             although I note from the report from Catherine Bell a detailed
             summary of the appalling treatment to the  appellant  suffered
             during the 6 years she was forced to work as a  prostitute  in
             Holland, Spain and Britain.


        10.  I note from the refusal letter that it is accepted she entered
             the United Kingdom in March 2009. She was jailed for 12 months
             for using a false passport whilst trying to leave the  country
             for Holland. That resulted in  deportation  proceedings  which
             were followed by an asylum claim on  10  June  2010.  She  was
             found to be a potential  victim  of  trafficking.  Her  asylum
             claim was refused and the appeal dismissed.  She  was  granted
             discretionary leave to remain on 25 November 2011.


        11.  It was found at the 2011 hearing that she remained in  regular
             communication with her mother and daughter. She conceded  that
             she would be able to return to  live  with  them.  Her  mother
             lived in a village close to a city a significant distance from
             where she met the men who trafficked her. It  was  found  that
             she would have family support available. It was  not  accepted
             that anyone would be aware other than her mother that she  had
             worked as a prostitute. She would not tell anyone  it  is  not
             reasonably  likely  anyone  would  find  out  about  it   will
             therefore have any negative views on her. There was  therefore
             no real risk from the general population  or  traffickers  who
             would not be aware that she had returned  given  the  lack  of
             time they spent in the country and distance they were from her
             mother's village.


        12.  In the letter with her application (23 July 2014)  she  sought
             an extension of the discretionary leave to remain. She  has  a
             well-established private life here as she has worked, goes  to
             church regularly, and has  established  social  relationships.
             She is receiving ongoing treatment for hepatitis.
        .
        13.  In her statement (24 June 2016) she said she is  scared  about
             being returned to Ghana. She thinks of her traffickers all the
             time. They took her son away while she was in Holland. She  is
             happy here. She found work as a cleaner at a college  but  had
             to stop working when her conviction  was  discovered.  She  is
             studying English, goes to church, and has friends.  She  would
             not have the equivalent  support  in  Ghana.  The  people  who
             trafficked her say that she owes E45,000 and they will try and
             find her.
        .
        14.  In her statement (22 November  2016)  she  said  that  she  is
             receiving help for low mood, anxiety, and  depression  from  a
             psychological well-being  practitioner  she  has  been  seeing
             every 2 weeks since  July  2016  for  counselling.  She  takes
             regular  medication  for  diabetes,  hepatitis,   high   blood
             pressure, and a vitamin D deficiency. She  rarely  leaves  the
             house unless she has  to  attend  appointments  as  she  feels
             isolated as a friend works full-time. She had been  introduced
             to a volunteer befriender to help as a  companion.  She  finds
             work difficult because of her illnesses. She is worried  about
             her son and being sent back to Ghana.


        15.  In evidence she said that her mother,  daughter,  and  brother
             live in Ghana. She is in contact with them. She could not live
             with them due to her problem with people there. About  a  year
             ago the men came looking for her. She did not  mention  it  in
             her statement as she was not asked and did not realise it  was
             not relevant. From the description given  by  her  mother  she
             knew it was the same men. Her mother said she  had  not  heard
             from her for a while. Her mother has just one room and is  80.
             Her (i.e. the appellants) daughter is 26 and works as a nurse.
             They last spoke yesterday and speak maybe every 2  weeks.  She
             rents a room where she works and has a child.  She  (i.e.  the
             appellant) would work if she had  permission  to  do  so.  She
             studied English for six months up until one and a half  months
             ago. Her mother,  daughter,  and  brother  live  in  different
             provinces or towns quite apart from each  other.  Her  brother
             does not work and cares for his 2 children.


        16.  Dr  Mattia  Fumanti  wrote  (20  July  2016)  that  he  is  an
             anthropologist who has undertaken research relating  to  Ghana
             for 16 years. He notes the US  State  Department  report  that
             Ghana is a source, transit, and destination country for  women
             subjected to sex trafficking.  They  are  recruited  and  sent
             abroad. The government does not meet the minimum standards for
             eliminating trafficking but is making significant  efforts  to
             do so. He adds that the police are corrupt. She left  home  at
             18 and would be seen as someone who cut important cultural and
             social ties with her family. Her lack of contribution  through
             sending remittances would have an impact on her moral standing
             within the family and community. She  would  face  destitution
             and would experience animosity in the village. She would  feel
             compelled to divulge her personal circumstances  overseas  and
             give a reason for her sudden return. Her  psychological  well-
             being will be placed under extreme strain. There  is  no  real
             welfare provision and great competition for  jobs.  She  would
             have difficulty setting up a business. Access to good  quality
             healthcare in rural areas remains a  problem.  She  would  not
             have access to adequate health care for hepatitis  unless  she
             had a secure and well-paid job.  Mental  health  services  are
             woefully inadequate with only 12 psychiatrists for 24  million
             people, three public psychiatric hospitals,  and  no  form  of
             social assistance for mental patients. Outreach  programs  are
             very scarce.
        .
        17.  Rachel Mullan-Feroze, service manager  at  Ashaina  Sheffield,
             wrote (undated) that the service works  with  women  who  have
             been trafficked. Colleagues have worked with the appellant  to
             identify her needs. The appellant remains distressed, tearful,
             and agitated due to her circumstances,  and  requires  ongoing
             support. Letters of support were written  by  Pastors  in  the
             Church and Jean Conroy.


        18.  Payslips, certificates relating  to  courses  in  relation  to
             studying  English  and  cleaning  and  hygiene,  and   medical
             referral  letters  noting  her  diabetes,  and  correspondence
             relating to her attendance  as  an  outpatient  for  hepatitis
             infection treatment and psychological counselling were noted.



     8. It is not suggested in the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  Judge's
        summary of  the  appellant's  claim  is  in  anyway  inaccurate  or
        misleading. Having considered the evidence in the round  the  Judge
        considers the merits of the claim by reference  to  the  protection
        element, the Immigration  Rules,  Qualification  Directive  and  on
        human rights grounds.

     9. In relation to the protection element the Judge finds at [21 - 23]:


        21.  I do not  accept  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  those  who
             previously trafficked the appellant tried  to  find  her  last
             year for the following reasons. Firstly, despite  her  knowing
             the importance of this to her claim to be able to remain  here
             she chose not to mention it until the hearing. It was  not  in
             her application. It was not in her statements. It was not even
             in her evidence in chief.  She  has  been  through  the  court
             process before and in my judgment would have been aware of the
             significance of that evidence. Secondly, I do not accept it is
             reasonably likely that out of the blue many  years  after  she
             had fled from the clutches of the people who trafficked,  they
             would suddenly appear at her mother's village. The  fact  that
             re-trafficking occurs in Albania does not necessarily mean  it
             is reasonably likely to occur in Ghana.  Thirdly,  she  is  in
             touch with her mother but has not obtained a letter  from  her
             confirming what had occurred despite  this  happening  a  year
             ago. Whilst I accept that there is  no  obligation  to  obtain
             evidence from a persecutory home country, she  does  not  fear
             her mother, is in touch with her, and this evidence would have
             been readily available.
        .
        22.  It is not  reasonably  likely  anyone  will  have  an  adverse
             interest in her. I do not accept the evidence  of  Dr  Fumanti
             that she would feel compelled to disclose what  she  had  been
             doing since she left the village when she was 18, what she had
             been doing in Europe, and why she had returned. While she does
             not have to lie about her circumstances, I do not  accept  she
             would have any intention of telling anybody what happened. She
             would not therefore have to change her behaviour or lie. I  do
             not therefore accept  that  she  would  need  to  seek  police
             protection or internally relocate away from her mother's.


        23.  The appellant has failed to establish that she is a refugee.



    10. The appellant claimed in the grounds that the Judge made  a  number
        of errors in [21] by substituting the reasoning  of  the  appellant
        and replacing it with his own reasoning  and  omitting  to  provide
        adequate reasons.

    11. The Judge does not err by requiring the  appellant  to  corroborate
        her  claim  and  not  accepting  it  unless  she  does.  The  Judge
        acknowledges there is no duty to corroborate  a  claim.  The  Judge
        makes a factual comment that despite being  aware  of  the  ongoing
        proceedings the appellant failed to produce  evidence  which  would
        have been readily  available.  This  finding  has  to  be  read  in
        conjunction with other observations regarding the claim made by the
        appellant at the very last minute, and during the hearing, that the
        men who trafficked her previously had visited her mother's property
        looking for her. The Judge was fully entitled  to  express  concern
        about such an important statement made very late in  the  day  when
        ample  opportunity  had  existed  for  this  matter  to  be  raised
        previously.

    12. There are a number of reported decisions relating to the impact  of
        a failure to mention earlier matters which are later  relied  upon,
        including ND (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1363 in which the Court of  Appeal  said
        the adjudicator was entitled to take the view  that  injuries  were
        not inflicted in the  circumstances  described  by  the  appellant,
        particularly in light  of  the  fact  that  he  only  revealed  the
        incidents of torture during a consultation his doctor  rather  than
        at an initial interview. At interview the appellant had  failed  to
        mention being hung up by the wrists for a long time and hung up  by
        the heels for four or five hours.

    13. In AM (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2006]
        EWCA 1813 the Iranian appellant did not  mention  problems  arising
        from his possession of the satanic verses until  after  the  asylum
        interview. The Court of  Appeal  upheld  the  judge's  decision  to
        reject the appellant's account on that basis and observed that  the
        appellant had given a detailed and comprehensive account of why  he
        had left Iran at interview, an account which differed entirely from
        the explanation he proffered five weeks later: this was not a  case
        in which the appellant had been silent  and  the  reasons  for  his
        asylum claim only became clear later.

    14. In HN v Sweden (Application no. 30720/09) ECtHR (Fifth Section) the
        Swedish Migration Board had found the appellant  was  not  credible
        for various reasons. That was upheld by the ECtHR  who  noted  that
        many of his statements were vague and lacking in detail and had  he
        been subjected to the events alleged, it  would  be  reasonable  to
        assume  that  he  could  provide  more  specific  information.   In
        particular, it was thought remarkable that, although he had escaped
        from prison, where he had allegedly been tortured, just  about  two
        weeks before his arrival in Sweden, he apparently made  no  attempt
        to draw the migration authorities' attention to possible  injuries,
        for instance by undergoing an initial health examination.

    15. The Judge was fully entitled to make an adverse credibility finding
        in relation to the claim the men the appellant had been  trafficked
        by had called at her mother's property looking for her.

    16. In relation to the Judges rejection of the evidence of Dr  Fumanti,
        a judge is entitled to depart from the evidence of  an  expert  but
        must give adequate reasons for doing so. The Judge did  not  accept
        that the appellant will be required to tell those in her village or
        elsewhere that she had been re-trafficked and what had occurred  to
        her. It has not been made out that there will be any compulsion  to
        do so that the appellant could not properly resist. The Judge notes
        there will be no obligation upon the appellant not to lie. This  is
        a  situation  that  normally  only  exists   in   relation   to   a
        fundamentally held belief such as a person's  religion,  ethnicity,
        or sexual identity, which it has been accepted a person  cannot  be
        expected to lie about, or hide, if the reason for doing  so  is  to
        avoid persecution - HJ (Iran) refers. This is not a case,  however,
        in which the appellant was trafficked or forced  into  prostitution
        as a result of a fundamentally held  belief.  The  appellant  is  a
        victim of crime and of the intention of the criminal gangs who  are
        those who should be properly sentenced for their activities. As the
        appellant would not seek to change her behaviour or have  to  admit
        what she does not need to admit the Judge was entitled to find that
        she would  not  be  at  risk  from  those  within  the  family  and
        community, such as to entitle  her  to  a  grant  of  international
        protection. No arguable legal error is made out in relation to this
        element of the case.

    17. As the finding the appellant was at risk from her  traffickers  has
        not been  found  to  be  credible,  for  sustainable  reasons,  the
        conclusion of the Judge at [26] that the appellant could stay  with
        her mother was also reasonably open to the Judge, where there  will
        be no real risk of being  discovered  by  the  men  who  previously
        trafficked her.

    18. It is not disputed that if a person has been trafficked in the past
        there may be a possibility of re-trafficking, but the issue in  the
        appeal before the Judge was whether the  appellant  had  discharged
        the burden of proof upon her to the required lower standard to show
        there was a real risk that she  would  be  re-trafficked.  The  new
        evidence before the Judge was the claim that people had been to the
        appellant's  mother's  house.  The  remaining  material  was   that
        considered and rejected by the original  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  As the Judge considered the evidence with  the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  for  the
        findings made with regard to this piece of evidence, the weight  to
        be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge.

    19. Mr Tetty asserted in his submissions  that  as  the  appellant  was
        granted discretionary leave and had  been  honest  in  relation  to
        risk, the Judge needed to do more. It was also asserted that  there
        was risk on return to the appellant's daughter i.e. a risk  to  the
        mother and in the alternative to her daughter. Mr Tetty stated  the
        Judge erred in failing to assess the risk to the daughter too.

    20. Whether if the alleged risk exists other  family  members  will  be
        affected is not the determinative factor. What is determinative  is
        whether the evidence established there was a credible real risk  to
        the appellant on return in the first place, of which it  was  found
        there was no evidence.

    21. Mr Tetty also submitted the Judge erred as  the  appellant  claimed
        she could not support her daughter and the Judge should  have  made
        clear whether this element of the claim was accepted  or  rejected.
        It was  asserted  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  daughter's
        circumstances. [8] of the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
        asserted the Judge erred and failed to make clear  findings  having
        regard  to  the  account  of  the  mother's  circumstances  and  to
        determine whether the appellant could reasonably be required to re-
        join her mother in Ghana.

    22. In reply to questioning from the Tribunal, it was established  that
        the daughter being referred to is  an  adult  in  Ghana.  There  is
        reference to a daughter being a qualified nurse in Ghana and it has
        not been made out the conclusion  by  the  Judge,  based  upon  the
        evidence made available  to  him,  establishing  it  would  not  be
        unreasonable for the appellant to return to  her  mother's  address
        where she had lived previously is infected by arguable legal error.

    23. In the reasons for refusal the Secretary of State found there  will
        be no significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration  into
        Ghana, a country where the appellant had spent the majority of  her
        life and where she had family including her children.  It  was  not
        found that exceptional circumstances existed to warrant a grant  of
        leave outside the Rules. It was clearly an issue in the appeal that
        the respondent proposed returning the appellant  to  Ghana  on  the
        basis of the available support and the fact it was her  country  of
        origin. It is not disputed  that  the  appellant  could  physically
        return to Ghana, as the Judge found,  and  thereafter  if  she  was
        claiming that it will be unduly harsh or unreasonable  she  had  to
        establish a basis on which she was entitled to a grant of leave  to
        remain where no other right to make such a claim existed. The  only
        available ground will be in relation to Article  3  destitution  or
        Article 8 on the basis of moral and physical integrity, neither  of
        which were adequately established before the Judge.

    24. The Judge considered the appellant's position and the existence  of
        accommodation as well as her mother, daughter, and brother and  his
        children, all of whom live in Ghana  [32].  The  evidence  did  not
        support a finding that the appellant will  be  without  support  or
        assistance on return.

    25. In relation to the EK point,  it  was  argued  that  the  case  law
        supports a finding it is not  acceptable  to  compromise  a  person
        trafficked and that such a person is able to benefit  from  support
        available in  United  Kingdom.  It  was  accepted  there  was  some
        interruption to the appellant's treatment in the United Kingdom but
        stated this was because  she  moved  accommodation  and  thereafter
        could not get access to support, although subsequently  obtain  the
        same.  It  is  argued  that  the  ongoing  support  amounted  to  a
        continuity of care.

    26.  Mr  Tetty  argued  the  Judge  erred  as  there  should   not   be
        discrimination against people who were moved by  the  Secretary  of
        State which caused a break in their care to occur.

    27. The medical evidence before the Judge showed ongoing therapy  which
        was a form of intervention from which the appellant has benefited.

    28. It was argued on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  decision  in
        Devaseelan did not tie the hands of the Judge and  that  the  Judge
        failed to consider this decision in context.

    29. The Judge was aware of the support  the  appellant  was  receiving,
        finding in [28]:


        28.  The medical conditions plainly come nowhere near the  relevant
             thresholds established in cases such as N (see  [20])  and  GS
             (India) and others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40. Indeed, Mr Tetty
             did not argue that it did. I am satisfied given that  she  can
             work, should be able to obtain some treatment for her  medical
             ailments. It would not be as good as here, but I am  satisfied
             that she could get it. Once she realises that there is no real
             risk from those who trafficked, I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
             reasonably likely she will not need the level  of  counselling
             currently provided. I am satisfied that should she  choose  to
             live with or near  her  daughter,  she  will  be  able  to  be
             provided with additional support required as her daughter is a
             nurse.



    30. Within the appellant's evidence before the Judge was a letter  from
        Touchstone (Psychological Therapies) dated 30 August 2016 referring
        to the appellant attended a mental health assessment on 7 June 2016
        and that she was suitable for 1:1 guided  self-help  sessions  (low
        intensity therapy) and had her first appointment on 28  July  2016.
        It is said the appellant's main problem is  low  mood  and  anxiety
        symptoms spending a lot of time thinking about her  difficult  past
        experiences.  It is stated appointments are every fortnight for one
        hour duration with an interpreter present.

    31. There is evidence of support regarding  physiological  services  at
        the Sheffield Teaching Hospitals and a  note  confirming  that  the
        counselling the appellant was receiving at that time occurred as  a
        result of the end of a relationship he had  formed  in  the  United
        Kingdom which it was submitted by  Mrs  Petterson  separated  these
        issues from any continuing support due  to  trafficking  which  had
        been completed and finished in 2009.

    32. It is not made out the Judge misapplied or failed to understand the
        application of the Devaseelan principle. All bar the claim that the
        men came to the appellant's mother's property in Ghana  are  issues
        that were adequately considered by an earlier judge. The Judge gave
        proper reasons for dismissing the appellant's claim  which,  as  it
        has not been found to be credible, can only be viewed  as  evidence
        introduced to try and establish that a place to which the appellant
        could go would not be available to her.

    33. It is important to read the decision as a whole. It is not disputed
        the appellant may have a subjective fear of return  on  account  of
        the fact  she  was  trafficked  from  Ghana.   This  point  is  not
        disputed. It is not disputed the appellant left Ghana  as  a  young
        woman before being trafficked to various countries in Europe  which
        would have had an adverse impact upon  her  which,  again,  is  not
        disputed. It is accepted it is unreasonable to expect the appellant
        to be 'healed' in the same way physical injury or a cut may heal as
        part of the mending process as psychological trauma  and  hurt  can
        take a considerable period of time to resolve.

    34. Although the appellant may have been reluctant to  make  disclosure
        with regard to what happened to her in the past, what was not  made
        out was that there was any reason why the new element of the  claim
        considered and rejected by the Judge could not have been  mentioned
        before, if true.

    35. It is not disputed that the appellant's relationship in the  United
        Kingdom ended and she may have suffered upset and or distress  when
        this occurred. The suggestion by  Mr  Tetty  that  this  cannot  be
        treated  in  isolation  but  rather  needs  to  be  viewed   as   a
        continuation of the appellant's need for ongoing support as per  EK
        is not made out. There is insufficient evidence before the Judge to
        warrant such a finding being made.

    36.  Whilst  parts  of  Ghana  have  been  identified  as  areas  where
        trafficking exists, the Judge considered  whether  this  particular
        appellant is at risk of being re-traffic on return  to  Ghana.  The
        conclusion she is not is, on the evidence, one fully  open  to  the
        Judge.

    37. Whilst the appellant may have needs, and has received support  from
        counselling services, it has not been made out any credible  issues
        have arisen such that the extent of the  need  requires  a  granted
        discretionary leave to enable the  appellant  to  engage  with  the
        Trafficking Convention by way of avoiding  being  removed.  It  was
        submitted that if the appellant has more time in the United Kingdom
        the Convention is not likely to be engaged. Mr Tetty submitted  the
        need for a short period of discretionary  leave  should  have  been
        recognised and granted by the Judge, but it has not been  made  out
        any such need was proved or when  any  such  period  of  leave  was
        likely to end or when the appellant will 'recover'.

    38. If the matters for which the appellant was last  receiving  support
        relate to the impact of  the  breakdown  of  a  relationship,  even
        though the appellant herself has been affected by what occurred  in
        the past, Ms Peterson's submissions that what  has  been  described
        does not relate to the trafficking incident but  rather  associated
        domestic concerns,  may  have  arguable  merit.  If  they  are  not
        trafficking issues but issues arising from  the  breakdown  of  the
        relationship any right to remain falls to be considered as a normal
        medical case pursuant to Article 3 of  Article  8,  as  indeed  the
        Judge did. The conclusion that the required threshold had not  been
        breached on  the  evidence,  such  as  to  warrant  a  finding  the
        appellant was entitled to a grant of leave on this basis,  has  not
        been shown to be arguably irrational or contrary to the evidence.

    39. In AA (Uganda) [2008] EWCA Civ 579, a case involving relocation  on
        return of a young woman trafficked from Uganda, where the  evidence
        indicated that in consequence of a lack of support in the place  of
        relocation a woman might be obliged to resort  to  prostitution  to
        survive,  Lord Justice Buxton said "... Even if that is the  likely
        fate of many of her countrymen I cannot think that either  the  AIT
        or the House of Lords that decided AH(Sudan) would have  felt  able
        to regard enforced prostitution as coming within  the  category  of
        normal country conditions that the refugee must be expected to  put
        with.  Quite simply there must be some conditions in the  place  of
        relocation that are unacceptable to the extent  that  it  would  be
        unduly harsh to return the applicant to them even if the conditions
        are widespread in the place of relocation."

    40. The finding by the Judge that the  appellant  had  not  established
        that conditions in the place of relocation were unduly harsh was  a
        finding arguably open to the Judge and one not shown to be affected
        by arguable legal error.

    41. In EK (Article 4 ECHR: Anti-Trafficking Convention) Tanzania [2013]
        UKUT 00313 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) Trafficking, as defined
        in Article 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol of 2000, falls  within  the
        ambit of Article 4 of the ECHR (prohibition of slavery  and  forced
        labour), as held in Rantsev v Cyprus and  Russia  [2010]  ECHR  22.
        (ii) There is no  distinction,  for  the  purposes  of  Article  4,
        between a domestic worker who  was  trafficked  by  way  of  forced
        labour and one who arrived voluntarily and was  then  subjected  to
        forced labour. (iii) Quite apart  from  the  duties  arising  under
        Article 4, which in particular are set out in IDIs,  the  Secretary
        of State's duty to provide assistance  under  the  Anti-Trafficking
        Convention is engaged no later than the point at which  a  decision
        is made that there are conclusive grounds to believe  a  particular
        appellant to be a victim of trafficking. (iv)  The  duties  arising
        under the Convention include an obligation to adopt  such  measures
        as  may  be  necessary  to  assist  victims  in   their   physical,
        psychological and social recovery (Article 12 paragraph 1)  and  to
        issue a renewable residence permit to  victims  if  their  stay  is
        necessary owing to their personal  situation  (Article  14),  which
        must include consideration of his or her  medical  needs.  (v)  The
        immigration decision in the present case was  made  without  taking
        account of (a) the link between the appellant's precarious state of
        health and the breach of the respondent's  protective  obligations,
        in terms of her  policy  regarding  foreign  domestic  workers  and
        Article 4 of the ECHR; and (b) the duties  engaged  under  Articles
        12, 14 and 16 of the Anti-Trafficking  Convention.   As  a  result,
        that decision was not in accordance with the law. (vi) Where  there
        is no error of  law  in  a  First-tier  judge's  conclusions  on  a
        discrete issue or issues, the conclusion that there is an error  in
        respect of another issue or issues does not require  a  re-visiting
        of the issue(s) where no error was found, when the decision is  re-
        made.  Kizhakudan [2012] EWCA Civ 566 distinguished.

    42. In this appeal the respondent was aware of her duties arising under
        the Convention and granted the appellant a period of  discretionary
        leave as was deemed  necessary  to  assist  the  appellant  in  her
        physical, psychological and social recovery (Article  12  paragraph
        1).  The  therapy  the  appellant  received  as  a  result  of  the
        assistance provided did not  require  the  respondent  to  renew  a
        residence permit as it was not found the appellant's continued stay
        is necessary owing to her personal situation  (Article  14),  which
        includes consideration of her medical needs.  There  is  clearly  a
        connection  between  the  Convention  identifying  the   need   for
        assistance  to  be  provided  to  victims  of  trafficking  to  aid
        physical, psychological and  social  recovery  arising  from  their
        previous experiences. As  the  appellant  was  granted  an  initial
        period of discretionary leave, together with the ability  to  apply
        for an extension,  albeit  that  it  was  refused  leading  to  the
        impugned decision challenged by way of appeal, it  is  arguable  as
        Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  identified  in  the  grant
        permission that it is not clear whether EK is  applicable  to  this
        case.

    43. It was not made out before the Judge that even if the appellant was
        not able to continue with the counselling  services  arising  as  a
        result of the breakdown of her relationship in the UK there would a
        lack of conformity with the obligation to return with due regard to
        the appellant's dignity.

    44. Having considered the challenge to the decision with great care, in
        light of the previous history, it is clear the appellant's claim to
        have been a victim  of  trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation  was
        accepted and that the period of  discretionary  leave  granted  was
        appropriate to enable the appellant to access support  services  in
        the United Kingdom. It is also clear the appellant  was  given  the
        opportunity to apply to extend such period of  discretionary  leave
        but  that  application  was  rejected  by  the  respondent  as  the
        appellant had not established that she was entitled to any  further
        grant of leave on the facts. It is clear the appellant was provided
        with an effective remedy to challenge the decision by way of appeal
        to the First-tier Tribunal. It is clear the  Judge  considered  the
        evidence  made  available  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny and that, although the appellant  clearly  disagrees  with
        the Judges findings, she has failed to establish any arguable legal
        error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.

    45. The appellant may wish to stay in the United Kingdom but  fails  to
        establish any legal obligation  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to
        facilitate the same.


Decision

    46. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    47. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I  make
        such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 June 2017

