
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00023/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd July 2015                    |On 29th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     AB
                        (An anonymity order is made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Braganza, instructed by Camden Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  the  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS




  History of Appeal

      1. The Appellant, who was born on 10th November 1987, is a national of
         Pakistan. She entered the United Kingdom on 23rd February 2011 with
         leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 6th July  2015.
         She became pregnant on 31st December 2013 and her son was  born  on
         28th September 2014. She does not know the identity  of  her  son's
         father and in February 2014, when her parents  and  brothers  found
         out that she was pregnant, they  began  to  threaten  her  with  an
         honour killing and say that they would also kill her baby.

      2. As a consequence she left her course, as her family knew where  she
         was studying, and on 9th June 2014 her leave to remain as a student
         was curtailed by the Respondent. On 13th August 2014 the  Appellant
         applied for  asylum  and  was  given  a  screening  interview.  Her
         substantive asylum interview took place on 10th November 2014.  The
         Respondent refused  her  application  on  4th  December  2014.  She
         accepted the Appellant's identity and nationality and the fact that
         she had given birth to  a  child  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         However, she did not accept that the Appellant would be at risk  of
         persecution if she were to be removed to Pakistan.

      3. The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  her  appeal  was
         heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Cassel  on  13th  April  2015.  The
         Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  decision  and   reasons
         promulgated  on  29th  April  2015.  The  Appellant   applied   for
         permission to appeal on 13th May 2015 and permission was granted by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 1st June 2015. She  did  so  on
         the basis  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cassel  had  made  no
         findings in relation to the risks  on  return  to  the  Appellant's
         child. She added that it was an arguable error of law to  have  not
         addressed the expert report in detail and to have  considered  this
         in the round with all other evidence. Finally, she noted  that  the
         Judge had not given any clear reasons as to why  there  can  be  no
         departure from KA and Others (Domestic Violence - risk  on  return)
         Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC).

      4. In the Respondent's response to the grounds of appeal under Rule 24
         she submitted that the Judge had considered the Appellant's risk on
         return and had found against her for sustainable reasons.  She also
         asserted that the  medical  report  by  Dr.  Gil  Darryn  had  been
         comprehensively considered by the Judge  in  paragraph  32  of  the
         decision and reasons.

  Error of Law Hearing

      5. At the hearing counsel for the Appellant noted that at paragraph 14
         of the decision and reasons the Judge  had  applied  the  incorrect
         standard of proof and that at paragraph 17 there were  no  findings
         of fact in relation to the circumstances which led to the Appellant
         becoming pregnant.

      6. She also noted that at paragraph 18 of the decision and reasons the
         Judge accepted that the Appellant's father was no longer supportive
         and had stopped providing her with financial support  and  that  at
         paragraph 19 the Judge accepted that the Appellant had reported the
         threats to the police in the United Kingdom.

      7. In addition,  she  submitted  that  the  failure  to  consider  the
         Appellant's credibility in the context of the available  background
         and expert evidence did amount to a  material  error  of  law.  She
         added that paragraph 32, which addressed the  question  of  asylum,
         was wholly unsatisfactory.

      8. When she replied the Home Office Presenting Officer noted that  the
         risk of the Appellant being separated from her  son  had  not  been
         part of her claim for asylum and that the circumstances in KA  were
         different as the children in that case had a  father  in  Pakistan.
         She also noted that in paragraph 38 of the decision and reasons the
         Judge had considered Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009 and found that it was in the Appellant's son's
         best interests to remain with her. She also noted that there was no
         evidence that the Appellant would be separated from her  son.   She
         did not address other submissions made by the Appellant's counsel.

      9. At paragraph 28 of the decision and reasons  the  Judge  did  state
         that she had taken into account the Appellant's age, her  level  of
         education and the evidence in both oral  and  documentary  form.  I
         accept that this may have included a very brief implicit  reference
         to Dr. Darryn's expert report.

     10. However,  the  Judge  only  devoted  one  short  paragraph  to  her
         consideration of whether the Appellant was entitled to asylum. I do
         not find it to be a comprehensive consideration of the  Appellant's
         claim or the expert evidence. In this paragraph it  was  not  clear
         whether she accepted that the Appellant was a single woman  with  a
         child who may be entitled to protection as a member of a particular
         social group.  In addition, she did not make any findings  of  fact
         about whether her fear of ill-treatment was well-founded or whether
         there would be a sufficiency of protection for her in Pakistan.

     11. Instead she makes a bare assertion that the expert  report  by  Dr.
         Darryn only highlighted certain difficulties which had already been
         extensively address in the country guidance case of KA.

     12. It is trite law that a judge must consider all the  evidence  in  a
         case in the round before coming to a decision as to an  appellant's
         credibility and any risk on return. (See, for example,  Karanakaran
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA  Civ  11).
         In paragraphs 26 to 31 the Judge singularly failed to do so and did
         not consider any objective or expert evidence when considering  the
         credibility of the Appellant's account but merely considered issues
         of internal consistency in her own evidence.

     13. In paragraph 32 the Judge also asserted that the difficulties which
         may be faced by the Appellant had already  been  addressed  in  KA.
         However, the Judge gave no reasons for this assertion. Neither  did
         she take into account the fact that the country guidance  case  was
         now more than five years old and that Dr. Gil Daryn had referred to
         a number of reports and articles which post-dated KA.  Furthermore,
         in KA the Court of Appeal had found that "whether a woman on return
         faces a  real  risk  of  an  honour  killing  will  depend  on  the
         particular circumstances". Therefore, the country  guidance  itself
         required the Judge  to  consider  the  Appellant's  own  particular
         circumstances in the light of the  objective  and  expert  evidence
         before reaching a decision. There is nothing in  the  decision  and
         reasons to show that the Judge did so.

     14. In addition, in paragraph 33 of the decision and reasons the  Judge
         found that the Appellant was at some risk if she returned to Lahore
         but gave no reasons for reaching such a finding or  the  basis  for
         it.

     15. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that  there  were  material
         errors of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and
         findings and that it should be set aside in its entirety. I am also
         satisfied that, as there will need to  be  a  complete  re-hearing,
         this is a proper case for remission to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons  did  include
         material errors of law.

      2. The decision should be set aside in its entirety.

      3. The appeal should be listed for a de novo hearing in the First-tier
         Tribunal.

    Directions

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
         hearing.

    2.   The appeal should not  be  re-listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge R. Cassel.






         Date 24th July 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
