
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00828/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 12 September 2014                            |On 13 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     SGH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the hoMe department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed of UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea. It is the respondent's
    case that she is a citizen of Ethiopia. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found on the evidence that the appellant was a national Ethiopia.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction. The appellant has  a
    child and the determination  herein  impinges  upon  the  interest  and
    welfare of that child. In the circumstances to protect  the  child  and
    her interests I make an anonymity direction. I note that, whilst  there
    is a connected file in  relation  to  the  child,  the  proceedings  in
    respect of the child were ruled as no valid appeal. The child is to  be
    treated as the dependant of her mother, the appellant, and  her  status
    determined in line with that of the mother.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malins promulgated on  18th  March  2014.   By  the
    determination the judge dismissed the appeal against  the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 22nd January 2014 to remove the appellant from the
    UK after refusing her asylum, humanitarian protection or  other  relief
    whereby the appellant would be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.



 4. The judge found that the appellant was an Ethiopian national. The  only
    risk that the appellant had identified was a risk of  serious  harm  or
    mistreatment constituting persecution in Eritrea.

 5. By decision taken on 27 June 2014 leave to appeal was  granted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. Thus the case appears before me  to  determine  in  the
    first instance whether or not there is an arguable error of law in  the
    determination.

 6. The issues raised in the grounds of appeal are:-

         a) Contrary to  the  judge's  findings  it  is  asserted  that  the
            appellant had told the truth when giving the date upon which she
            had been deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea. It is  claimed  that
            background information indicated that  expulsions  continued  to
            take place from Ethiopia into 2001 and 2002. The judge's finding
            that deportations ceased after  the  "Cessation  of  Hostilities
            Agreement" in  2000  was  not  consistent  with  the  background
            information.

         b) It is alleged that the judge's findings with regard to parts  of
            the evidence was speculative and not based on the facts, such as
            findings as to why the appellant's father had supported Eritrean
            independence. The judge was also mistaken as to  the  date  upon
            which the appellant was arrested in Eritrea.

         c) The judge has failed to take  into  account  evidence  that  was
            before the judge that the appellant had approached the Ethiopian
            embassy and the reply from the embassy.

         d)  The  judge's   findings   on   credibility   are   flawed   and
            unsustainable.

         e) The judge has failed to consider the case of MO 2010 UKUT 00190,
            wherein it was found that a failed asylum seeker would on return
            to Eritrea be forced to perform military service  and  would  on
            return be at risk.

         f) The judge has failed to assess the  risk  to  the  appellant  in
            Eritrea.

Factual Background

 7. The appellant claims to have been born in Eritrea  and  to  have  lived
    there until 1990. In 1990 together with her parents she moved  to  live
    in Ethiopia. The family lived in the Ethiopia until July 2001 when  the
    family were deported from Ethiopia back to Eritrea.

 8. In August 2001 the father of the family allegedly went to see his  sick
    mother in Asmara and was never seen again.

 9. The appellant claims that she converted to Pentecostal Christianity  in
    August 2001. Initially in  interview  the  appellant  was  claiming  to
    practice her Pentecostal religion in a house until it was  pointed  out
    that the religion was not banned until May 2002. The  appellant  claims
    that she was arrested in September 2002 because of her religion.

10. The appellant claims that she was detained  at  a  police  station  for
    about a month. Her aunt then secured her release. The appellant  claims
    that she had been raped and that she subsequently gave birth in Sudan.

11. Having been released  the  appellant  was  taken  in  October  2002  to
    Khartoum in Sudan. She worked there for some 11 years. However she  had
    a dispute with her employers.

12. On 21 October 2013 she left Sudan with her daughter and flew to France.
    Thereafter they came to the United Kingdom.

Consideration of the issues

13. Central to a determination of this case is whether the judge's  finding
    that the appellant is a national of Ethiopia  is  sustainable.  If  the
    appellant is an Ethiopian national being returned to Ethiopia, there is
    no risk to the appellant in Eritrea because she would never be  removed
    there.

14. It is claimed that the judge has failed to take account of evidence  of
    when deportations from Ethiopia ceased. The evidence now  presented  by
    the  appellant  is  an   extract   from   the   Human   Rights   Watch,
    Eritrea/Ethiopia Vol 15 -3(A) January 2003. That indicates  312  people
    of Eritrea origin were deported from Ethiopian in November 2001  and  a
    further group of 100 people were deported on the 16th March 2002.

15. The grounds of appeal further refer to the  fact  that  since  December
    2000 21,255 persons of Ethiopian origin had been repatriated  to  their
    country from Eritrea. First and foremost with regard to  that,  we  are
    allegedly dealing with repatriations of Eritreans by force  to  Eritrea
    from Ethiopia and not Ethiopians from Eritrea to Ethiopia.

16. The evidence that has been submitted identifies two specific  instances
    of persons been deported from Ethiopia backed to Eritrea. At  the  time
    of the hearing the judge had background information in the form of  the
    Ethiopia OGN paragraph 3.17.2  which  specifically  identifies  the  US
    State Department  Report  2000  as  referring  to  the  fact  that  the
    Ethiopian government stopped forcibly deporting Eritreans in June 2000.

17. One has to read with care the conclusion  reached  by  the  judge.  The
    judge at paragraph 9.1 (a) concludes that the appellant and her  family
    were not deported as claimed in July 2001. That was  not  a  conclusion
    that deportations had ceased before that date. The conclusion was  that
    the appellant and her family  were  not  deported  on  that  date.  The
    background information indicates that other deportations took place but
    those deportations relate to specific numbers on specific dates and  do
    not  correspond  with  the  date  given  by  the  appellant.   In   the
    circumstances the conclusion by the judge  is  not  undermined  by  the
    evidence now adduced. The judge has considered the  evidence  that  was
    before him. The judge was entitled to come to the  conclusion  that  he
    did on the basis of the evidence presented.

18. With regard to the remainder of the appellant's account the  judge  has
    given valid reasons for making adverse  findings  of  credibility.  The
    appellant did state in interview that she had started to  practice  her
    religion in a  house.  It  was  only  when  it  was  pointed  out  that
    Pentecostal Christianity was  only  made  illegal  sometime  after  the
    appellant had joined the religion, that the appellant  stated  she  had
    practised her religion originally in a church. The judge  was  entitled
    to find that the start of a person's commitment to  a  religious  faith
    would be an important event so significant that one would remember  the
    details of where one was practising one's religion. Those were findings
    of fact that the judge was entitled to make on the evidence.

19. The judge noted that the appellant spoke Amharic and when  asked  about
    the Eritrean currency identified Ethiopian currency instead.  Similarly
    the appellant's claims to have stayed in Sudan but  not  to  speak  any
    Arabic and to being a domestic servant to Nigerians,  a  Nigerian  lady
    speaking Amharic and her husband speaking English were considered.  The
    judge has given valid reasons for finding that those  claims  were  not
    credible. In paragraph 9 of the determination the judge has made  valid
    findings of fact based on the evidence. Whilst it does appear that  the
    judge has mistaken the date upon which the appellant was arrested  that
    does not affect the rest of the findings of fact made.

20. It is suggested  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account
    corroborative evidence. Issue has been taken with regard to the judge's
    treatment of the evidence from the Ethiopian Embassy. It  is  suggested
    that the appellant having approached the Ethiopian Embassy, the  letter
    from the Ethiopian Embassy supports the appellant's account that she is
    not an Ethiopian national. The letter from the Ethiopian Embassy merely
    states that insufficient evidence has been submitted on the part of the
    appellant for the Ethiopian Embassy to say that she is  a  national  of
    Ethiopia. Whilst it is evident that can be taken into account of itself
    it does not prove that the appellant is not a national of Ethiopia  nor
    is it necessarily corroborative for the appellant's claims.

21.  During  the  course  of  the  hearing  before   me   the   appellant's
    representative sought to  argue  that  there  had  been  an  inadequate
    assessment of the risks to the appellant on  return  to  Eritrea.  That
    seemed to be ignoring the principal point made by the  judge  that  the
    appellant was not a national of Eritrea. The appellant would  therefore
    be returned to Ethiopian and not to Eritrea. If  the  judge's  findings
    with regard to the appellant being an Ethiopian national are sound,  no
    issue arises as to an inadequate assessment of the risk in a country of
    which she is not a national.

22. Taking the determination as a whole the judge has given  valid  reasons
    for coming to the conclusions that he did. The judge  was  entitled  on
    the evidence to come  to  the  conclusions  he  did  and  was  entitled
    therefore to conclude that the appellant was a national Ethiopia.

23. In the  circumstances  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to dismiss  this  appeal  on  all
    grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



Direction regarding anonymity- rule 45 (4)(i) holds the Asylum and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                                       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

