
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/00430/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                     LC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G Melllow of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                             DECSION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania born on [~] 1998. The respondent
    refused the appellant's application to be recognised as a  refugee  and
    to be granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mace dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  in  a  decision
    dated 27 February 2019.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal Judge Shimim in
    a decision dated 26 March 2019 stating that it is "arguable that  there
    are this material errors of law in the decision".


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


 4. The  Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise. The basis of the appellant's claim for protection is that he
    fears persecution from his family  and  society  generally  in  Albania
    because he is a homosexual. The appellant was a minor when  he  entered
    the United Kingdom and when he was interviewed in August 2014 he was 16
    years of age.


 5. The appellant's problems started three  years  before  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom when his family found out he it is a homosexual and this
    was when he was 13 or 14 years old.  He  was  seen  holding  hands  and
    hugging his partner [MS] near the park. His father wanted to  kill  him
    and he beat him two  or  three  times.  His  father  would  attack  him
    randomly. His parents would ask why he was  doing  such  things  as  he
    comes from a good family. The appellant however managed to continue  to
    see [MS] and they would meet in different  towns.  Sometimes  he  would
    stay at a friend's house telling his friend that his father was beating
    him.


 6. The appellant decided he had to leave Albania. He managed to  convinced
    his father that he had changed and convinced him to go  on  holiday  to
    Italy to forget everything. From Italy he travelled to France by train,
    using they money given to him by his father.


 7. The Judge found that the appellant's account as to how his relationship
    with [MS] started is credible and taking into account his age when  the
    events occurred even if there were some discrepancies, his  account  is
    plausible. The appellant has demonstrated that he is a homosexual.


 8. The Judge then considered the appellant's risk on return based  on  the
    fact that he is  a  homosexual.  The  Judge  stated  that  there  is  a
    considerable amount of background material on homosexuals and  Albania.
    He also considered the expert report from Dr Chencier who concluded  in
    his report that the appellant's account in relation to being  a  victim
    of domestic violence and his experiences in regard to his sexuality  is
    plausible.  In  the  expert's  opinion,  homosexuals  are  at  risk  of
    oppression in Albania. The expert does not use the  word  "persecution"
    but "oppression" which does not imply a level  that  would  engage  the
    Convention.


 9. The expert confirms in his opinion that the appellant would be at  risk
    on return to Albania on account of his sexuality from  his  family  and
    society  generally  and  would  be  stigmatised  and  abused   by   the
    authorities as he would not have their  protection  and  will  also  be
    denied employment because the State is the main  employer  in  Albania.
    The sole shelter in Albania is too small and it appears only  to  cater
    for attack victims.


10. Dr Chancier  states  that  this  intra-family  feud  and  there  is  no
    resolution possible expect for punishment or exile for  the  appellant.
    The expert opinions that the family honour  has  been  shamed.  If  the
    appellant return this would exacerbate the blood feud and the appellant
    will be at risk of a range of physical and  psychological  punishments.
    The expert also states that all jobs are gained through  patronage  and
    in Tirana everyone is nosy and asks where new arrivals come from.


11. Internal migrants must transfer their civil registration and there is a
    possibility that his father could bribe corrupt police officer when the
    appellant seeks to register himself. The expert summarised that if  the
    appellant returned he would plausibly visit his mother and  sister  and
    his former partner in his home area and his whereabouts  would  rapidly
    become known the. Also, it is likely that the appellant has been  lined
    up without his knowledge for an arranged marriage  by  his  traditional
    parents and in addition to the shame of  his  open  homosexuality,  his
    expulsion from home has wrecked any traditional arranged marriage which
    his extended family will view as a serious shame on them.


12. The Judge disagreed with the conclusion of the  expert  that  effective
    security and protection of LGBT events by the  Albania  authorities  is
    not relevant to the assessment of risk for  the  appellant.  The  Judge
    stated  that  the  authorities  have  provided  security   for   public
    demonstrations or support for  LGBT  events  which  is  indicative  and
    supportive  of  their  attitude  and  commitment   to   implement   the
    antidiscrimination laws that  have  been  brought  into  force  and  to
    provide an environment where people can  express  themselves  publicly.
    The Judge also found that the expert's conclusion that the  authorities
    would pose a risk of serious harm to the  appellant  were  he  to  live
    alone or with someone of the same sex, particularly in one of  the  big
    cities.


13. The Judge accepted that while there remains a level  of  discrimination
    within society towards LGBT people in Albania, it  is  clear  from  the
    background material that the authorities have taken  significant  steps
    to tackle this. The Judge took into  account  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    article from November 2017 recounting a visit to a  LGBT  shelter.  The
    judge also considered  the  country  policy  and  information  note  on
    Albania would states that the Albanian government has made  significant
    efforts  in  the  inclusion  of  protection  of  LGBT  people  although
    homophobic sentiment remains very high.


14. The Judge said that  having  accepted  the  appellant's  sexuality  and
    having considered the background material,  found  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on his return to Albania. He did not  accept  that
    the appellant is at risk from his father or that his father would  have
    the means or influence  to  trace  the  appellant  should  he  have  to
    register in Tirana order to obtain services and  employment  this.  The
    Judge noted that appellant has expressed no wish to return to his  home
    area and there is no reason to believe that he would go  anywhere  near
    his home area when he returns to Albania. It is pure  speculation  that
    the appellant's father would be aware that the appellant  has  returned
    and then bribe a police officer and even less likely  that  his  father
    would ask the University if he was there.


15. The Judge did not accept the expert's opinion that this was a matter of
    family honour akin to a  blood  feud  whereby  his  father  would  feel
    obliged to exact some form of revenge on the appellant.  The  appellant
    remained in the family home for some considerable time after his family
    became aware of the sexuality and while he was  treated  badly  by  his
    father, it went no further. His father did not throw  him  out  of  the
    family home and seek to harm him physically in a more permanent way. It
    is also speculative to say that the appellant without his knowledge may
    have been lined up for an arranged  marriage.  The  appellant  was  not
    compelled to leave the family but he left were his own accord.


16. The Judge stated even considering the report of the expert, it contains
    a large number of references which are balanced and include reports  of
    progress in relation to the LGBT  community  in  Albania.  However  the
    expert comes to a number of conclusions which are speculative  and  not
    based on the evidence. The appellant has expressed no  wish  to  return
    home and there is no need  for  him  to  do  so.  The  appellant  could
    reasonably be expected to relocate to another part of the country  such
    as Tirana.


17. The Judge considered the country guidance case of IM (risk -  objective
    evidence - homosexuals) Albania CG [2003] UKIAT 00067 in which  it  was
    concluded that there is no country background evidence would support  a
    reasonable likelihood that homosexuals in Albania are  subject  to  any
    action on the part of the  populace  or  the  authorities  which  would
    amount to persecution or it would be in breach of their protected human
    rights. The Judge acknowledged that the case was decided some time ago,
    but stated it is equally  evident  that  the  pressure  for  change  in
    Albania for LGBT people has increased  over  recent  years.  There  are
    regular high-profile  public  LGBT  events  which  are  publicised  and
    supported by the authorities. The authorities have  passed  legislation
    and adopted an action plan for 2016-2020 to improve inclusion.


18. The background material and case law demonstrates  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to live openly as a homosexual man, then  I  consider
    whether the appellant would do so and why.  The  evidence  demonstrates
    that the appellant is a reserved and quiet individual who does not like
    to discuss his sexuality readily even with his foster family or  social
    workers, individuals whom he trusts and feels comfortable with.  [MS]'s
    evidence was that it is only on very few  occasions  that  the  subject
    comes up. The Judge stated that he was not sure whether  the  appellant
    would be able to openly express himself as  he  knows  how  the  people
    around him would react, such is the culture.


19. The Judge did not accept that he has been held back in the 4 � years he
    lived in this country by fear as suggested. The Judge  found  that  the
    appellant would live his life in Albania discreetly not because of  the
    fear but of the consequences of doing otherwise. Even if the  appellant
    were to live openly as a gay man in Albania, while it is accepted  that
    he may face some hostility and discrimination, there  are  support  and
    advocacy networks available in the form of NGOs and LGBT groups. It  is
    not accepted that the level of treatment the appellant would  encounter
    particularly in the large  cities  such  as  Tirana,  would  reasonably
    likely amount to persecution which would be in breach of his  protected
    rights.


20. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal with reference to  paragraph
    276 ADE. and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


21. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that I should set it aside and remit the appeal to the  first-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard.


22. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The  Judge
    having accepted the appellant's account and accepting past harm, failed
    to properly apply rule 399K prior to conducting an analysis  of  future
    harm.


23. The Judge failed to  make  any  findings  on  risk  of  return  to  the
    appellant's home area. The Judge does not address at all  the  risk  to
    the appellant from his father/community if returned to his home area in
    northern Albania or whether the appellant's father would  be  motivated
    to persecute him on return to his home area.


24. The Judge exclusively concentrates throughout the decision to  risk  to
    the appellant from his father if  he  moved  to  a  different  area  in
    Albania. The question posed at paragraph 34 and 35 of the  decision  is
    asking the wrong question and adopts the wrong analysis.  The  question
    is not whether the appellant would in fact return to his home area  but
    whether he would be persecuted there if he did. It is  only  once  that
    question is  answered  the  question  of  internal  relocation  becomes
    relevant.


25. The Judge gave no consideration at all to the sufficiency of protection
    in  the  appellant's  home  area.  The  Judge  on  his   own   findings
    acknowledges that  it  is  likely  to  be  difficult  to  obtain  State
    protection  in  his  home  area  when  it  comes  to   family   matters
    particularly in the north of the  country  where  the  appellant  comes
    from. The Judge's failure to consider it or even address  the  question
    is material.


26. The Judge fails to lawfully consider the question of reasonableness  or
    undue harshness of internal relocation for  the  appellant.  The  Judge
    does not take into account her own finding that she has made as to  the
    discrimination, hostility and very high homophobia in Albania. Even  if
    this  does  not  meet  the  threshold  persecution  this   conduct   is
    nonetheless relevant to the question of  reasonableness  of  relocation
    for the appellant. There is also no  engagement  with  the  appellant's
    ability to access accommodation employment and support in light of this
    age, lack of family support, the extent of support he needs in order to
    function and his emotional well-being, evidence of lack of shelters for
    the appellant, his sexuality and the risk of  harm  and  discrimination
    against these attacks, his subjective fear of return as a gay  man  and
    the difficulties in integrating in to the community as a gay man.


27. The Judge failed to consider the expert report properly or at  all  for
    the question of internal relocation for the appellant. The Judge failed
    to specify  what  NGOs  and  LGBT  support  groups  could  support  the
    appellant on his return. The Judge's conclusion that the appellant  can
    relocate, flies in the face  of  the  expert  report  and  no  reasons,
    adequate or otherwise are given from not relying on it.


28. The Judge failed to properly  consider  HJ  Iran  test  and  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant  would  live
    discreetly in Albania because he wished to do so and not out  of  fear.
    The Judge failed to lawfully or adequately consider the reasons why the
    appellant would behave discreetly on return. The  appellant's  evidence
    was clear that he would be compelled to modify his behaviour on  return
    because of fear of persecution.


29. The last ground of appeal is that the crux  of  the  appellant's  claim
    related to the risk arising from his father on  return  which  was  not
    considered by the Judge and the risks to the appellant  on  account  of
    his current sexuality and  likewise  the  analysis  of  sufficiency  of
    protection is flawed. The  Judge  fails  to  engage  with  the  country
    guidance evidence and the expert  report  in  considering  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution on return and failed  to  ask
    himself whether  the  appellant  could  be  expected  to  access  State
    protection.


30. The Judge has failed to properly consider or  determine  the  questions
    identified by Upper Tribunal Judge  Davidge  at  paragraph  12  of  his
    decision remitting this case, namely whether there is  a  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to the appellant's home area and whether  there  is
    sufficiency of protection in his home area and  the  reasonableness  of
    this appellant's relocation in all the circumstances of his case.


31. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision such  that  I  should  set  it
    aside and remitted to the first-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


    Discussion and Decision as to whether there is an error of law.


32. I have given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and have taken into account the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    submissions made at the hearing. The gist of the grounds of  appeal  is
    that the Judge did not take into account the expert's opinion that  the
    appellant could not safely return to his home  area  in  Albania  as  a
    homosexual and it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to  Tirana.



33. The grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel with the  findings  of
    the Judge who in a very careful decision  took  into  account  all  the
    evidence including the expert report, the background  evidence  of  the
    country guidance case in finding  that  the  appellant  can  return  to
    Albania and relocate to Tirana and that  background  evidence  and  the
    country guidance case states that homosexuals are not persecuted within
    the Convention definition of persecution in Albania.

34. The grounds of appeal argue that the Judge did not consider whether the
    appellant would be at risk from his father on his return  to  his  home
    area. Miss Melllow argued that  the  Judge  must  take  a  step-by-step
    approach and only after he has determined  that  the  appellant  cannot
    return to his home area should he look at the question of relocation.

35. I do not accept this argument because it is implicit in  the  decision,
    that the Judge took into account the appellant's own evidence  that  he
    has no intention of going back to his home area if he has to return  to
    Albania. The Judge stated that the appellant was not going to return to
    his home area and found that there was an area of the country  to  with
    the appellant could go where he would not be at risk of harm  and  that
    was sufficient. Even if the Judge did not  explicitly  find  one  where
    another whether the appellant would be at risk in his home  area,  this
    would not be  a  material  error  because  the  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant can relocate to Tirana and it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    him to do so. The Judge found  that  the  expert  speculated  that  the
    appellant who misses his mother and ex-partner would  go  to  his  home
    area but this was against the appellant's own evidence  that  he  would
    not go home and the Judge found that there would be no need for him  to
    do so and therefore a sustainable finding.  Therefore  this  ground  of
    appeal has no merit because the Judge acknowledged that  the  appellant
    would not return to his home area and whether there was a risk  to  him
    or not in his home area was a moot point.

36. The Judge accepted the appellant's evidence that he is a homosexual and
    believed his account of his  relationship  with  [MS]  when  he  was  a
    teenager. However the Judge considered the  background  evidence  which
    states that the Albanian authorities have made huge strides forward  in
    trying to improve inclusion of LGBT people in the community. The  Judge
    relied on the country guidance case of IM which sated that there is  no
    evidence which supports a reasonable  likelihood  that  homosexuals  as
    such in Albania are subject to any action on the part of  the  populace
    or from the authorities which would amount to persecution or  would  be
    in breach of their protected human rights. The Judge found even  though
    the case was decided on 2003 and the background evidence suggests  that
    the situation has changed for the better in Albania  for  LGBT  persons
    and that there is no reason or evidence before him for why  she  should
    depart from the country guidance case.

37. There is no merit in the argument that the Judge did not  consider  the
    expert report fully. The  Judge  extensively  referred  to  the  expert
    report in his decision and came to sustainable findings and conclusions
    about the report. The Judge  noted  that  although  the  expert  report
    states that the appellant would return to his home area  to  visit  his
    mother, sister and his former partner because he misses  them,  is  not
    supported by the appellant's own evidence at the hearing that he has no
    wish to return to his home area. Therefore the expert's report that  he
    would go to his home area is not supported by the appellants'  evidence
    that he will  not  return  there.  The  Judge  found  that  the  expert
    speculated on what the  appellant  would  do,  including  the  expert's
    speculation that an arranged marriage might have been set  up  for  the
    appellant. The Judge was  entitled  to  place  limited  weight  on  the
    expert's speculations. The Judge noted that even  the  expert  set  out
    evidence that the Albanian authorities are improving their treatment of
    LGBT people.

38. The Judge also found that although the appellant  says  he  misses  his
    mother and former partner, he has made no attempts to contact them  and
    thereby concluded that the appellant would not  go  anywhere  near  his
    home area or indeed would have no need to do so.  These  are  perfectly
    sustainable findings on the evidence before the Judge.

39. The Judge found that the appellant is a  young  educated  man  who  has
    gained experience of employment and his commendable voluntary work  and
    his more recent employment. The Judge found that the appellant's father
    would not be motivated to seek him  out  or  try  and  bribe  a  police
    officer if he attempts to register elsewhere. The Judge did not  accept
    the expert's opinion that this is intra family situation is akin  to  a
    blood feud. The Judge also found that this was  a  speculation  by  the
    expert that this would be considered a matter of family honour all that
    the appellant's father would seek to exact  revenge  on  the  appellant
    given that his father did not throw him out of the house when he  first
    discovered that the appellant is  a  homosexual  and  it  was  not  the
    appellant who left the family home of his own accord.

40. The Judge said that the appellant would not live openly in Albania  and
    it would not be out of fear but that he would behave discreetly  as  he
    has done in the past because of the culture. The Judge  found  even  in
    this country the appellant did not raise matter of his  sexuality  with
    others and that is how he would behave on his return to  Albania  which
    would not be out of fear but from his cultural background. The  grounds
    of appeal state that this is speculation on behalf of  the  Judge  that
    the appellant would be discrete but not out of fear. However the  Judge
    went on to say that even if the appellant does live openly as a gay man
    in Tirana, it  would  not  be  reasonably  likely  that  any  level  of
    treatment given to him would not amount to persecution  or  breach  his
    protected rights. This was a conclusion open to the Judge  to  make  on
    all the evidence before him which he carefully analysed.

41. The Judge also considered that there was sufficiency of protection  for
    the appellant in Tirana in Albania even if there was no sufficiency  of
    protection in  his  home  area.  However  the  Judge  stated  that  the
    appellant had said  in  his  evidence  that  he  had  no  intention  of
    returning to his home area  and  therefore  whether  or  not  there  is
    protection for him in his home area does not arise because that is  not
    where he will go. The appellant is no longer a child which he was  when
    he was last in Albania. He is now an adult, and will be able  to  avail
    himself of the protection of the authorities in Tirana to where he  can
    relocate.

42. I  find  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  and  required  to  reach  his
    conclusions based  on  the  evidence  in  determining  the  appellant's
    appeal. The Judge has taken into account all the evidence including the
    background  and  the  expert  evidence.  I  find   there   is   nothing
    unreasonable or perverse in the conclusions reached  by  the  Judge.  I
    find on  the  evidence  in  this  appeal,  no  differently  constituted
    Tribunal would reach a different conclusion.

43. I find that there is no material error of law in respect of the Judge's
    findings that the appellant cannot be recognised as  a  refugee  or  be
    granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. I find the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision stands and his appeal cannot succeed as  there
    is no material error of law in the decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed

Anonymity direction is not made

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award


      Dated this 7th day of May 2019
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana

