

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00651/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 16 July 2014              |
|Delivered orally                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     LK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton of Blavo & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant claims to be an Eritrean national who  was  born  on  23
      September 1990. She claims to be a Pentecostal Christian and  at  risk
      on return to Eritrea. She arrived in the United Kingdom on 8  December
      2013 and claimed asylum that day.  She claimed that  she  had  a  well
      founded fear of persecution based on her religion and/or  her  imputed
      political opinion.

   3. The appellant underwent a screening interview on 8 December 2013 which
      was conducted  in  the  language  of  Tigrinya  which  is  a  language
      associated with Eritrea.  She subsequently  underwent  a  full  asylum
      interview on 3 January 2014 which was conducted in  Amharic  which  is
      predominantly the language spoken in Ethiopia.  On that same  day  the
      appellant was also interviewed over the telephone by an  analyst  from
      Sprakab and a report dated 7 January 2014 was produced as a result.

   4. On 6 January 2014 the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
      for asylum and for humanitarian protection and on the basis  that  she
      had a right to remain in the United Kingdom under Article 8.   Central
      to that decision was the Secretary of State's view that the  appellant
      was not an Eritrean national but a national of Ethiopia who came  from
      the Tigre region of Ethiopia.

   5. As a consequence on 14 January 2014 the Secretary of State refused the
      appellant leave to enter and proposed removal directions  to  Eritrean
      or Ethiopia.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      against that decision.

   6. The appeal was heard  on  3  March  2014  by  Judge  Knowles.  In  his
      determination,  having  considered  all  the  evidence  including  the
      Sprakab report, in paragraph 65 he said this:

           "Looking at all the evidence in the round I have  no  reason  to
           reject to conclusions reached in the Sprakab report. I find  the
           appellant has not proved that it is reasonably likely  that  she
           is a national of Eritrea. In my view the probability is that she
           is an Ethiopian national".

   7. He also made a number of credibility findings against the appellant.

   8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on
      7 April 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Coates) granted the appellant
      permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal came before me.

   9. Ms Smeaton who represented the appellant relied on the grounds  and  a
      detailed skeleton argument in which she developed a number of  grounds
      which she invited me to conclude amounted to errors of law  such  that
      the Judge's decision could not stand.  Her submissions  focussed  upon
      the Judge's reliance upon the  Sprakab  report.   Having  done  so  Mr
      Richards, who represented the Secretary of  State,  acknowledged  that
      the Judge may have misunderstood the report  or  at  least  not  given
      sufficient consideration to it  so  as  to  explain  and  justify  his
      conclusion that it established that the  appellant  was  an  Ethiopian
      rather than an Eritrean national.

  10. The basis for Mr Richards' acceptance of  that  is  derived  from  the
      submissions that Ms Smeaton made  in  relation  to  the  report  which
      states a number of matters.  It  states  at  1.1  that  the  speaker's
      linguistic background is assessed  to  be  ("high")  "Ethiopia,  among
      Eritreans".  It then states  in  1.2  that  the  speaker's  linguistic
      background of being Eritrean is "unlikely".  At 1.3 the report  states
      that:

           "the speaker has mastered Tigrinya on a  native  speaker  level.
           The language used was not congruent with that of native speakers
           in Eritrea.  The language used was congruent with  the  language
           used  among  Eritreans  in  Ethiopia.   The   speaker's   stated
           linguistic background is assessed to be unlikely."

  11. There are then further observations by the writer of the report which,
      Ms Smeaton submitted, were entirely consistent  with  the  appellant's
      case rather than the respondent's case, namely that she is an Eritrean
      speaking Tigrinya in Ethiopia.  So, in 2.3 the grammatical features of
      the appellant's speech are said to  be  "congruent  with  Tigrinya  as
      spoken among Eritreans in Ethiopia" (see also 2.4 - lexical features).
       In relation to her use of Amharic words when speaking  Tigrinya  this
      is said to be "typical of Eritreans in Ethiopia" (see 2.4).

  12. The appellant's case is that she is an Eritrean who lived for  a  time
      amongst Ethiopians.  Her case is that she was born and lived in  Sessa
      in Eritrea where she lived until  she  was  two.  She  then  moved  to
      Ethiopia where she lived until she was 9 years old  and  she  attended
      school there.   Her evidence was that during the course of the war she
      was deported at the age of 9 from Ethiopia to Eritrea and  then  lived
      in Assab.

  13. In my view Mr Richards' concession is entirely properly made  in  this
      case. Putting it at its lowest the Sprakab report  is  unclear  as  to
      precisely what is the appellant's  nationality.   Putting  it  at  its
      highest it is mostly consistent with the  appellant's  claim  to  have
      been an Eritrean who lived amongst Ethiopians as  she  claimed  to  do
      between the ages of 2 and 9  when  one  might  assume  her  linguistic
      abilities and skills developed before being deported back to Ethiopia.
       It is clear to me that the Judge may have over-read  or  misread  the
      report so as in paragraph 65 of his determination to conclude, on  the
      basis of the Sprakab report, that the appellant was  likely  to  be  a
      national of Ethiopia and not a national of Eritrea.

  14. For completeness I should also note  that  the  Judge  relied  on  the
      Sprakab report in relation to  knowledge  issues  -  on  which  little
      detail of the enquiry is given in the report -  which  is  problematic
      after the Supreme Court's decision in SSHD v MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30.

  15. Leaving that aside, it is accepted by the Secretary of State that  the
      Judge erred in law in relying on the Sprakab report  without  properly
      explaining why it supported  his  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is
      Ethiopian rather  than  Eritrean.   It  was  a  central  part  of  his
      reasoning  in  finding  adversely  against  the   appellant   on   her
      nationality and more generally in relation to her credibility.

  16. For those reasons, I agree with the concession  made  by  Mr  Richards
      that the Judge's decision is legally flawed.



Decision



  17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal involved
      the making of an error of law.  The decision cannot stand and  is  set
      aside.

  18. Having regard to the nature of the fact-finding required and para  7.2
      of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the appeal  is  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing by  a  Judge  other
      than Judge Knowles.











                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




