
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00422/2015
     AA/00423/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 February 2016                    |On 11 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   WJ & MW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Khan, Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in relation to  a  decision
    made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bird  that  was  promulgated  on  9
    December 2015.  The appeal is brought with the permission of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert, granted on 4 January 2016.

2.   In dealing with the grant of permission Judge Lambert stated:

         "The grounds argue lack  of  reasoning  justifying  departure  from
         Country Guidance in AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan  [2011]
         UKUT 31 and failure properly to apply the principles  of  effective
         protection as established by  case  law.  In  the  absence  of  any
         ascertainable consideration in the decision  of  AW  or  the  legal
         framework for a successful claim of lack of  effective  protection,
         the grounds are arguable."


3.   The grounds drafted on behalf of the Secretary of State  were  slightly
    more extensive than this, but the focus of the submissions made  to  me
    this morning have been narrowly addressed and confined to this discrete
    matter.  I do not need to rehearse the facts of this case.  There is no
    dispute so  far  as  that  is  concerned  and  the  recitation  of  the
    background and the findings of Judge Bird in that respect  are  not  in
    any way subject to criticism.

4.   The issue which is taken is the extent to  which  Judge  Bird  properly
    addressed the question of sufficiency of protection in the  event  that
    the respondents to this appeal were returned to Pakistan.  The point is
    fairly made that there is no citation of the leading  authority  of  AW
    (above).  For convenience I need only rehearse two  paragraphs  of  the
    head note of that decision:

         "2.  Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection,  a
             claimant may still have a well-founded fear of persecution  if
             authorities know or ought to know of circumstances  particular
             to his/her case giving rise to the fear, but are  unlikely  to
             provide the additional protection the particular circumstances
             reasonably require (per Auld LJ at paragraph 55(vi)).


         3.   In considering whether an appellant's particular circumstances
             give rise to a  need  for  additional  protection,  particular
             account must be taken of past persecution (if any)  so  as  to
             ensure the question posed is whether there are good reasons to
             consider that such persecution (and past  lack  of  sufficient
             protection) will not be repeated."


5.   The judge's decision would have been enhanced had  AW  been  cited  and
    the content of the head note rehearsed.  However, I have been taken  to
    the  key  passages  in  the  decision  and  it  seems   to   me   that,
    notwithstanding the lack of citation of that authority, the  issues  to
    be addressed were both raised and were determined. In particular I have
    regard to paragraph 38 of the decision which reads as follows:

         "The documentary evidence that has been produced by the  appellants
         to the lower standard corroborates their  account  of  firstly  the
         marriage of the second appellant and her divorce from  [NA].   They
         also corroborate  the  second  appellant's  account  that  she  was
         married to a distant relative in 2000 and  that  she  divorced  him
         because of his violence. It is obvious that in the cultural context
         for a woman to divorce her husband on those grounds would have been
         seen as bringing dishonour to the family.  It is also highly likely
         that because of her divorce the first and  second  appellants  were
         threatened by her ex-husband.  The  appellant  sought  to  relocate
         within Pakistan but the ex-husband managed to trace them. They also
         reported the matter to the police but there is no evidence  of  any
         action being taken or any investigation being carried  out  by  the
         police in Pakistan."


6.   There is then reference in paragraph 39 to the country information  and
    guidance that was provided which is analysed and assessed by the judge.



7.   In paragraph 40 the judge says the following:

         "There is also objective evidence in the respondent's  bundle,  the
         latest being a US State Department Report 2013 referring to  events
         in 2012 which considers the police and other  protection  agencies.
         At paragraph 87 of the second  appellant's  bundle  is  a  note  on
         Security and Foreign Forces dated 17 April 2012.  This report again
         points to the availability of protection. Against the background of
         the objective evidence the respondent says that the appellants  can
         return to Pakistan and there would be  sufficiency  of  protection.
         What however has  to  be  looked  at  is  what  happened  when  the
         appellants reported the incidence of attacks. There was  no  action
         taken. The sufficiency of protection  therefore  against  non-state
         agents has not been effective or available to the appellants."


8.   Paragraphs 44 and 45 of the judge's decision read as follows:


         "44. From the account of these appellants I find that it is  likely
             that the second appellant's family and her ex-husband may well
             have seen her actions as bringing  dishonour  to  the  family.
             The couple relocated on a number of occasions to avoid threats
             being carried  out.   They  did  not  receive  any  protection
             against these threats from the police despite reporting  them.
             The threats appear to continue against the  first  appellant's
             family."


         45.  To the lower standard I find that the  appellants  have  shown
             that they have a  well-founded  fear  of  being  subjected  to
             treatment that would amount to persecution  because  of  their
             religious views if returned to Pakistan.  For the same reasons
             I find that there will be a breach of their  protected  rights
             under Articles 2 and 3."


9.   Looking at these paragraphs of  the  decision  which  I  have  set  out
    fully, I am confident that the judge properly carried out the task that
    was required of her in accordance with AW.  She had  proper  regard  to
    the  generic  circumstances  prevailing  in  Pakistan  and   read   and
    considered all relevant country guidance and similar documentation.  In
    addition, she went further, as she was required to do,  and  considered
    the particular circumstances of the individuals  before  her  and  took
    account of both past persecution and the success or otherwise  of  such
    protection as was made available giving an indication of  whether  past
    misfortunes would be repeated or not.

10.  Matters concerning the weight to be given to the  evidence  and  issues
    of credibility are properly  within  the  province  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge during the fact-finding exercise. I can find nothing  to
    support the suggestion that there was any failing in  the  fact-finding
    nor can I find anything in the suggestion that there was  an  error  of
    law in the judge's approach to the case.  It  seems  to  me  that  this
    appeal is in reality  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  factual  findings
    dressed up as an alleged error of law.

11.  Having reviewed the case thoroughly, I am satisfied that  there  is  no
    error of law apparent on the face of the decision.  On the contrary  it
    is an entirely proper decision which balances the  relevant  issues  in
    accordance with the required legal approach.

12.  In all of those circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     3 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
