
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/00704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2014                    |On 4 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     W W
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    The Appellant in person.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Easterman promulgated on 21 July 2014 allowing WW's appeal against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 14  January  2014  (served  20
    January 2014) to remove him from the UK, to the extent  that  the  case
    was returned to the Secretary of State to make a decision in respect of
    the ECHR in accordance with the law.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant  and  WW  is
    the respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before
    the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to WW as the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of  Uganda.  His  personal  details  are  a
    matter of record on file and are known to the parties:  I  do  not  set
    them out here in keeping with the anonymity order that has been made in
    these  proceedings.  Some  details  of  his  immigration  and  personal
    histories are also apparent in the documents on file - although certain
    aspects of the immigration history are unclear in the summary  set  out
    in the cover sheet to the Respondent's  bundle.  What  is  particularly
    pertinent is that although  the  Respondent  disputed  the  Appellant's
    claim to have arrived in the UK in August 2000, there  is  evidence  by
    way of a screening interview record that confirms he had claimed asylum
    in September 2000. A substantive asylum  interview,  however,  was  not
    conducted until 1 November 2013 (decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 5). In the meantime, it appears from the Immigration  History
    set out in the covering sheet to the  Respondent's  bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the supporting documents at  annexes  B-F  that
    the Appellant's asylum claim was initially refused,  seemingly  on  the
    grounds of non-compliance because of a failure to attend interview, but
    that such a refusal was subsequently withdrawn.

 4. These matters are set out in more  detail  at  paragraphs  2-5  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In any event, in due course the Appellant was interviewed on 1 November
    2013.

 6. The essential bases of the Appellant's asylum claim are  summarised  at
    paragraph 13 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 14 January  2014,  and
    the removal decision, communicated by  way  of  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision of the same date, was made in consequence.

 8. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds for reasons set out in his determination. Having set out
    with thoroughness and detail the evidence (paragraphs  18-62)  and  the
    parties' submissions (paragraphs 63-70 and 72-82), the  Judge  set  out
    his findings of fact and  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  claim  for
    protection (paragraphs 83-94). In essence the Judge was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant had given a credible  account  of  the  events  upon
    which he based his asylum claim.

10. The Judge also gave consideration to Article 8 of the  ECHR.  He  noted
    that "it was not suggested that [the Appellant] could  meet  Article  8
    under the Immigration Rules" (paragraph 95). The Judge  concluded  that
    in so far as the Respondent  had  purportedly  given  consideration  to
    exceptional circumstances,  she  had  not  had  proper  regard  to  the
    procedural history of the Appellant's application and her own  role  in
    frustrating the more rapid consideration of his  case.  The  Judge  was
    "satisfied that the Secretary of State had sent  documentation  to  the
    wrong address for the appellant, and that as a result  there  had  been
    the best  part  of  a  ten  year  or  more  delay  in  considering  the
    appellant's claim, facts which clearly had not been considered  in  the
    Letter of Refusal, where the blame for the  delay  was  placed  on  the
    appellant" (paragraph 71). See  similarly  paragraph  97,  wherein  the
    Judge observes that the Appellant's friend and witness  in  his  appeal
    made an application at the same time and with the same representatives,
    which went through a  process  culminating  in  him  receiving  British
    citizenship; and see also paragraph 98 -

   "The respondent's Letter of Refusal sets out  the  various  facts  which
         simply do not match with the evidence provided in their  own  file,
         or from the appellant, and the main difficulty is that  the  letter
         requiring the appellant's attendance at interview as  long  ago  as
         2001, was sent to a YMCA  address  at  which  appellant  has  never
         resided. It has not been possible for me to find out why  that  was
         so but it can be seen from the letter that it was so.  The  refusal
         has been based on the assumption that the appellant has avoided the
         respondent, whereas by checking their own file they will find  that
         there were letters from a Member of Parliament and  indeed  in  the
         end Administrative Court proceedings,  which  brought  this  matter
         back to the respondent's attention".

11. In the circumstances the Judge concluded that there had  not  been  due
    and proper consideration to the issue  of  exceptional  or  extenuating
    circumstances, in particular by reference to policy guidance set out in
    Chapter 53 of the  Respondent's  Enforcement  Instructions  &  Guidance
    (paragraph 99), that the matter had not been considered "lawfully, that
    is to say properly, either on the correct facts, or in the light of the
    respondent's own guidance" (paragraph 101), "felt unable to make a full
    consideration of  any  possible  argument  that  the  appellant  should
    succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules" (paragraph 101), accordingly
    declined to hear argument in this regard (paragraphs 71 and  101),  and
    determined that in the circumstances he was  "not  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  is  in  accordance  with  the  law"
    (paragraph 102). In such circumstances the Judge decided to "return the
    appeal  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and   consideration   of
    exceptional circumstances to the Secretary of State to await  a  lawful
    decision" (paragraph 106).

12. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 10 August 2014.

13. The Appellant did not apply for permission to appeal those  aspects  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision  dismissing  his  appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention and/or on other 'protection' grounds.  Nor  has  the
    Appellant filed a Rule 24 response.

Consideration

14.  The  Respondent's  grounds,  upon  which  Ms  Isherwood  relies   with
    amplification in her oral submissions, assert that the  Respondent  had
    made a detailed decision including a full consideration of  Article  8,
    and it was for the  Judge  "to  come  to  a  decision  on  whether  the
    Secretary of States refusal would result in a breach of the appellant's
    Human Rights". In other words, the Judge  should  have  determined  the
    issue rather than remitting it.  Moreover  it  is  submitted  that  the
    approach of the Judge was in conflict with the decision in AZ (Asylum -
    'legacy' cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270 (IAC); and  further  that
    the Judge had misunderstood Chapter 53 which it was pleaded was  not  a
    matter to be considered at the time of an  initial  refusal  -  as  per
    paragraph 353B of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  was  only  relevant
    following consideration of further submissions  in  the  context  of  a
    'fresh claim', or once an appellant was 'appeal rights exhausted'.

15. I accept that the Judge erred in his approach in respect of Chapter  53
    of  the  Respondent's  Enforcement  Instructions  &  Guidance.  In   my
    judgement the explanation as to the scope and application of the policy
    set  out   at   paragraph   53.1,   'When   to   Consider   Exceptional
    Circumstances', indicates that they fall for consideration - under  the
    policy - "where an asylum or  human  rights  claim  has  been  refused,
    appeal rights have been exhausted and no  further  submissions  exist",
    whereupon paragraph 353B of the Rules is to be applied.  Accordingly  I
    accept the Respondent's submission that the policy is to be applied  in
    the context of an asylum claim  only  where  appeal  rights  have  been
    exhausted, and as such it is premature  to  apply  the  policy  in  the
    context of the initial asylum consideration, and in  turn  the  policy,
    just as paragraph 353B, is  not  a  matter  for  consideration  by  the
    Tribunal.

16. However, in my judgement, the Judge's references to  Chapter  53  -  he
    references it at paragraph 96 and appears to identify an error  on  the
    part of the Respondent in its application at paragraph 99 -  amount  to
    an error of 'form' and not 'substance'. The matters identified  by  the
    Judge as not having been properly considered  by  the  Respondent  were
    germane  both  to  Article  8,  and  also  to  the   consideration   of
    'Exceptional Circumstances' undertaken under that heading in the  RFRL.
    The fact that such matters might also in due course have been  relevant
    to a consideration of exceptional circumstances pursuant to Chapter  53
    and/or paragraph 353B does not mean that they were not also relevant to
    the Respondent's decision  taken  appropriately  without  reference  to
    Chapter 53 and/or paragraph 353B.

17. The Respondent  does  not  dispute  that  the  approach  taken  by  the
    Respondent's decision maker in the  RFRL  was  flawed  in  its  factual
    premises for the reasons identified by  the  Judge.  Such  errors  were
    plainly material to a proportionality balancing exercise under  Article
    8. In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  not  to  be
    criticised for characterising such fundamental misconceptions  of  fact
    to have rendered the Respondent's decision not in accordance  with  the
    law. In such circumstances the Judge  had  power  pursuant  to  section
    86(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2000 and so - "the
    Tribunal must allow the appeal  in  so  far  as  it  thinks  that...  a
    decision against which the appeal  is  brought  was  treated  as  being
    brought was not in accordance with the law..."

18.  The  Respondent's  alternative  submission  is  that  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was in conflict with the decision in the case of AZ
    (Asylum 'legacy' cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270 (IAC).  The  case
    is not directly on point being primarily concerned with  the  issue  of
    whether or  not  the  Tribunal  should  adjourn  an  asylum  appeal  in
    circumstances where there might be a  'legacy'  consideration  pending.
    The Respondent seeks to argue by approximate analogy  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should have  determined  the  appeal  substantively
    rather than remitting it. In my judgement that analogy  does  not  hold
    good. The Judge did indeed determine the appeal within the scope of his
    powers under section 86.

19. In this latter context and generally whilst I accept that it would have
    been open to the Judge to go  on  and  consider  the  Article  8  issue
    substantively  and  reach  a  decision  notwithstanding  the  error  of
    approach  in  the  Respondent's  consideration,  I  do  not  understand
    anything in section 86 or otherwise to compel the Judge  so  to  do.  I
    find that it was open to the Judge to conclude  that  in  circumstances
    where the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, and
    given that proper consideration had not been  given  to  the  Appellant
    circumstances in respect of Article 8 and/or exceptional circumstances,
    and also given the particular complexity of the history,  a  resolution
    by way of effective  remittal  to  the  Respondent  to  take  a  proper
    decision in accordance with the law was an appropriate outcome  in  the
    appeal.

20. In all such circumstances, notwithstanding the error of approach on the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge with regard to his  understanding
    of the applicability of Chapter 53, with reference to section  12(2)(a)
    of the Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 I determine that  it
    would not be appropriate to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and stands.

22. The appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is dismissed. It continues  to  be  the  case  that  WW's
    appeal under the Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection,  and  the
    Immigration Rules is dismissed, but the appeal in respect of  the  ECHR
    is allowed to the extent that the Secretary of State's decision was not
    in accordance with the law and the matter must be reconsidered  by  the
    Secretary of State in accordance with the law.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     23 May 2015


Anonymity Order (Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, rule 13)

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  orders  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This Order  applies  to
the Appellant and to the  Respondent  and  any  other  person  or  business.
Failure  to  comply  with  this  Order  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     23 May 2015
