

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/00936/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Sent           |
|On 24 September 2014                          |On 20 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MOUNA HANNA

                                                               Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms E King, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    Whilst this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department,  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in   the
   determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

2.    The appellant,  a  national  of  Egypt,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  her
   application for asylum and to remove her from the UK. Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal Herbert allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
   appeals with leave to this Tribunal.

Background

3. The appellant claims that she is a Coptic Christian who has a son in  the
   UK and two daughters in the USA. She is separated from  her  husband  who
   lives in Saudi Arabia. She claims that in  2012  and  2013  she  received
   threatening phone calls and text messages  from  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
   telling her to change her religion. She says that graffiti was written on
   her door on three occasions and that she had water thrown at her door. On
   27 December 2013 she was near her house when two people on  a  motorcycle
   snatched her crucifix necklace and her bag; she believed these  men  were
   from the Muslim Brotherhood. She went to the police  but  she  says  they
   were not interested in the religious aspect of the crime. She was  lonely
   and suffered from depression. On 29 December 2013 she came to the  UK  to
   spend Christmas with her sister, her son and her cousin. On  31  December
   2013 she received an email and phone call from a friend to tell her  that
   the person responsible for her apartment block had  told  her  that  some
   unknown people were looking for her and her ex-husband got  in  touch  to
   say that her house had  been  broken  into.  The  appellant  submitted  a
   psychiatric report  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  said  that  she
   suffered from PTSD and that she was at high risk of suicide if she was to
   return to Egypt.

4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  is   a
   practising Coptic Christian and that she  lived  in  a  neighbourhood  in
   Cairo where she had been targeted during the recent  troubles.  He  found
   that as a single Christian elderly woman with significant  mental  health
   issues living  on  her  own  she  would  be  particularly  vulnerable  to
   persecution or harassment. The Judge said [55];

      "I  am  satisfied  therefore  that  it  is  the  combination  of   her
      vulnerability as a person suffering from a significant risk of suicide
      and her vulnerability as a Christian  woman  which  places  her  in  a
      position of high risk"

5. The Judge found that the appellant had been the victim of persecution  in
   the past and that it would be difficult for her to obtain protection.  He
   also found that it is not  feasible  'without  undue  hardship'  for  the
   appellant to relocate to another part of Egypt an that  if  returned  she
   would be living in  seclusion  and  isolation  'barricaded  in  her  flat
   without being able to conduct a normal life or attend church'  [59].  The
   Judge allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention and Articles  2,  3
   and 8 of the ECHR.

6. The respondent's grounds of appeal of appeal contend that;

      . The Judge made a material misdirection in law by failing  to  apply
        the risk categories identified  in  MS  (Coptic  Christians)  Egypt
        CG [2013] UKUT 00611 (IAC);

      . The Judge erred in failing to apply the six stage test outlined  by
        the Court of Appeal in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 when making the
        finding that the appellant is at risk of suicide;

      . The Judge failed to identify arguably good grounds  of  appeal  for
        considering the appeal under Article  8  and  therefore  failed  to
        apply the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8  -new  Immigration  Rules-
        correct approach) [2013]UKUT 640 (IAC);

      . The Judge failed to provide any or  adequate  reasons  for  finding
        that the appellant was targeted by the Muslim Brotherhood; that the
        appellant will be at heightened risk because the Muslim Brotherhood
        has been banned; that the appellant is  at  risk  of  suicide;  for
        distinguishing the case of MS; and for finding that the appellant's
        circumstances are exceptional and not covered  by  the  Immigration
        Rules.

Error of Law

7. In the Rule 24 response and at the hearing Ms  King  submitted  that  the
   first ground is misconceived because the risk  categories  in  a  country
   guidance case are not exhaustive or exclusive.

8. In MS the Upper Tribunal  set  out  the  following  country  guidance  as
   summarised in paragraph 151;

          "Country guidance
      1.   Notwithstanding that there  is  inadequate  state  protection  of
      Coptic Christians in  Egypt,  they  are  not  at  a  general  risk  of
      persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.
      2.     However, on current evidence there are some areas where  Coptic
      Christians will face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
      contrary to Article 3. In general these will be (a) areas outside  the
      large cities; (b) where radical Islamists have a strong foothold;  and
      (c) there have been recent  attacks  on  Coptic  Christians  or  their
      churches, businesses or properties.
      3.     On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal,  the  following  are
      particular risk categories in the sense that those falling within them
      will generally be able to show a real risk of persecution or treatment
      contrary to Article 3, at least in their home area:
               (i) converts to Coptic Christianity;
               (ii)  persons   who   are   involved   in   construction   or
               reconstruction/repair of churches that have been  the  target
               for an attack or attacks;
               (iii) those accused of proselytising where the accusation  is
               serious and not casual;
               (iv)  those  accused  of  being  physically  or   emotionally
               involved with a Muslim woman, where the  accusation  is  made
               seriously and not casually.
      4.     Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in general at real risk
      of persecution  or  ill-treatment,  although  they  face  difficulties
      additional to other women, in the form of sometimes being  the  target
      of disappearances, forced abduction and forced conversion.
      5.     However, depending on the particular circumstances of the case,
      Coptic Christian women in Egypt aged between 14-25 years  who  lack  a
      male protector, may be at such risk.
      6.     If a claimant is able to establish that in their home area they
      fall within one or more of the risk categories identified  in  3  (i)-
      (iv) above or that they come from  an  area  where  the  local  Coptic
      population faces a real risk of persecution, it will  not  necessarily
      follow that they qualify as refugees or as beneficiaries of subsidiary
      protection or Article 3 ECHR protection. That will depend  on  whether
      they can show  they  would  not  have  a  viable  internal  relocation
      alternative. In such cases there will  be  need  for  a  fact-specific
      assessment but, in  general  terms,  resettlement  in  an  area  where
      Islamists are not strong would appear to be a viable option.
      7.     None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic  Christian  in
      Egypt from being able to establish a real risk of persecution or  ill-
      treatment in the particular circumstances of their case, e.g. if  such
      an individual has been the target of attacks because he or  she  is  a
      Coptic Christian."

9. The Upper Tribunal therefore found in MS that there is  inadequate  state
   protection for Coptic Christians in  Egypt,  that  there  are  particular
   categories of people who will generally be able to show a  real  risk  of
   persecution and that, although they face difficulties,  Coptic  Christian
   women in Egypt are not in general at real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
   treatment. However paragraph 7 above states  that  none  of  the  country
   guidance necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian  in  Egypt  from  being
   able to establish a real risk of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  in  the
   particular circumstances of their case for example where the  person  has
   been the target of attacks because of their religion. The Judge  did  not
   therefore  err  in  considering  that  the  appellant  was   capable   of
   establishing that she faces a real risk of persecution in the  particular
   circumstances of her case. The Judge was not prohibited from  making  the
   finding he did by the guidance in MS.

10. In the Rule 24 response and at the hearing Ms King  submitted  that  the
   Judge did not determine the case on the basis of the appellant's risk  of
   suicide but, instead, the risk of suicide was taken into account as  part
   of the assessment of the appellant's position and personal  circumstances
   as set out in paragraph 339J of the Immigration Rules and referred to  in
   HJ  (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
   Department [2010] UKSC 31.

11. The six stage test set out in J v SSHD relates to determining  the  risk
   of suicide in the context of Article 3 of the ECHR.  The  Judge  in  this
   case  took  into  account  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances   in
   assessing  the  risk  of  persecution,  including  her  account  of   the
   harassment she previously suffered, the medical evidence  (including  the
   diagnosis of PTSD and the risk of suicide), her age, the lack  of  family
   support and financial support in Egypt, and her living  conditions  there
   in determining the asylum appeal. The Judge did not determine  this  case
   on the risk of suicide  issue  alone.  The  Judge  was  entitled,  indeed
   obliged, to take all of this evidence into account. I am  satisfied  that
   the Judge did not err in his approach to the  evidence  of  the  risk  of
   suicide in this context.

12. The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge erred  in  considering  the
   appeal under Article 8 having found that she was not eligible  for  leave
   under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. However the  Judge  did  consider
   the relevant case law before  going  on  to  decide  that  there  was  an
   arguable case that  the  appellant's  case  should  be  considered  under
   Article 8. The Judge made clear that the reasons for doing  so  were  the
   same as those given in relation to the asylum appeal [67]. I am satisfied
   that the judge gave adequate reasons for going on to consider  Article  8
   and that this was a course of action open to him for the reasons given.

13. The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge failed to  provide  any  or
   adequate reasons for findings on material matters. However the Judge  set
   out all of the oral evidence before him and was entitled  to  accept  the
   appellant's evidence in relation to past events in Egypt. The  Judge  set
   out the relevant parts  of  the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
   diagnosis of PTSD and the  risk  of  suicide.  The  Judge  said  that  he
   accepted that evidence in the context of the appellant's lack  of  family
   support in Egypt [54].  I am satisfied that the Judge has considered  the
   medical evidence and accepted it for the reasons given. These reasons are
   adequate.

14. The grounds of appeal contend that the  Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons
   for accepting that the appellant was targeted by the  Muslim  Brotherhood
   and that she would be at heightened risk because the  Muslim  Brotherhood
   has been banned. However the Judge referred to the expert  report  before
   him and it is clear from the decision  that  this  was  relevant  to  the
   Judge's assessment  as  to  the  lack  of  protection  available  to  the
   appellant [58]. This  too  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  accepting  the
   appellant's account in relation to  past  persecution  and  the  risk  of
   future persecution. I accept that the Judge did not state the  source  of
   the assertion that the situation of the appellant would be exacerbated by
   the banning of the Muslim Brotherhood [52]. However this finding  is  not
   material given the rest of the findings that the  appellant,  because  of
   her particular vulnerability, would be at risk of persecution  and  would
   be unable to access adequate state  protection.  It  is  clear  from  the
   determination that these personal factors informed the  Judge's  decision
   that there was not viable internal relocation option  for  the  appellant
   when eh said  that  the  appellant  could  not  relocate  without  'undue
   hardship' [58].

15. In summary I am satisfied that the Judge did not err in his approach  to
   the evidence or the application of the country guidance in MS and that he
   made a decision which was open to him on all of the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

Signed
                               Date:  15 October 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal









