
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00096/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th December 2017                 |On 6th February 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                   ALI [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse of SH & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Syria born on 1st January 1986.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 3rd October 2014 and applied for asylum  on
    23rd December 2014.  That application was refused for the reasons given
    in the Respondent's Asylum  Decision  dated  12th  January  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Juss (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on  25th  August  2016.
    He decided to allow the appeal for the reasons given  in  his  Decision
    dated 4th October 2016.  The Respondent sought to leave to appeal  that
    decision, and on 7th September 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant sought asylum on the basis that he was at risk on  return
    to Syria as an ethnic Turkman.  The only issue  before  the  Judge  was
    whether the Appellant was of Turkish or Syrian nationality.  The  Judge
    allowed the appeal because he found the Appellant to  be  credible  and
    believed his account that he was an ethnic Turkman from  a  village  on
    the Syrian/Turkish border but nevertheless was a Syrian national.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mrs Aboni helpfully informed me that  it  was
    no longer disputed that the Appellant was a Syrian citizen and that  it
    was the policy of the  Home  Office  that  it  was  too  dangerous  and
    therefore not possible to return any Syrian  citizens  to  Syria.   Any
    error of law by the Judge was therefore not material.

 5. I indicated to Mr Woodhouse that there was no need for me to hear  from
    him.  On the basis that  the  Appellant's  citizenship  was  no  longer
    disputed and that it was the policy of the Home Office  not  to  return
    any Syrian citizens to Syria at the present time, I accept Mrs  Aboni's
    suggestion and find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
