
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16th November 2016               |On: 13th January 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Marlon Williams
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica date of birth  3rd  July  1992.
    On the 14th  March  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Designated  Judge
    McClure) allowed his appeal against a decision to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    The appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.  On the  19th  April  2016
    Acting Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted permission  to
    appeal to the Secretary of State.  Judge Zucker considered it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to give adequate  reasons
    and in failing to give sufficient weight to the public interest.






    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The facts and background  are  now  largely  uncontested.  Mr  Williams
    claims to have entered the United Kingdom when he was nine  years  old.
    He was brought here as a visitor and  was  left  in  the  care  of  his
    grandmother and  aunts  in  Manchester.  His  father  had  intermittent
    involvement with his upbringing. Mr  Williams'  father  was  physically
    abusive towards him and his home life was not stable.  Social  services
    had some early involvement and in July 2007 Mr Williams was taken  into
    care.  He was then aged just fifteen.  At  around  the  same  time  his
    father was deported to Jamaica following a conviction relating to Class
    A drugs.  Mr Williams himself committed a series of  offences.  Between
    2007 and 2009 he received  seven  convictions  for  offences  including
    robbery, battery and burglary.    On  the  13th  February  2008  social
    services made a claim for asylum on his behalf. This  was  unsuccessful
    but did result in Mr Williams being granted a period  of  Discretionary
    Leave (DL), valid from the 21st July 2008 through to  the  3rd  January
    2010. Before that leave expired Mr Williams  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain. This was refused on the 3rd February 2011.


 3. Mr Williams appealed. He had at that point been in the  United  Kingdom
    for some nine years, having come here as a young child.  He  relied  on
    that private life, and what might be termed the  compassionate  factors
    in this case. He further submitted that he was in a stable relationship
    with a British citizen, Miss Naomi Davies. He had been living with  her
    and her family since mid-2010. Having regard to these factors the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers)  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds. In a determination dated 29th March 2011 Judge Cruthers  found
    that Ms Davies had substantial ties  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He  had
    regard to the evidence that Mr Williams had now turned his life around.
    He was acting as a mentor to other disaffected young men  and  had,  in
    the two years  before  the  appeal,  made  "serious  progress"  in  his
    education. He had completed a Duke of Edinburgh bronze  award  and  had
    received numerous certificates for completing various courses.    Judge
    Cruthers weighed  against  Mr  Williams  the  fact  that  he  had  been
    convicted of a string of offences but taking all of the factors in  the
    round he was satisfied that it would be a disproportionate interference
    with Mr Williams' Article 8 rights to remove him.

 4. A further grant of DL followed.  This commenced on the 5th  April  2011
    and expired on the 4th April 2013.

 5. An application for further leave was made on the 3rd April 2013.    The
    Secretary of State responded on the 15th December 2014 by refusing  any
    further leave. It was not accepted that Mr Williams had any  protection
    needs in respect of his potential return to Jamaica.   The Secretary of
    State noted that in allowing the appeal back in 2011 Judge Cruthers had
    said the following: "the appellant must understand that if  he  commits
    any further criminal offences, or fails to use his time in this country
    constructively (in terms of education and/or employment) then his  case
    for being granted  a  further  period  of  leave  would  be  very  much
    undermined".    The decision maker found no evidence before him that Mr
    Williams was still in a relationship, or that he had been  employed  or
    engaged in education; worse still there was an  "impending  prosecution
    for assault and possession of a firearm". In light of these factors the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that there would be any breach  of
    Article 8 if  Mr  Williams  were  to  be  removed.   In  light  of  the
    criminality, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that Mr  Williams
    should be given any further periods of DL.

 6. The appeal against this decision came before  Judge  McClure.  By  that
    time  the  Secretary  of  State  had  withdrawn  her  reliance  on  the
    allegation about a firearms prosecution, but there was evidence  before
    the Tribunal that since the decision of Judge Cruthers Mr Williams  had
    been convicted of possession of cannabis (in June 2011) and on the 23rd
    December 2014 he was sentenced to 9 months'  imprisonment  for  assault
    with intent to resist arrest. The background to that offence  was  that
    Mr Williams believed that one of his neighbours had stolen a puppy from
    him. Mr Williams and Ms Davies (they were in fact still  together)  had
    returned to their home to find that one of the puppies that  their  dog
    had recently given birth to was missing.  Ms  Davies  was  very  upset.
    They made enquiries in their  street  and  independently  a  number  of
    neighbours told them that another neighbour had gone into their  garden
    and taken one of the puppies.  The animal being very young Mr  Williams
    and Ms Davies were concerned that it might die if  separated  from  its
    mother.   Mr Williams went to the house of the  neighbour  in  question
    and confronted him. the neighbour denied having taken  the  animal.  Mr
    Williams admits to having been "very worked up". The  neighbour  called
    the police. When the police arrived Mr Williams remonstrated with  them
    and protested that his puppy had been stolen by this individual.  In  a
    statement provided to Judge McClure Mr Williams accepted  that  he  was
    angry, that he had resisted arrest and that an officer had been injured
    as a result. He accepted that he handled the whole affair  very  badly,
    and expressed sincere remorse.


 7. Judge McClure had the benefit of hearing oral  evidence  from  both  Mr
    Williams and Ms Davies. This was to the  effect  that  they  are  in  a
    stable relationship of some five years standing and that they have  set
    up home together. They would like to have children when they can afford
    it. Ms Davies supports them  by  working  full  time.   Numerous  other
    witnesses provided  statements  speaking  to  Mr  Williams'  character.
    This included letters from boys who attend the  Collyhurst  and  Moston
    Lads Club, where they are supported and mentored  by  Mr  Williams.  He
    volunteers at this gym and is described as being "keen to get  involved
    and enthusiastic about working with younger children  to  give  them  a
    positive attitude".

 8. Judge McClure was asked to consider two matters in light of all of this
    evidence. First, whether there would be a breach of  Article  8  if  Mr
    Williams were removed to Jamaica.  This question  was  resolved  in  Mr
    Williams' favour, and it is the reasoning  underpinning  that  decision
    that is challenged by the Secretary of State.   Second,  Counsel  asked
    the Tribunal to assess whether the Secretary of State  should  in  fact
    have granted Mr Williams Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) in line  with
    her own published policy of  making  such  grants  once  a  person  has
    accrued six years' continuous residence with DL.    Judge  McClure  did
    so, but for reasons explained below, did not accept that  the  decision
    was unlawful for a failure to apply policy.  There was no  cross-appeal
    lodged but before me Mr Nicholson argued, in the context of the Rule 24
    response, that this matter was not properly addressed. I deal with each
    issue in turn.



    Article 8

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are that the Tribunal  erred
    in the following respects:


              i)  In  failing  to  "properly  apply"  section  117B  of  the
                 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;


             ii) The Judge's continued references to  Mr  Williams'  private
                 life demonstrate that he placed undue weight  on  a  matter
                 which should, in light of his  unlawful/precarious  status,
                 only have attracted "little weight";

            iii) Ditto in respect of the relationship with Ms Davies,  which
                 was formed when his status was precarious;

             iv) The Tribunal failed to consider whether Mr Williams  should
                 return to Jamaica in order to apply for entry clearance  as
                 a partner under Appendix FM


10. I note from these grounds that no issue is taken with the finding  that
    Article 8 was engaged, in respect of both private and family life.  The
    quarrel is with the approach taken to proportionality.


11. The Tribunal specifically directs itself to section 117B  at  paragraph
    66 of the determination. At paragraph 68 consideration is given to  the
    fact that Mr Williams has had various jobs and that he actively  sought
    full time employment, albeit at the date of the appeal  unsuccessfully.
    There does not appear to be recognition of the fact  that  Mr  Williams
    speaks fluent English but the Secretary of State can  hardly  have  any
    complaint about that omission. The focus of Mr  Harrison's  submissions
    were that the Tribunal failed to adequately balance the public interest
    against the "little weight" that had to be attached to the private  and
    family life claim.

12. The determination does not, it is  true,  specifically  and  separately
    recite  the  terms  of  s117B(1),  namely  that  the   maintenance   of
    immigration control is in the public interest. What it does do is  make
    repeated reference to the criminal convictions, and the  weight  to  be
    attached to those. There is a reason for that. The reason is  that  the
    only matter weighing against Mr Williams  was  those  convictions.  The
    Secretary of State had  previously  recognised  that  Mr  Williams  had
    qualified for leave to remain. There was no attempt - as  an  adult  at
    least - to circumvent  immigration  control,  and  no  periods  without
    leave. There was therefore no arguable error in the  Tribunal  focusing
    on the convictions in its assessment of the public interest.

13. As for the weight to be attached to Mr  Williams'  private  and  family
    life, Mr Harrison agreed that the injunctions at s117B (4)  &  (5)  did
    not limit the Tribunal in what it could consider. Of the 14 years  that
    Mr Williams had spent in  the  United  Kingdom  (at  the  date  of  the
    hearing), nine had been as a child. The finding that his  private  life
    was "substantial" had to be viewed in that light. He did not choose  to
    come here, and had no say in his place of residence.  This was  plainly
    a relevant consideration which the Tribunal was entitled to  take  into
    account: see Forman (Sections 117A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT  412
    (IAC), Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 131  (IAC).
     Judge McClure's decision in this respect followed the  approach  taken
    by the Upper Tribunal in Miah [at 24]:

         "In the case of  a  child  it  is  possible  to  envisage,  in  the
         abstract,  a  series  of  considerations  which  could  potentially
         outweigh the public interest. These might include matters  such  as
         parental dominance  and  influence;  trafficking;  other  forms  of
         compulsion; and the absence of any flagrant, repeated or persistent
         breaches of the United Kingdom's immigration regime  by  the  child
         concerned. Furthermore, the child's age and personal  circumstances
         at the commencement of the period  under  scrutiny  and  thereafter
         will be obviously material considerations. Viewed panoramically, it
         seems   uncontroversial   to   suggest   that   an   Article   8(2)
         proportionality exercise which strikes  the  balance  in  a  manner
         which overcomes the public interests  engaged  is  more  likely  to
         occur in the case of a child than that of an adult".

14. If there was any error in the Tribunal  declining  to  make  methodical
    findings on each sub-section (1)-(5) of the Act,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that it is any way material. It is evident from the  reasoning  overall
    that the Tribunal has  given  careful  consideration  to  the  criminal
    convictions  and  attached  appropriate  weight   to   them.   Although
    describing them as serious matters, the Tribunal was entitled  to  take
    the  mitigating  factors  into  account,  in  particular  the  sad  and
    troubling events of Mr Williams' childhood.    It was also entitled  to
    find, as it did, that the public interest was outweighed in  this  case
    by Mr Williams' long residence, his commitment to his local  community,
    and the relationships that he has established whilst he grew up here.


15. The fourth ground is not made out. Had this case been purely about  the
    relationship  with  Ms  Davies,  and  had  the   Chen   approach   been
    specifically pleaded before the Tribunal, then this ground may have had
    some merit.  This case was not however, a failed attempt to gain  leave
    under Appendix FM. The point was that this was  a  young  man  who  has
    lived here for most of his 24 years. The family life he shares with  Ms
    Davies was only one of the many relationships  he  has  established  in
    that time, as the numerous letters of support attest.    Judge  McClure
    was required, as a matter of law, to consider all of that. He could not
    restrict his analysis to the fact that Mr Williams is  a  'partner'  as
    defined in GEN.1.2.



    ILR


16. There is no cross appeal before me on this issue.  Since Mr Nicholson's
    submissions on this matter went to the  materiality  of  any  error  in
    respect of Article 8, I agreed to hear them.   As can be seen from  the
    above, I did not find any of the Secretary of  State's  grounds  to  be
    made out so any comments that I would have to make about the ILR  issue
    would be obiter dicta.


17. It is not in issue that Mr Williams was granted DL from the  21st  July
    2008, and that by virtue of successive grants and operation of  section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971, he continues to hold that status today.
    At the date of decision he had held DL for in excess of six  years;  at
    the date of this decision it has been  eight  and  a  half  years.  The
    applicable policy is agreed by the  parties  to  be  expressed  in  the
    following terms:


         "Applicants granted discretionary leave before 9th July 2012:


                 a) Those who before 9th July 2012 have been  granted  leave
                    under the DL policy in force at the time  will  normally
                    continue to be dealt with under that policy  through  to
                    settlement  if  they  qualify  for  it  (normally  after
                    accruing  six  years'  continuous  DL).  Further   leave
                    applications for those granted up  to  three  years'  DL
                    before 9th July are subject to active review.


                 b) Consideration of all further leave applications will  be
                    subject to a criminality check and  the  application  of
                    the criminality threshold, including in respect of cases
                    awaiting a decision on a further period of  DL  on  that
                    date.

                 c) Criminality and exclusion section above"


    The criminality and exclusion section simply points out  that  decision
    makers must consider the impact of  an  individual's  criminal  history
    before granting any leave.


18. Judge McClure had regard to  the  fact  that  these  policy  statements
    mirror paragraph 287 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had given  express  consideration  to  the  criminal
    convictions and the perceived  lack  of  integration  when  considering
    whether to grant further DL, and found that even if the  decision-maker
    had directed her mind to whether to grant  ILR,  the  outcome  of  that
    reasoning process would have been the same:


         "59. However whilst consideration is given to the issue of  whether
         or not the appellant would be entitled to discretionary leave, that
         has been refused by reason of the appellant's criminal convictions.
         The fact that the appellant now has six years  discretionary  leave
         and should be considered for indefinite leave would  merely  import
         consideration of the same factors into the assessment of indefinite
         leave. Had he made an application for  indefinite  leave  he  would
         have been refused under paragraph 287 and I cannot see that he  can
         be in any better position  by  reason  merely  the  fact  that  the
         entitlement  to  be  considered  for   indefinite   leave   accrued
         subsequently and was not considered in the letter of refusal"


19.  The  real  complaint  Mr  Nicholson  has  about  this   reasoning   is
    foreshadowed in the written submissions made by GMIAU as  long  ago  as
    February 2015. That is that had anyone bothered to look at the guidance
    on  the  "criminality  threshold"  necessary  to  deny  ILR  in   these
    circumstances, it would have been seen that the offences  committed  by
    Mr Williams do not meet it.   Whether  that  is  true,  I  cannot  say.
    Neither the Rule 24 response nor the written submissions by  GMIAU  set
    out what the criminality threshold is, or rather was at the time.  None
    of the policies reproduced in the papers before me are  of  assistance.
    No doubt in assessing the impact of this  determination,  and  that  of
    Judge McClure, the Secretary of State will give  careful  consideration
    to her own policies, applicable at the relevant time, and to whether Mr
    Williams can today  be  rationally  and  lawfully  denied  a  grant  of
    indefinite leave in line with those published policies and the terms of
    the Immigration Rules.





      Decisions


20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


21. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     12th
                                January 2017










    Post Script: Apology


    It has taken two months for this decision to be promulgated. That is  a
    delay to be regretted and I extend my apologies to  both  parties.  The
    reason is that the file was misplaced at the hearing centre and it took
    some time before it was returned to me.


