
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00465/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd September 2015                |On 14th September 2015               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     R M
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by Morgan Dias
                    Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was  born  on  the  15th  August
    1995. He appeals against the decision of Judge Buchanan,  published  on
    the 23rd March 2015, to dismiss his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom following refusal of his
    application for asylum. I extend the anonymity direction that was  made
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Background to the appeal

 2. The appellant's original claim for asylum was based upon his claim that
    he had come to the adverse attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities  by
    using an old newspaper bearing the picture  of  an  Iranian  leader  in
    order clean his car. That account was  comprehensively  disbelieved  by
    both the respondent and Judge Buchanan and those  credibility  findings
    are not challenged in the instant appeal.

 3. The aspect of Judge Buchanan's appeal that is criticised can  be  found
    at paragraph 10 of his  decision.  He  there  noted  that  the  Country
    Information and Guidance report dated November 2014 suggested that  any
    Iranian who left the country illegally without a valid travel  document
    would be sentenced to a period of between 1 and 3  years'  imprisonment
    or a fine. The judge also noted that in some cases, a person might  not
    be issued with a travel document. An example of this is a young man who
    is liable to serve 18 months' compulsory military  service.  The  judge
    then quoted from SB (risk on return -  illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00053 which is to the effect that illegal exit is not  in  itself
    likely to be a significant risk factor on return but, if a person faced
    other difficulties, it might be a factor that added to  the  risk.  The
    judge thereafter concluded as follows:

         "I have considered the matters discussed in the case of SB, but the
         appellant does not fall into any of the categories which  discloses
         any heighted interest in him, despite the fact that  the  appellant
         is at the age when it would be expected that he undertake  military
         service."

 4. The essence of the grounds of the original application  for  permission
    to appeal was that the judge failed to consider whether  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Iran as  "a  failed  asylum  seeker".  In
    refusing permission to  appeal  on  this  ground,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grimmett made the following observation:

         "The grounds assert that the Judge  failed  to  reconcile  the  new
         country material and clear risk  the  Appellant  was  facing  as  a
         failed asylum seeker. However, that was not a matter raised in  the
         grounds of appeal or in the skeleton argument and there is  nothing
         to suggest that it was raised at the hearing as an  issue  for  the
         Judge to decide."

 5. The  grounds  advanced  in  support  of  the  renewed  application  for
    permission to appeal states that  the  observation  of  Judge  Grimmett
    "misses the point". It further claims that the appellant had  submitted
    a body new material, post-dating the decision in SB (risk on  return  -
    illegal exit) Iran, which "showed an  arguable  risk  upon  return  for
    failed  asylum  seekers"  [emphasis  as  it  appears  in  the  original
    document].

 6. In granting the renewed application for  permission  to  appeal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum stated as follows:

         "It  is  arguable  that,  despite  having  regard  to  the  Country
         Information and Guidance document dated November 2014 and SB  (risk
         on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]  UKAIT  00053,  the  Judge
         failed to engage with the evidence before him relating to  risk  on
         return as a failed asylum seeker."

The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Mr Hussain, who did not appear in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  accepted
    that there was no reference in either the original grounds of appeal or
    in Counsel's Skeleton Argument to a claimed risk to  the  appellant  on
    return to Iran by reason of his status as a failed  asylum  seeker.  He
    nevertheless claimed that the First-tier Tribunal was provided  with  a
    standard  bundle  of  documents  containing  both  background   country
    information reports  relating  to  Iran  and  a  number  of  grants  of
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal that - in whole or in  part
    - were based upon  the  'failed  asylum  seeker'  issue  (these  latter
    documents are also attached to the renewed application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal). Mr Hussain did  not  explain  how  he
    came to be in a position to assert that this bundle had  been  provided
    to Judge Buchanan - rather, he appears to have assumed it - but he  did
    provide me with a copy of that bundle, bearing the name of a  different
    appellant, that he happened to have with him. I placed this  bundle  of
    documents on the file upon the strict understanding that there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that it had in fact been before Judge Buchanan.  If
    anything, the evidence suggests that it was not before him. I say  that
    because not only is there no reference  to  it  in  Counsel's  Skeleton
    Argument that was put before Judge Buchanan, but  the  only  bundle  of
    documents on the file is entirely different from that furnished  by  Mr
    Hussain. I therefore endorsed Mr Hussain's bundle of documents with the
    caution that I had not seen any evidence that it had been placed before
    Judge Buchanan before putting it on the file. It follows  that  I  have
    there considered this appeal on the footing that the  only  documentary
    evidence that was before Judge  Buchanan  concerning  the  position  of
    failed asylum seekers returning to Iran was  that  contained  within  a
    bundle of documents that bears the  appellant's  name  and  contains  a
    total of 50 pages.

Analysis

 8. Mr Hussain accepted this appeal could only succeed if the risk  to  the
    appellant on return as a failed asylum seeker  could  be  described  as
    "obvious" upon the evidence that was before Judge  Buchanan.  The  word
    "obvious" in this  context  bears  the  meaning  given  to  it  in  the
    following passage from the judgement of the Court of Appeal in R v SSHD
    ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1152

         "39. Because the rules place an onus on the asylum-seeker to  state
         his grounds of appeal, we consider that it would be  wrong  to  say
         that mere arguability should be the criterion to be applied for the
         grant of leave in such circumstances. A higher hurdle is  required.
         The appellate authorities should of course focus primarily  on  the
         arguments adduced before them, whether these are to be found in the
         oral argument before the special adjudicator  or,  so  far  as  the
         Tribunal is concerned, in the written grounds of  appeal  on  which
         leave to appeal is sought. They are not required  to  engage  in  a
         search for new points. If there is readily discernible  an  obvious
         point of Convention law which favours the applicant although he has
         not taken it, then the special adjudicator should apply it  in  his
         favour, but he should feel  under  no  obligation  to  prolong  the
         hearing by asking the parties for submissions on points which  they
         have not taken but which could be properly  categorised  as  merely
         "arguable" as opposed to "obvious". Similarly, if when the Tribunal
         reads the Special Adjudicator's decision there is an obvious  point
         of Convention law favourable to the asylum-seeker  which  does  not
         appear in the decision, it should grant leave to appeal. If it does
         not do so, there will be a danger that  this  country  will  be  in
         breach of its obligations under the Convention. When we refer to an
         obvious point we mean a  point  which  has  a  strong  prospect  of
         success if it is argued. Nothing less  will  do.  It  follows  that
         leave to apply for judicial review of a refusal by the Tribunal  to
         grant leave to appeal should be granted if  the  judge  is  of  the
         opinion that it is properly arguable that a point not raised in the
         Grounds of Appeal to the Tribunal had a strong prospect of  success
         if leave to appeal were to be granted. [Emphasis added]"

 9. I have therefore applied the test of a "strong prospect of success"  to
    the claim that the Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  consider  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Iran by reason of his status as
    a 'failed asylum seeker'. In doing so, I have noted  that  amongst  the
    background country information that  was  before  the  Tribunal  was  a
    report  by  the  'Refugee  Documentation  Centre  (Ireland)',  entitled
    'information on the treatment of returned Asylum Seekers'. Some of  the
    information quoted therein is undoubtedly  capable  of  supporting  the
    argument which the appellant now belatedly seeks to  advance.  Thus,  a
    report by Amnesty International states that failed asylum seekers  risk
    arrest on return, particularly if forcibly returned, where their asylum
    application is known to the authorities. On the other hand,  a  country
    advice by the 'Australian Government Refugee Tribunal' states:

         "It remains uncertain as to whether either the Iranian  authorities
         or paramilitaries aligned to the regime impute returnees with anti-
         government or anti-Islamic  Republic  political  views  simply  for
         applying for protection abroad. What is certain is  that  at  least
         some returnees from Australia and elsewhere have  been  subject  to
         varying degrees of ill-treatment by authorities upon return ranging
         from monitoring, interrogation, and detention. There  are  reliable
         reports that some returnees from Canada have been physically harmed
         and there is at least one report  of  a  returnee  dying  following
         physical harm upon return. However, it is unclear as to whether any
         of these examples of ill-treatment are  attributable  to  political
         beliefs imputed by  authorise  due  to  asylum  claims  made  while
         abroad. [See page 50 of the appellant's bundle of documents]"

10. Thus, whilst there was evidence before the Tribunal that was capable of
    supporting an argument that a returnee  risked  persecution  by  reason
    solely of his status as a failed asylum seeker, it did not  support  an
    argument that had "a strong prospect of success". It  cannot  therefore
    be said that any such risk was "obvious" in  the  'Robinson'  sense  of
    that word. It follows from this that the Tribunal did not make an error
    of law by failing to consider it.

Notice of Decision

11. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  any  error  of  law  in  its
    determination of the appeal and the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    therefore dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed   Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
