
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00565/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham UT (IAC)                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 June 2014                                 |On 27 June 2014            |
|Prepared 20 June 2014                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AM
                         (Anonymity Order continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Rutherford, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and AM is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of Afghanistan, date of  birth  5  June  1995,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  14  January  2014  to
    refuse claims under the Refugee  Convention  and  seeking  Humanitarian
    Protection status, as a result of a refusal of further leave to remain.
     The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish who,  on  14
    March 2014, who allowed  the  appeal,  the  parties  are  agreed,  with
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge's determination is by no
    means a model of clarity, but it is clear that  the  judge  rejected  a
    claim of risk on return under the Refugee Convention and on  the  basis
    of  the  risk  of  serious  harm  or  it  would  seem,   although   the
    determination is somewhat quiet on the matter, Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision by the Secretary of State was  given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 31 March 2014.

4.   At the hearing Mr Mills argued that the judge, having rejected or  made
    adverse credibility findings in respect of the claimant's claim  to  be
    at risk on return, nevertheless without clarity of reasoning went on to
    make two, possibly three significant factual findings: which are to  be
    inferred from the decision he ultimately made.  In paragraph 23 of  the
    determination and reasons, the  judge  accepted  the  claimant  was  of
    Hazara ethnicity, whose father had died when he was very young and that
    the claimant,  on  attaining  the  age  of  being  able  to  work,  had
    essentially been discarded, as an unwanted mouth to feed, by the  uncle
    who had been providing for him, his mother and brother. There being  no
    work for him he was sent to the United Kingdom.

5.   The judge found it difficult to  conclude  with  any  certainty  as  to
    whether or not the claimant's mother and brother, in being returned  to
    Afghanistan, had been able to return to the old family home and to  use
    the land which had formerly been the subject of a dispute.   The  judge
    was less than clear upon what view he ultimately took of  their  return
    but it might be inferred he did not  accept  that  part  of  the  claim
    either.  Nevertheless the judge, in paragraph 27, went on  to  conclude
    that the maternal uncle had washed his hands  of  his  responsibilities
    towards the claimant.  Thus it was said, by the  judge,  the  claimant,
    having been in the United Kingdom for a significant  number  of  years,
    found himself, by reference to the case  of  JS  (Former  unaccompanied
    child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 568 (IAC), a category
    of person who, having been in the UK  a  significant  length  of  time,
    should be  granted  leave  to  remain.   Thus,  although  he  does  not
    expressly say so, he allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   Mr Mills makes the point that there was  no  factual  basis  or  proper
    finding made b y the Judge to  conclude  that  the  claimant  had  been
    abandoned by his maternal uncle and that the associated concerns  about
    his return simply failed to properly  assess  the  real  likelihood  of
    there being family and support available on a return to Afghanistan.

7.   Miss Rutherford fairly says that a great deal has been found in  favour
    of the claimant in relation to those personal circumstances.  In  those
    circumstances or even if, although she does not concede the point,  the
    judge's reasoning is poor, in substance even with better reasoning  the
    outcome would be not materially different.  Accordingly  such  mistakes
    as the judge may have made do not disclose an error of law which  means
    that the original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

8.   In considering this matter I, with some diffidence, bear  in  mind  the
    advice and guidance given in R Iran [2005] EWCA Civ 982  and  E  and  R
    [2004] qb 1044 ca and Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11,  do  not  lightly
    interfere with the decision.  However it does seem to me  that  parties
    to appeals are entitled to sufficient  and  adequate  reasoning.   With
    considerable reluctance, but with a sense of inevitability, I am driven
    to the conclusion that the reasons do fall short of that  required  and
    that the original Tribunal decision cannot stand.

9.    The anonymity order is continued.

10.   The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter should be  re-made
    in the First Tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 24 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



