
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00058/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 1 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              Ayan Mohamed Haji
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rana of Counsel instructed by Aden & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national  of  Somalia  born  on  22  March  1988  in
    Mogadishu.

 2. Following a  determination  promulgated  on  17  September  2007  under
    reference OA/52470/2006 she was granted a residence card entitling  her
    to enter as the wife of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the
    United Kingdom.  She arrived in about December  2007.   In  about  June
    2012 she  and  her  husband  separated.   Her  claim  for  a  permanent
    residence card was refused by the Respondent  and  her  appeal  against
    that  refusal  was  dismissed  by  a  determination  promulgated  on  3
    September 2014 under reference IA/23579/2014.

 3. Subsequently  on  17  September  2014  she  applied  for  international
    surrogate protection because she feared to return to Somalia on account
    of being a lone female member of a minority clan.  On 12 December  2014
    the Respondent refused her claim and her appeal  against  that  refusal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Greasley  who,  by  a
    decision promulgated on 23 April 2015, dismissed her appeal.

 4. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was a member of the  Ashraf  clan
    but made an adverse credibility finding against her and  in  particular
    rejected her claim that she had no family members in Somalia.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which on 18 May 2015 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Astle granted on the basis that it was arguable
    the Judge had failed adequately to  address  the  part  of  the  expert
    report by Professor Aguilar (the expert report) which the Appellant had
    submitted dealing with the safety of minority clan women in  Mogadishu,
    even if they had family members there, and also  failed  adequately  to
    consider a report from the Minority Rights Group International (UK)  of
    30 January 2015 entitled "No One Cries for Them: The Predicament Facing
    Somalia's Minority Women" (the MRG report).

 6. The grounds for appeal challenge the Judge's treatment  of  the  expert
    report, asserting the Judge had accepted substantial elements of it but
    had failed to address the essential part relating to  the  position  of
    women on return to Mogadishu.  They  also  asserted  that  he  had  not
    addressed  the  submissions  made  on  the  Appellant's  minority  clan
    membership as well as on the expert report and the MRG report.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions for the Appellant

 7. For the Appellant, Mr Rana relied on the grounds for appeal in  support
    of the Appellant's permission application.  The Judge had accepted  the
    Appellant was a minority clan member.  He submitted that this was based
    on the expert report's finding at paragraph 33.  This may be so but  we
    would add there was additional evidence before the Judge to support his
    acceptance of her claim to be Ashraf, particularly the fact  that  that
    finding had already been made in the 2007 determination leading to  the
    grant of a residence card.

 8. He continued that, at paragraphs 50 and 51 of his decision,  the  Judge
    had failed to deal expressly with the risk to minority  clan  women  on
    return to Somalia.  He noted the determination in MOJ & Others  (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC)  had  not  expressly
    dealt with the position of women.  He noted that all  three  Appellants
    were male.

 9. Mr Rana argued that the  Judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    objective evidence which was before him and in particular parts of  the
    MRG report and the Respondent's Country Information and Guidance of  19
    March 2015 on south and central Somalia - Majority Clans  and  Minority
    Groups (the COIR).  We noted that additionally the Appellant had  filed
    a report of 3 February 2015 from  the  same  source  on  women  fearing
    gender-based harm/violence.

10. He referred firstly to the MRG report.  Its central passages  had  been
    highlighted in the copy filed for  the  Appellant.   In  particular  he
    referred to pages 16 and 26 of the bundle which state:-

         'Although the civil war in Somalia has all  but  ended,  minorities
         continue to be considered the weakest in Somali society.   Minority
         women ... face multiple forms of discrimination in Somalia, and are
         uniquely vulnerable to rights violations on the basis of both their
         gender and minority identity.  While majority clan women by  virtue
         of their position in the traditional clan structure have some level
         of protection and access to basic services and other  institutional
         processes, particularly those from wealthy families or with  strong
         family connections, minority women lack these  protections  and  so
         suffer a range of more pronounced forms  of  social,  cultural  and
         economic discrimination.

         ... minority  women  ...  face  a  variety  of  threats,  including
         physical violence, sexual abuse, theft  and  forced  labour.   Many
         feel especially vulnerable in the absence of clan protection,  lack
         of faith in official  institutions  such  as  the  police  and  the
         broader context of insecurity in many parts  of  southern  Somalia,
         particularly its informal settlements and IDP camps.'

    Further, he referred to a passage on page 29 noting that minority women
    because of distinct  physical  features,  traditional  occupations  and
    related social attitudes, experience hate speech and social harassment.

11. Mr Rana then referred to the COIR.  He relied on passages at pages  41,
    56 and 59 in the Appellant's bundle which were also highlighted.  These
    state:-

         'Members of minority groups in south and central Somalia are  at  a
         particular disadvantage in comparison to members  of  the  majority
         clans.  They usually lack the support network provided  to  members
         of the majority clans and as a result  are  subject  to  political,
         social, economic and judicial discrimination, and have  experienced
         human rights abuses including harassment with  violence,  killings,
         torture, rape, kidnapping for  ransom,  and  looting  of  land  and
         property, which in some circumstances may  amount  to  persecution.
         ... Crimes against women, especially amongst  women  from  minority
         groups, are often perpetrated with impunity ...  This  particularly
         applies to single women or a woman who is head of a  household  who
         may also be liable to gender-based violence and trafficking.

         Minority groups in Somalia are marginalised and  face  a  difficult
         humanitarian situation, according to sources.  The minority  groups
         lie  outside  the  clan  system,  and  the  clan  structures   pose
         particular difficulties  for  them.   ...  particularly  vulnerable
         minorities ... include ... Ashraf ...'

    Mr Rana submitted that failure to  address  these  points  specifically
    amounted to a material error of law.

12.  He then turned to the expert report and submitted that  the  Judge  had
    failed adequately to address the relevant parts.  He noted  the  expert
    report at para.35 referred to the MRG report and at para.36  summarised
    the key findings by quoting in full the paragraph headed "Key findings"
    from the MRG report.  At para.37 the expert report stated:-

         'The key findings of this report suggest that the client  would  be
         at risk of violence,  marginalisation  and  rape,  because  of  her
         status as a woman belonging to a minority clan.'

    At para.47 the expert report noted that  para.56  of  the  Respondent's
    reasons letter did not recognise the danger a  woman  from  a  minority
    clan faces on return to Mogadishu if she did not have family there.  He
    concluded the decision contained material errors of law and  should  be
    set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

13. Mr Bramble noted the Appellant's argument had focused on the  objective
    evidence and there had been no challenge to the  Judge's  finding  that
    the Appellant had family in Mogadishu  made  at  paragraph  50  of  his
    decision.  He had taken into account the expert report and the guidance
    in MOJ & Others.

14. Turning to the expert report he noted it set out the  key  findings  of
    the MRG report, the introduction to  which  he  noted  started  with  a
    quotation from a Benadiri woman  in  Puntland  stating  that  the  most
    dangerous place is in an IDP camp  because  that  is  where  most  rape
    happened.  Puntland was different  from  Somalia  and  Mogadishu.   The
    areas of risk to a woman on return to Mogadishu were in the  IDP  camps
    but the Judge had found the Appellant would not be returned as  a  lone
    woman and would not go to any  IDP  camp  because  she  had  family  in
    Somalia.

15. Turning to page 46 of the expert report addressing the  instruction  to
    the expert to comment on the  MRG  report,  Mr  Bramble  submitted  the
    comments added nothing.  The conclusions at paragraph 48  were  on  the
    express assumption that the risk would be to the Appellant if  she  did
    not have family in Mogadishu and the conclusion that she  would  be  at
    risk contained in the middle of the paragraph needed to  be  viewed  in
    that context.

16. The MRG report focused on minority clan  women  but  MOJ  &  Others,  a
    recent country guidance case, noted the diminution of the importance of
    clan membership and the shift in emphasis from the  clan  as  providing
    protection to the clan as a social network which could provide support.
     The MRG report had to be considered in the context of  MOJ  &  Others.
    The Upper Tribunal in MOJ & Others had found that there were  different
    dynamics in play from those described  in  the  MRG  report  which  was
    subsequently published.

17. The main area of risk identified in the MRG report was in the IDP camps
    but the Appellant would not be going there because she had  been  found
    to have family in Somalia.  The extract from the MRG report at page  56
    of the Appellant's bundle referred to minority  groups  generally,  not
    just women, and that the risks were predominantly in the IDP camps.  At
    paragraph 50 of his decision the Judge had  taken  this  into  account,
    referring to a passage in the MRG report which also  was  addressed  in
    the expert report.  There had been no material error  of  law  and  the
    decision should stand.

Further Submissions for the Appellant

18. Mr Rana confirmed that the Judge's findings on the presence  of  family
    of the Appellant in Somalia were not challenged.   The  Judge  had  not
    adequately addressed the MRG report and the COIR which  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.

Findings and Consideration

19. The introduction to the MRG reports notes that  there  is  little  data
    available about the position of minority women.  It refers to  them  as
    being at greater risk of sexual assault and other  rights  abuses  than
    members of majority clans who have more social resources.  It  goes  on
    to note that they face multiple forms of discrimination on  account  of
    their gender and minority identity: see  page  11  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  Elsewhere the report refers to forms of social,  cultural  and
    economic discrimination.  The conclusion notes that:-

         'Empowering minority women to play an  equitable  role  in  Somalia
         will  involve  a  complex   and   long-term   process   of   social
         transformation.  In the immediate  term,  protection  concerns  for
         minority  women,  particularly  sexual  and  gender-based  violence
         perpetrated by militias, armed forces and members of majority clans
         as well as men from their communities, must be urgently prioritized
         to ensure their safety and dignity.  ...'

20. Although the expert report was intended expressly to  address  risk  on
    return as a female minority clan member, it states at para.34:-

         'In my opinion she would be at risk of violence from majority clans
         because she belongs to a minority clan and because she is  a  woman
         who belongs to a minority clan.  The protection for minority  clans
         does not come from their families but from majority  clans  or  the
         state.  Years of violence have proven that neither  the  state  nor
         the majority clans have protected members of the Ashraf clan within
         Mogadishu.  The client would have no protection within Mogadishu.'

    The expert report does not address the findings of MOJ & Others or give
    any sources for the basis for that opinion and  makes  no  material  or
    substantive comment on the MRG report at paras.34-37.  At  para.38  the
    expert report simply asserts that the situation after MOJ & Others  has
    not changed substantially and women are at a high risk of violence  and
    rape.  There is no material engagement with MOJ & Others.

21. Para.39 of the expert report is instructive because it  relies  on  the
    quotation from a Benadiri woman in Puntland, already referred  to,  and
    concludes:-

         'It is plausible to suggest that the  objective  evidence  suggests
         that a woman  from  a  minority  clan  is  not  safe  in  Mogadishu
         regardless of having family members.  The report [the  MRG  report]
         ... suggests  that  minority  clan  women  do  not  have  effective
         protection available for them.'

22. The country guidance in MOJ & Others was expressed  in  gender  neutral
    terms.  In R and Others (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ.982 the Court  of
    Appeal considered without  disapproval  Practice  Statements  18.2-18.4
    which now appear in identical  or  near  identical  terms  as  Practice
    Statement 12.  The Judge was required to follow  MOJ  &  Others  unless
    there were good reasons not to.  There was no evidence  the  Judge  was
    given good reasons for departing from MOJ & Others and indeed before us
    such an argument was not strongly urged.

23. The Judge engaged with the expert report and with the  MRG  report,  if
    only because it was addressed in the expert report.  He also looked  at
    other background evidence referred to at para.37 of his  decision.   We
    conclude that his consideration of the evidence was  adequate  and  the
    grounds for appeal in essence amount to disagreement with him.

24. We find the First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

25. There was no request for an anonymity order and having heard the appeal
    we consider one is not required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a material error of  law
such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.  The effect is:-

    The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

