

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00347/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Laganside Courts                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22nd August 2013                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                           muse mohammoud hussein

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stuart McTaggart, instructed by Crawford & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Andrew Mullen of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is said to have arrived in Belfast on 11th November  last
    year, the day after leaving Somalia.  He applied for  asylum,  but  the
    application was refused in a letter dated 19th December  2012,  and  on
    the same day a decision was taken to remove Mr Hussein  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  An appeal against that decision came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 14th February 2013, and was dismissed by Judge  Turkington,
    who was "unable to accept any part of the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    insofar as it relates to his claimed persecution by Al Shabaab and  his
    family relations."  He had "sought to build an asylum claim around that
    of a person who has been granted asylum", i.e. a  Somali  man  who  was
    said to be the appellant's brother ~ a relationship not accepted by the
    respondent.  The judge was not in a  position  to  make  a  finding  on
    whether he was or not, but "the inconsistencies in  the  evidence,  the
    lies and the implausibilities all add up in their cumulative effect  to
    a position where I do not believe a word this Appellant says."

2.    Judge Turkington was constrained, however, to accept ~ because it  had
    been accepted by the respondent ~ that the appellant  hailed  from  the
    village of Ceel Ahmed in the Lower Shabelle region of Somalia, and that
    he belonged to the Ashraf minority.  The judge  observed  that  in  his
    interview, Mr Hussein had stated that, prior to  the  presence  of  the
    Union of Islamic Courts and later Al  Shabaab,  the  village  had  been
    controlled by Hawiye war lords.  But he had not personally  encountered
    any problems under Hawiye rule.  It was fear of  Al  Shabaab  that  had
    caused him to flee Somalia,  after  he  had  been  pressed  into  their
    service and had escaped from their clutches.  He had not, commented the
    judge, "sought to make the case that he is at risk  by  virtue  of  his
    Ashraf ethnicity", and no evidence had been put  before  him  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on that account if he returned to Somalia.

3.   What about the risk from Al Shabaab in  his  home  area?   The  country
    background material indicated  to  Judge  Turkington  that  AMISOM  and
    Somali government troops, having expelled Al  Shabaab  from  Mogadishu,
    had gone  on  to  retake  the  urban  centres  of  Merka  and  Kismayo.
    According to the appellant, Ceel Ahmed is near Golweyn, which  in  turn
    is near Merka, and Judge Turkington surmised that Al  Shabaab  were  no
    longer well enough established in the Lower  Shabelle  to  be  able  to
    round up young men to fight for them,  which  was  what  the  appellant
    claimed to fear.

4.   Although Judge Turkington cited AMM [2011] UKUT  445  (IAC),  this  was
    not  in  relation  to  a  possible  'internal  flight  alternative'  to
    Mogadishu.  Rather, it was to point up the lack of a real risk  to  the
    appellant because of his Ashraf ethnicity.  According to paragraph  370
    of the country guidance, there was no evidence  before  the  panel  "of
    anything to suggest that, certainly in comparison with the time  before
    the rise of the Union of Islamic Courts, a returnee  to  Mogadishu,  of
    whatever clan, would face a real risk of persecution by reason  of  his
    or her clan.  The Gundel reports indicated that a community such as the
    Reer Hamar was no longer the subject of targeted violence, albeit  that
    they might still be the subject of discrimination."   Judge  Turkington
    found that the appellant could be safely  returned  to  Mogadishu,  but
    this would just be a  staging  post  on  his  way  back  to  the  Lower
    Shabelle, and there was no evidence that he would suffer  serious  harm
    en route to his home town.

5.   The robust negative credibility findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    have not been challenged, but leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
    sought and granted on three grounds of a general nature, not  dependent
    on the truth of the appellant's account.  First, the  area  from  which
    the appellant hailed was said still to  be  under  the  control  of  Al
    Shabaab, and hence  not  a  safe  place  for  the  appellant  to  live.
    Secondly, the finding in AMM that there was a real risk of  an  Article
    15(c) breach for the generality of Somalis returning to  Mogadishu  had
    not been addressed.  Thirdly, as an Ashraf there was nowhere in Somalia
    to which the appellant could return in safety.

6.   Although  a  'Rule  24  Response'  from  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
    indicated that the respondent did not oppose the application for  leave
    to appeal, provided the adverse credibility  findings  were  preserved,
    the Upper Tribunal is not bound by such  a  concession,  and  when  the
    appeal came before me I intimated to the representatives  that  it  was
    still to be established whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
    material error  of  law.   Mr  McTaggart  tried  most  persuasively  to
    demonstrate that this was indeed the case, and was ably rebutted by  Mr
    Mullen.  At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  determination,  and
    having given the matter much thought I can now set out  my  reasons  in
    fairly short compass.

7.   While AMISOM and Federal Government troops  have  certainly  pushed  Al
    Shabaab out of Mogadishu, Afgoye, Marka and Kismayo,  Judge  Turkington
    was wrong to suppose that "Al Shaabab have been driven out of the lower
    Shabelle."  Mr McTaggart drew my attention to some maps at the rear  of
    the Appellant's Bundle showing that, as of October 2012 and again as of
    December, much of the Lower Shabelle was still under the control of  Al
    Shabaab.  This is confirmed by the Country of Origin Information Report
    on Somalia, dated 5th August 2013 and handed up  by  Mr  Mullen.   This
    states at 1.34 that "areas of the southern part of Lower  Shabelle  are
    controlled by al-Shabaab", which still uses the seaport of  Brava,  and
    that "al-Shabaab controls approximately 50% of the rural areas  in  the
    southern part of Lower Shabelle."  Lying  near  Marka,  Ceel  Ahmed  is
    actually in the northern part of Lower Shabelle.  So  while  the  judge
    was wrong to suppose that Al Shabaab have  been  driven  out  of  Lower
    Shabelle altogether, they may no longer be in control of Ceel Ahmed.

8.   But even if they are, it must be remembered that not one word  of  what
    the appellant says happened to him in Ceel  Ahmed  has  been  believed.
    Hence, it can be inferred that he has never been forcibly recruited  by
    Al Shabaab in the past.  Nothing in  the  country  background  material
    before the First-tier Tribunal and now before me shows that Al  Shabaab
    are forcibly recruiting unwilling helpers in the Lower Shabelle.   What
    this material does show, as  Mr  McTaggart  pointed  out,  is  that  Al
    Shabaab are using hit-and -run tactics against targets in the areas now
    controlled by government forces.   But  such  tactics  require  trained
    guerrillas, not civilians pressed unwillingly into service.   And  such
    tactics do not amount to a generalised risk to civilians in  the  areas
    which are not yet controlled by government forces.   So  it  cannot  be
    said that Judge Turkington erred in law by finding that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk from Al Shabaab in his home area.

9.   While the head note to AMM says that "there remains in general  a  real
    risk of Article 15(c) harm for  the  majority  of  those  returning  to
    [Mogadishu] after a significant period of  time  abroad",  the  country
    guidance panel had in mind people who were going to stay in  or  around
    Mogadishu, rather than just passing through on  their  way  to  another
    part of Somalia.  Besides, the appellant had not  spent  a  significant
    period of time abroad when he appeared before the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    He had only been away from Somalia for  four  months.   The  ground  of
    appeal based upon the Qualification Directive therefore falls way.

10.  The third ground relies upon the country guidance in  NM  [2005]  UKAIT
    76 for the proposition that a member of the Ashraf minority will be  at
    risk of persecution on return  to  Somalia.   Practice  Direction  12.2
    requires country  guidance  to  be  treated  as  authoritative  in  any
    subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal  "depends  upon  the  same  or
    similar evidence."  The evidence  from  the  appellant  here  was  very
    different from that before the AIT in NM.  When the  panel  in  NM  was
    taking evidence early in the year 2005, the problems in Somalia  mostly
    stemmed from the struggles between clan-based warlords,  with  minority
    groups  falling  prey  to   the   depredations   of   armed   militias.
    Subsequently,  all  that  changed.   Tired  of  this  internecine  clan
    rivalry, the population largely welcomed the Union of  Islamic  Courts,
    despite their imposition of Sharia law.   Their  dominance  was  short-
    lived, thanks to military intervention  by  Ethiopia,  but  Al  Shabaab
    emerged to carry on a similar programme.  Now, however, the  forces  of
    the legitimate government, with the support of the AMISOM  contingents,
    have established government control over a great part of Somalia.  Even
    when the Hawiye war lords  were  in  control  of  his  home  area,  the
    appellant says that he had no problems from them.  Country guidance  is
    not a straight-jacket, and Judge Turkington  was  clearly  entitled  to
    find, on the evidence before him, that there would be no  risk  to  the
    appellant, either in his home area or in Mogadishu, because he belonged
    to the Ashraf folk.



     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          6th September 2013



