
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/00388/2014
                                                               Aa/00385/2014
                                                               Aa/00403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2015                      |On 20th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MUHAMMAD ZAHID (first respondent)
                      NAZNEEN ZAHID (second respondent)
                   MUHAMMAD UMER ZAHID (third respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Afzal of Legal Acumen Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal P J Holmes (the Judge) promulgated following a hearing on
    22nd May 2014.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of Pakistan born 22nd September  1954,  20th
    August 1963, and 28th January 1982 respectively.  The first and  second
    Claimants are married, and are the parents of the third Claimant.

 4. The first and second Claimants entered the United Kingdom as  visitors,
    with the third Claimant  entering  as  a  student.   They  subsequently
    claimed asylum.  The claims were based upon  their  actual  or  imputed
    political opinion, as the first Claimant was a journalist  in  Pakistan
    who had written articles criticising the Taliban,  and  also  organised
    anti-Taliban demonstrations.

 5. The applications were refused and directions given  for  their  removal
    from the United Kingdom.  The Respondent did not accept the credibility
    of the claims made by the Claimants.

 6. The Claimants appealed, and their appeals were heard  together  by  the
    Judge on 22nd May 2014.  The judge found the Claimants to  be  credible
    in relation to the core of  their  account  and  allowed  the  appeals,
    concluding that the Claimants were entitled to asylum,  and  to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom would breach Articles 2 and 3 of the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and the appeal came before me on 9th March 2015.   The  basis
    of the appeal was that the judge had failed to  make  any  findings  in
    relation to internal relocation.  I found the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be, in the main, comprehensive, well reasoned  and  it
    was evident that it had been prepared with care.  However I found  that
    the judge had failed to make specific findings on the issue of internal
    relocation, which had been raised  as  an  issue  in  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal letters.  The judge had not considered whether  the
    Claimants would be at risk if they relocated to the south of  Pakistan,
    and lived for example in a large city such as  Karachi.   I  found  the
    error to be material and therefore set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, but noted that  there  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    credibility findings, nor the findings  of  fact,  and  those  findings
    therefore stood.

 8. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission by Judge McGeachy, and my reasons for finding  an  error  of
    law are contained in my decision dated 10th March  2015.   The  hearing
    was adjourned as the Presenting Officer did not have a complete copy of
    the Claimants' bundle.  It was agreed at  the  hearing  and  directions
    were given,  that  the  adjourned  hearing  would  proceed  by  way  of
    submissions,  and  as  no  further  evidence  was  to  be  called,   no
    interpreter would be required.

Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

 9. I ascertained that I had all the documentation upon which  the  parties
    intended to rely.  I had the Claimants'  bundle  comprising  588  pages
    that had been before the First-tier Tribunal.  I had  also  received  a
    further bundle submitted on  behalf  of  the  Claimants  containing  76
    pages.  Mr Mills had also received this bundle.

10. Prior to the commencement of the  hearing  I  received  the  Claimants'
    skeleton argument with case law attached.  Although directions had been
    made at the error of law hearing on 9th March 2015 that  the  adjourned
    hearing was to be by way of submissions only, and any further documents
    were to be served by 30th March 2015, I observed  that  the  Claimants'
    representative had served further  witness  statements  from  both  the
    first and third Claimants, which had been received by the  Tribunal  as
    late as 6th  May  2015.   There  was  an  application  made  for  these
    statements to be admitted in evidence, on the  understanding  that  the
    Secretary of State would able to cross-examine  the  Claimants  on  the
    contents of those statements.  The application neglected to explain how
    such evidence would be  given  as  the  Claimants  required  a  Punjabi
    interpreter, and no interpreter had been arranged, on the understanding
    that the adjourned hearing would be by way of submissions only.

11. Mr Mills did not however object to  the  statements  being  introduced,
    commenting that in his view they expressed opinion only, and  he  would
    not seek to cross-examine.  On that basis  I  admitted  the  statements
    into evidence indicating that I would  attach  what  weight  I  thought
    appropriate to them.

12. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

13. Mr Mills confirmed that the findings of fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not been challenged, and the  only  issue  to  be  decided
    related to internal relocation.  He relied upon paragraphs 84-94 of the
    Secretary of State's reasons for refusal letter dated 3rd January 2014,
    in relation to the  first  Claimant,  and  paragraphs  105-112  of  the
    Secretary of State's letter dated 6th January 2014 in relation  to  the
    third Claimant.  There was no separate refusal letter  for  the  second
    Claimant.  These paragraphs relate to the issue of internal relocation,
    and it was suggested that there  was  a  reasonable  relocation  option
    available to the Claimants in Karachi.  Therefore while it was accepted
    by Mr Mills that the Claimants would be at risk in their home  area  of
    Lahore, there would be no such risk in Karachi.

14. Mr Mills submitted that the Claimants would  not  have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution from the Taliban  in  Karachi,  as  the  background
    evidence did not indicate that the Taliban had the  same  influence  in
    Karachi as they were able to exercise in a city such as Lahore.

The Claimants' Submissions

15. Ms Afzal relied upon her skeleton argument dated 8th May 2015.   I  was
    asked to note that it was accepted that the Claimants had been  subject
    to persecution by the Taliban because the first Claimant had written in
    excess of 200 articles over a ten year period which identified  him  as
    an opponent of the Taliban.  It was also accepted the first  Claimant's
    younger son may have been followed home from school by the Taliban, and
    that a gun was pointed at the first Claimant and his younger  son  when
    they were on a motorbike.  In addition  the  first  Claimant  had  been
    assaulted by the Taliban at a protest meeting and the family  bodyguard
    had been shot dead in September 2010, and a family friend had been shot
    on 4th January 2011.

16. Ms Afzal pointed out that the background evidence indicated  that  FIRs
    that had been issued in Pakistan were not shared between the  different
    police districts, and therefore the FIRs that had been  issued  by  the
    Claimants in relation to the past  attacks  upon  them,  would  not  be
    available if they moved to a different area.

17. Ms Afzal referred me to the background information which is set out  in
    the skeleton argument, and submitted that this demonstrated that  there
    would be no reasonable option of internal relocation for the  Claimants
    in Karachi and therefore they were entitled to a grant of asylum.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Findings and Conclusions

19. In considering these linked appeals,  I  take  into  account  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Claimants, and the standard of proof  can  be
    described as a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  which  is  a  lower
    standard  than  the  balance  of  probability.   I  must  consider  the
    circumstances as at the date of hearing.

20. I summarise below the preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

21. The first Claimant was a journalist in Pakistan and wrote approximately
    200 articles over ten years, expressing opposition to the Taliban.

22. The first Claimant wrote for a number of newspapers, and in  particular
    the Daily Jurat.  His household began to receive threatening  telephone
    calls which may have been from the Taliban.

23. The first and second Claimants' youngest son was taken  out  of  school
    for his own safety as in 2008 it was discovered that unknown people had
    been following him.  In March 2008 the  first  Claimant  was  with  his
    younger son on a motorcycle  when  they  were  followed  by  people  on
    another motorcycle one of whom pointed a pistol at them.

24. The first Claimant's account of being assaulted at protest meeting that
    he organised on 2nd June 2008 was not rejected.

25. A security guard hired by the family were shot and killed  in  December
    2010 while travelling in a car with the third Claimant  and  the  third
    Claimant's wife.

26. At a protest meeting  on  4th  January  2011  organised  by  the  first
    Claimant, a friend of the third Claimant,  who  was  with  him  at  the
    meeting, was shot and wounded.

27. The incidents were reported to the police and FIRs  were  issued  which
    were produced before the First-tier Tribunal, but Judge Holmes did  not
    find the documents reliable, and based his conclusions on  the  written
    and oral evidence of the three Claimants and their family  members  who
    attended the appeal hearing.

28. Judge Holmes found that  the  general  credibility  of  the  Claimants'
    accounts remained intact, and the Claimants who  gave  evidence  before
    him were coherent and plausible and he was satisfied  to  the  required
    standard that they had been the  victims  of  persecution  in  Pakistan
    perpetrated by the Taliban on  account  of  the  Claimants'  actual  or
    imputed political opinion.

29. Judge Holmes considered that the evidence did  not  indicate  that  the
    Pakistani police had shown a willingness and an ability to protect  the
    Claimants, and that all that the police had done was issue  FIRs.   The
    judge was satisfied that the police had failed to offer  the  Claimants
    adequacy of protection as set out in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37.

30. Therefore the finding that the Claimants would be at risk in their home
    area of Lahore stands, and I must  consider  the  contention  that  the
    Claimants would not be at risk if they moved to Karachi in the south of
    Pakistan.  I have considered all of the background material to which  I
    have been referred.  The Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  (COI
    Pakistan 2010) indicates  at  paragraph  8.01  that  foreign  terrorist
    organisations operated and carried out attacks  in  Pakistan,  and  the
    attacks targeted the country's major urban centres  including  Karachi.
    This information is however of some age, being taken  from  the  United
    States Department of State Report on Terrorism 2009.

31. At paragraph 8.03 there is reference to the Human Rights Commission  of
    Pakistan Report of 2009 which refers to suicide attacks, and refers  to
    an attack on an Ashura procession in Karachi on December 28th 2009.   I
    attach some weight to these articles, although I take into account that
    the articles are of some age, which lessens the weight to be  attached.
    At page 559 of the Claimants' bundle, paragraph 8.09 of  the  COI  2013
    refers to the number of  target  killings  in  Karachi  being  a  stark
    increase when compared to the previous  year,  which  itself  was  very
    high.  I attach some weight to the comment that this is relevant to the
    state's inability to provide protection to its citizens.  There is also
    reference in this paragraph to "different  criminal  elements  targeted
    rival groups with impunity in Karachi."  This may have  some  relevance
    in considering whether the Claimants would be safe in Karachi,  but  is
    not of direct relevance, as this  relates  to  rival  criminal  groups,
    which is not the scenario that I am considering in these appeals.

32. In the same report at page 555 of the bundle,  there  is  reference  in
    paragraph 8.14 to the police arresting Karachi  gang  members  and  TTP
    (Pakistan  Taliban)  commanders  who  provided  logistical  support  to
    militants in the tribal areas.  I accept that this would indicate  that
    the Taliban may have members or supporters in Karachi.

33. Contained within the Claimants' supplementary bundle is a  Home  Office
    document entitled "Country Information Guidance - Pakistan; Fear of the
    Taliban and Other Militant Groups."  At paragraph 1.3.2 risk  from  the
    Taliban and other militants groups is described as being highest in the
    area formerly known as North-West  Frontier  Province,  semi-autonomous
    Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) that have a  strong  Taliban
    presence, and Baluchistan, but the comment is made that  the  Pakistani
    Taliban and other militant groups do  however  have  reach  outside  of
    those areas.

34. At paragraph 2.2.2, the report confirms that the TTP has declared Jihad
    against the Pakistan State, seeks to control territory, enforces Sharia
    law, and fights NATO forces in  Afghanistan.   There  are  no  reliable
    estimates on the size of the TTP.

35. At paragraph 2.2.5 there is reference  to  the  Pakistan  Armed  Forces
    beginning a major air offensive on suspected militant hideouts in north
    Warziristan on 15th June 2014, in response  to  an  attack  on  Karachi
    Airport the previous week which killed 38 people.  At paragraph  2.2.6,
    it is recorded that 850 militants with suspected links to  the  Taliban
    were arrested in 2012, but successful prosecutions of those responsible
    for politically  motivated  or  sectarian  attacks  are  rare,  usually
    because of a lack of evidence or poor investigative methods.

36. In paragraph 2.3.1 of the same report, it is recorded  that  there  has
    been a sharp rise in sectarian violence since 2010, mostly concentrated
    in Quetta, Kurram, parts of Karachi and Gilgit Baltistan.

37. Paragraph 2.4 relates  to  politically  motivated  violence,  which  is
    described as being most prevalent in Karachi  between  members  of  the
    Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), the Awami  National  Party  (ANP),  the
    Pakistan Peoples  Party  (PPP),  and  Sindhi  Nationalist  Party.   The
    Taliban has also claimed responsibility for attacks against MQM and ANP
    supporters, which  again  indicates  that  the  Taliban  do  have  some
    influence in Karachi.

38. There is reference in paragraph 2.4.3 to Afghan and  Pakistani  Taliban
    groups  consolidating  in  Karachi,  engaging  in  criminal   activity,
    recruiting and fund raising, and in the case of the Pakistani  Taliban,
    organising attacks on security personnel  and  political  or  sectarian
    rivals.

39. Commencing at page 609 of the Claimants' bundle is a Home Office Report
    entitled  Country  Information  and   Guidance   Pakistan;   Background
    Information, Including Actors of Protection  and  Internal  Relocation.
    Paragraph 2.4.9  confirms  that  FIRs  are  not  systematically  shared
    between different police forces in Pakistan and there  is  no  national
    tracking system or data base.  This supports  the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the Claimants, that the  FIRs  issued  in  Lahore  would  not
    automatically be accessible to the police in Karachi.

40. Paragraphs 2.7.9, to 2.7.18  comment  upon  the  effectiveness  of  the
    police in Pakistan which  varied  greatly  by  district,  ranging  from
    reasonably good to ineffective.  Paragraph 2.7.10 refers to the  police
    force in Pakistan being under resourced, poorly  trained,  badly  paid,
    low in moral, and viewed with  suspicion  by  the  courts  and  society
    because of its poor human rights record.

41. Paragraph 2.7.17 refers to criminal gangs and Jihadi networks  wreaking
    havoc in Pakistan's big cities, which must  include  Karachi,  although
    this paragraph does not specifically refer  to  that  city,  commenting
    that Peshawar has born the brunt of militant violence.

42. It has been found that  the  Claimants  have  suffered  persecution  in
    Pakistan because of the  activities  of  the  first  Claimant.   If  he
    returned to Pakistan, and lived in Karachi, he could not be expected to
    stop writing articles in  opposition  to  the  Taliban,  or  organising
    opposition meetings, because of a  fear  of  the  Taliban.   The  Upper
    Tribunal in AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31
    (IAC) found that generally there was a systematic sufficiency of  state
    protection in Pakistan, but that a Claimant  may  still  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution if authorities know or  ought  to  know  of
    circumstances particular to his/her case giving rise to the  fear,  but
    are unlikely to  provide  the  additional  protection,  the  particular
    circumstances  reasonably  required.    In   considering   whether   an
    individual's  circumstances  give  rise  to  a  need   for   additional
    protection, particular account must be taken of past persecution so  as
    to ensure the question posed is  whether  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution (and past lack of sufficient protection)
    will not be repeated.

43. It is  accepted  that  the  Claimants  have  not  had  an  adequacy  of
    protection in the past from the police  in  Lahore.   Having  carefully
    considered the background evidence, the relevant parts of which I  have
    referred to above, I conclude that it cannot be said that  the  Taliban
    have no influence in Karachi.  The evidence indicates  that  while  the
    security situation may not be as severe in Karachi, as  it  is  in  the
    north of Pakistan, there have still been Taliban  attacks  in  Karachi.
    The evidence indicates that the Taliban do  have  a  presence  in  that
    city.

44. I therefore conclude that if the first Claimant  returned  to  Karachi,
    and commenced writing articles opposing  the  Taliban,  and  organising
    meetings, this would attract the Taliban's attention, and I  find  that
    the Claimants,  and  their  family  members,  would  be  at  risk.   In
    conclusion, I do not find that there is a sufficiency of protection for
    the Claimants, on the facts of this particular case, and I do not  find
    that they have the option of internal relocation to Karachi.

45. The Claimants are therefore entitled to a grant of asylum by reason  of
    their actual or imputed political opinion in opposition to the Taliban.



46. I do not find that the risk to the Claimants satisfies  the  very  high
    threshold of Article 2, but in view  of  my  findings  in  relation  to
    asylum, there is a real risk of treatment that would breach  Article  3
    of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.  Therefore the  appeal
    is also allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.

The Claimants are not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeals on human rights grounds in relation to Article 3.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request for anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.



Signed   Date 12th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It appears that no fee was paid or is payable and therefore there is no  fee
award.



Signed   Date 12th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
