
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00317/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 30th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                               Mr murat uyran
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra Counsel instructed by Kinas solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter is Mr Uyran who is a citizen of Turkey.  I
    shall refer to the parties as the  "appellant"  and  the  "Respondent".
    This is an error of law  hearing   for consideration as to  whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in  the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Housego)("FtT"), promulgated  on 26.9.2016 in which the
    FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  refusal  of  his  human
    rights application under the rules and Article 8  outside of the rules.



Background

2.   The appellant is a  Turkish  national  who  is  married  to  a  British
    citizen wife and they have a British citizen child born  on  14.6.2014.
    He met his wife in Turkey when she was on holiday there. The  appellant
    entered the UK in March 2013 and made a claim for  asylum  in  December
    2013.  The appellant and his wife married on  18.12.2014.   The  asylum
    and human rights applications were refused by the  respondent  and  the
    appellant appealed. The appeal before  the  FtT  was  pursued  only  on
    Article 8  grounds  and  the  main  issue  to  be  considered  was  the
    application of section 117B(6) Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended) to a British citizen child as  a  "qualifying  child"
    and the reasonableness of the child leaving the UK.

3.   The FtT decision set out a wealth of caselaw at  [9-29]  relied  on  by
    the appellant.  The recent judgment of MA (Pakistan)  was  referred  to
    but not in any detail [33].  The facts were set out  [46-52]  and  were
    not disputed. The FtT found that British citizenship of the child  "has
    weight".  The FtT cited ZH (Tanzania) and quoted that  "it  was  not  a
    trump card" [53 & 55].  The FtT also made reference to  Trebhowan  [56]
    in terms that in the event that a child was a qualifying child and   it
    found that it was unreasonable for the child to leave the UK, there was
    no public interest in the appellant's removal.   The FtT considered the
    child in the context of his Turkish heritage [59], his  young  age  and
    that there was family support in Turkey.  It found no evidence  of  any
    potential harm coming to the child in  Turkey.  He  would  be  able  to
    follow  the  Alevi   faith   notwithstanding   that   there   is   some
    discrimination.  The FtT found his primary interests lay in being cared
    for by his parents [60].  The FtT concluded  that  given  "the  child's
    deep connection with Turkey it is not unreasonable for him to go  there
    and the point of general significance - that if anyone who  fathered  a
    child who had British nationality  could  stay  on  Article  8  grounds
    however he got here - is overwhelmingly against this appeal.  The  wife
    of the appellant does not have to go to Turkey, nor take her son if she
    does not wish to do so: that is her choice to make" [67].

Grounds of application for permission to appeal

4.   The three grounds are detailed and in essence  complain  that  the  FtT
    failed to adequately consider and /or place sufficient  weight  on  the
    best interests of the child and on British citizenship.  The FtT failed
    to identify the benefits and advantages of British citizenship such  as
    education, healthcare, social and cultural aspects and access to  state
    benefits.

Permission to appeal

5.   Permission was granted by UTJ Coker who stated  that  it  was  arguable
    that the FtT's assessment of the reasonableness of the British  citizen
    child having to leave the UK was legally flawed in terms of failing  to
    apply the relevant jurisprudence of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
    which  held that the approach in Treebhawon was wrong in law.



Error of law hearing

Submissions

6.   Ms Malhotra expanded on the detailed grounds emphasising  the  need  to
    give proper consideration to the rights of  a  British  citizen  child.
    Mr Avery submitted that  contrary  to  the  observations  made  by  the
    permitting Judge, the FtT had in fact referred  to  MA  (Pakistan)  and
    there was no indication  that  the  principles  therein  had  not  been
    properly applied.   There  was  evidence  before  the  FtT  to  justify
    reaching the decision having found close connections with Turkey.

Discussion and decision re error of law

7.   I found that there was an error in law in the decision made by the  FtT
    on the grounds as argued by the appellant.  The FtT failed to assess or
    evaluate the child's rights as a British citizen together with the fact
    that his mother was also a British citizen.  The FtT  failed  to  place
    sufficient weight on citizenship as a primary consideration.

8.   I set aside the decision.  I went on  to  hear  submissions  from  both
    representatives before remaking the decision.

Re making the decision Discussion and conclusion

9.   The brief submissions from Ms Malhotra were in essence the same as  the
    grounds. She submitted that significant weight must  be  given  to  the
    rights of a British citizen child rather than to focus on the  heritage
    of that child and his mother. She relied on MA (Pakistan) at  [44]  and
    the  respondent's  own  guidance   in   the   Immigration   directorate
    Instructions re family migration -  Appendix  FM  children  -  1.0  (b)
    11.2.3. which is set out below;

    "11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to
    leave the UK?


    Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take a
    decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child.
    This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.


    The decision maker must consult the following guidance when assessing
    cases involving criminality:


        . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)


        . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)


    Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
    primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary
    carer.


    Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:
    10-Year Routes August 2015


    In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
    child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship.


    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
    EU.


    The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


        . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398
          of the Immigration Rules;


        . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
          repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


    In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision maker
    must consider the impact on the child of any separation. If the
    decision maker is minded to refuse, in circumstances where separation
    would be the result, this decision should normally be discussed with a
    senior caseworker and, where appropriate, advice may be sought from the
    Office of the Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare
    of the child, in order to inform the decision.


    Where the applicant has made an application under the family and/or
    private life Immigration Rules, the application must:


       a)     be considered under those Immigration Rules first;


       b)     where the applicant falls for refusal, the decision maker
       must go on to consider whether there are any exceptional
       circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave to remain outside
       the Immigration Rules; and


       c)     where the applicant falls for refusal under the Immigration
       Rules and there are no exceptional circumstances, and where
       satisfactory evidence has been provided that all of the following
       criteria are met, the case must be referred to European Casework for
       review:


       i. the child is under the age of 18; and


      ii. the child is a British Citizen; and


     iii. the primary carer (care responsibilities and court orders are
          examples of evidence) of the child is a non-EEA national in the
          UK; and


      iv. there is no other parent/guardian/carer upon whom the child is
          dependent or who could care for the child if the primary carer
          left the UK to go to a country outside the EU.


    The originating decision maker should not issue a decision on the
    Immigration Rules application whilst awaiting this Zambrano decision.


    The originating decision maker must not grant leave outside the Rules
    because they believe the applicant has a Zambrano right, but must
    instead always refer the case to European Casework for them to review
    and determine the case under EU law if the criteria above are met."


10.  Mr Avery relied on the submissions made by the Home  Office  Presenting
    officer at the FtT, and as set out at paragraph 43 of the decision.   I
    reserved my decision.

Discussion and decision

11.  As a starting point I remind myself that the appellant has not met  the
    requirements of the Immigration rules as a parent or  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM. The application as a partner failed because the  appellant
    did not show that he came with in the  definition  of  partner.  As  to
    parent the appellant did not meet the requirements under E-ECPT  2.3(a)
    & (b) as he was not a sole carer. The provisions under paragraph 276ADE
    were not met for private life.  The  respondent  found  no  exceptional
    circumstances to justify consideration of  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules.

12.  I consider only Article 8 outside of the Rules. It is  clear  that  the
    FtT did make reference to the decision of MA (Pakistan) although  there
    was no detailed discussion or analysis of  the  principles  or  of  its
    impact on Treebhawon [53 & 56].  MA  (Paksitan)  held  that  the  wider
    public interests were applicable and that Treebhawon was wrong to focus
    on the restricted public interests of the child.

13.  Although not pleaded in the grounds, I am satisfied that the FtT  erred
    (although not materially) by consideration of the rules in so far as it
    applied EX1.  EX 1 is applicable only to situations involving a  single
    parent, which is not  the  case  here.   The  relevant  provisions  are
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended) in the context of  Article
    8  ECHR, outside of the Rules.  The  principles  and  approach  to  the
    assessment of  "reasonableness"  are  now  advanced  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    although the main focus is on children qualifying on the basis of seven
    years residence in the UK.  The second criteria for a qualifying  child
    is of course that the child is a British citizen. The Court  considered
    this briefly at [44 & 45] emphasising the significant weight to British
    citizenship and where section 117B(6)(ii)  is  established  this  is  a
    significant factor leaning in favour of leave to remain being  granted.
    This  approach  is  consistent  with  the  guidance  produced  by   the
    respondent and cited by Ms Malhotra.  In  other  words  there  must  be
    strong reasons for refusing leave.

14.  The FtT found that there was family life.  In the event of the  removal
    of the appellant there would be an interference with family life as the
    couple would not be able to live as a  family  with  their  child.  The
    interference  is  lawful.   In  considering  proportionality    it   is
    necessary to carry out a balancing exercise looking at factors  British
    citizenship  ZH (Tanzania), where the best interests of the  child  lie
    (Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]) UKSC 74 and  the  statutory  provisions  as  to
    public interest under section  117B(6)  2002  Act  (as  amended)  which
    states that where the child is a qualifying child as a British  citizen
    and it is not reasonable for the child to leave the  UK,  there  is  no
    public interest in removal of the parent.  In  considering  the  public
    interest the Tribunal can consider the  wider  public  interest  in  EV
    (Phillipines) and MA (Pakistan).  The fact of the child having  British
    citizenship is a significant starting point in favour  of  leave  being
    granted.  On the evidence I agree that the best interests of the  child
    lie in living in the UK with both parents. There  was  little  evidence
    before the FtT to show that there would be  any  major  change  to  the
    child's life were he to live in Turkey in terms of education,  religion
    and social and cultural ties. The FtT considered  that  in  Turkey  the
    child could face discrimination as a result of his faith  as  an  Alevi
    but found this not to be of significance [62].  The FtT  made  much  of
    the child's Turkish heritage and "deep" connection with  Turkey  rather
    than looking at his British citizenship and the fact  that  his  mother
    was born in the UK and had never lived in Turkey.  In reality the child
    himself has limited connection with Turkey; he has visited as  a  young
    baby for a holiday with his  mother  and  obviously  the  appellant  is
    Turkish and has strong family ties.  The child started  nursery  school
    in the UK, developed family relationships in the UK where both  parents
    have extended family members.  His mother works  part  time  and  as  a
    British citizen is entitled to receive state  benefits.  There  was  no
    evidence to show that there would be damage to the child  if  separated
    from his father.

15.  His father has a strong connection in Turkey where  he  has  lived  for
    most of his life and where he has family and support.  His  mother  has
    some connection with Turkey but she does not wish to live there and has
    never lived there. She has visited for holidays and gave no explanation
    for why she would not be able to move there in order  to  maintain  the
    family unity. Both parents  have  decided  not  to  apply  for  Turkish
    citizenship for their son because it imports onerous requirements  such
    as military service. The child would not face any level of harm  living
    in Turkey. There would be no major issue with language as  both  parent
    speak Turkish/Kurdish and the child can easily learn  a  new  language.
    There  were  no  factors  of  significance  other  than   his   British
    citizenship that led me to conclude that his interests lie in remaining
    in the UK with both parents to care for him. He would not be forced  to
    leave the UK as a result of the appellant's removal because his mother,
    who is his primary carer, can look after him in the UK.

16.  In considering reasonableness I consider  the  wider  public  interests
    and in this regard I accept the submissions made by the  respondent  as
    set out at [43] of the FtT decision.  I am  satisfied  that  the  wider
    public interest in immigration control outweighs the interests  of  the
    child and his rights as a British citizen. The parties  clearly  had  a
    choice when they decided to marry and to have a child knowing that  the
    appellant had no lawful leave and no right to remain in  the  UK.   The
    appellant does not meet the Immigration rules and there is no breach of
    policy on the part of the respondent.  In the short term the  appellant
    could return to Turkey from where he can  apply  under  the  rules  for
    leave to enter as the husband/father of a  British  citizen.   In  that
    instance his wife and child can choose to  go  with  him  for  a  short
    period of time or not.  Alternatively, if the appellant is  removed  to
    Turkey, in  the longer term his wife and child can choose  to  move  to
    Turkey to live with him and it would not be unreasonable for the  child
    to do so.  The public interest in immigration control is based  on  the
    father's poor  immigration  history  whereby  he  entered  the  UK  and
    fabricated a claim for asylum, and then he appealed against the refusal
    which he then did not pursue [52]. He has remained in the  UK  with  no
    lawful leave in the capacity in which he now seeks to be granted leave.
    I am satisfied that there is no evidence to show that he was forced  to
    flee from Turkey in fear of his life.  There was no evidence to support
    the claim that the marriage was disapproved of by the wife's family  in
    Turkey and the FtT found this was not believable [48].  The child is of
    an age where he can easily adapt to  a  change  of  environment  or  to
    living new country as part of his family and where the evidence is that
    his circumstances would not  vary  greatly  nor  that  the  move  would
    constitute a significant breach of his rights as a British citizen.



Decision

17.  The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the FtT is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date 26.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal










NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 26.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


