
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
  (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: AA/00487/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport  |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                      |
|On: 25 August 2017                 |     On: 11 September 2017       |
|                                   |                                 |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     TY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr N Webb, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Richards-Clarke in which the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
       Appellant, who claims to  be  a  citizen  of  Eritrea,  against  the
       Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  asylum  and  set  removal
       directions.


    2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 October  2013  and
       claimed asylum the following day. His application was refused by the
       Respondent on 1 September 2014. The Appellant exercised his right of
       appeal against this decision and this is the appeal that  was  heard
       before Judge Richards-Clarke on 10 November 2016 and dismissed.  The
       Appellant's application for permission to appeal against the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge's decision was granted on 20  December  2016  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer in the following terms

    It is arguable that the Judge has erred in that where the Appellant was
    asked questions about Eritrea and got them right it is unfair to say he
    learned them from the  public  domain,  as  if  that  is  correct,  the
    Respondent should ask better  questions.  He  should  have  been  given
    credit for that rather than it being a fact that  was  neutral.  It  is
    also arguable that inadequate reasons  were  given  for  rejecting  the
    evidence of the witness who claimed to have known him from Eritrea  and
    was not just reporting what he had allegedly  been  told.  These  could
    amount to material errors of law.


    All grounds may be argued.



    3. By a rule 24 response dated 6 January 2017  the  Respondent  opposed
       the appeal arguing that the thrust of the appeal is nationality  and
       that the significant reason given for finding the Appellant  not  to
       be an Eritrean national was the language analysis and that the other
       matters of knowledge of Eritrea and the witness are minor points not
       material to the overall finding.


    4. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety appeared for  the  Secretary  of
       State and Mr Webb represented the Appellant.


Background

    5. The Appellant is 30 years old and claims to be a citizen of  Eritrea
       and a Pentecostal Christian. According to his account he was born in
       Eritrea and moved with his family to Ethiopia when he  was  2  years
       old. The family, as Eritreans, were  deported  to  Eritrea  in  2000
       (when the Appellant was 14) where they lived in  Assab.  In  January
       2004, the Appellant was arrested whilst worshipping with others at a
       home prayer meeting. After being detained and abused for 6 days  the
       Appellant was released on payment of a bribe. On  his  release,  the
       Appellant made his way to Sudan where he lived  for  about  6  years
       before travelling via Turkey, Greece and other countries to the UK.


    6. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant is a Pentecostal Christian
       but does  not  accept  that  he  is  Eritrean.  This  is  primarily,
       according to the rule 24 statement, because he speaks Amharic and  a
       language analysis concludes that the  way  that  he  speaks  Amharic
       indicates that he is of Ethiopian origin.


    7. In dismissing his appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that
       the Appellant's claim turned on his  nationality.  The  Judge  found
       that the linguistic analysis along with his  lack  of  knowledge  of
       life in Eritrea and the lack of supporting evidence  caused  her  to
       reach the conclusion that there  was  not  a  reasonable  degree  of
       likelihood that he is an Eritrean national.


Submissions

    8. Mr Webb referred to the grounds of appeal. The issues  are  language
       and nationality. The Judge found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  an
       Eritrean national because  he  spoke  Amharic  but  failed  to  take
       account of his detailed witness statement explaining why that is the
       language  he  speaks.  When  considering  everything  in  the  round
       although the amount of weight to be attached to evidence is a matter
       for the Judge that does not mean that evidence can be  ignored.  The
       Appellant gives an account of being brought up in Ethiopia  that  is
       consistent with the fact that he  speaks  Amharic.  So  far  as  the
       witness  is  concerned  the  Judge  appears  to  misunderstand   his
       evidence. The witness  knew  the  Appellant  in  both  Ethiopia  and
       Eritrea. There is no finding in this respect.  The  Judge  does  not
       engage with  the  Appellant's  evidence  only  with  the  linguistic
       report. It must be wrong for the Judge to attach no  weight  to  the
       Appellant's knowledge of Eritrea simply because it is in the  public
       domain. Mr Webb went on to say that the Article 8 findings were also
       flawed and that evidence as  to  family  life  had  not  been  fully
       considered.


    9. For the Respondent Mr McVeety referred to the rule 24  response  and
       said that the Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
       inability to speak the language of Eritrea was sufficient for him to
       reach the finding that the Appellant was not Eritrean. The weight to
       be given to the evidence is a matter for the Judge.  The  linguistic
       report is clear that the Appellant does  not  speak  Amharic  as  an
       Eritrean would. Asked by me to highlight any parts of the linguistic
       report that engage with the Appellant's account of spending time  in
       Ethiopia and in an Amharic speaking community in Eritrea Mr  McVeety
       accepted that this was not addressed.

   10. I said that  the  appeal  would  be  allowed.  The  Appellant  gives
       detailed reasons for his failure to speak Tigrinya  in  his  witness
       statement. The Judge makes no findings on the chronological  aspects
       of the Appellant's  account  and  does  not  refer  to  his  witness
       statement and explain  why  she  does  not  accept  the  Appellant's
       account of why he speaks Amharic. The Judge appears to  be  mistaken
       in her  assessment  of  the  witness's  evidence  which  appears  to
       corroborate the Appellant's account. I reserved my written decision.



 Error of law

   11. The Appellant's account is clearly given in his  witness  statement.
       He claims to be a person  who  was  born  in  Assab  in  Eritrea  to
       Eritrean parents. The family moved to Addis Ababa to  live  when  he
       was 2 years old and this is where  the  Appellant  went  to  school.
       Although his parents spoke Tigrinya they also spoke Amharic and this
       was the language the Appellant spoke at school and with his friends.
       When his parents spoke to  him  in  Tigrinya  he  would  respond  in
       Amharic and they also spoke this language. The Appellant  claims  to
       understand Tigrinya and to be able to speak some words.  The  family
       was deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea in 2000 where  they  lived  in
       Campo Sudan in Assab. It was here that he claims  to  have  met  the
       witness F M. The Appellant remained in Eritrea  until  January  2004
       when, following an arrest and a short period of detention,  he  left
       the country and went to Sudan.


   12. In finding that he was an Ethiopian national  and  not  Eritrean  as
       claimed the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  relied  exclusively  on  a
       linguistic analysis report dated 8 April 2014. The Judge notes  that
       the report concludes that the Appellant's linguistic  background  is
       Ethiopia with a high degree of certainty, that he spoke a variety of
       Amharic found in Ethiopia and that his speech did  not  display  any
       features of Tigrinya which can  be  expected  among  Eritreans.  The
       Judge notes that the report "does not solely rely  on  the  language
       spoken by the Appellant" ... but also  that  he  displayed  "limited
       general knowledge about Eritrea". At paragraph 33  the  Judge  says,
       "In  these  circumstances  I  attach  significant  weight   to   the
       linguistic report"


   13. The Appellant's witness statement addresses  the  linguistic  report
       and seeks to  explain  in  some  detail  why  the  Appellant  speaks
       Amharic. Put simply it is the Appellant's case  that  his  formative
       years were spend in an Amharic  speaking  in  environment  in  Addis
       Ababa and that even after return to Eritrea he lived in  an  Amharic
       speaking part of Eritrea with others recently deported from Ethiopia
       who also spoke Amharic. He also explains that his witness, who  knew
       him both in Ethiopia  and  Eritrea,  had  also  been  deported  from
       Ethiopia.


   14. The Judge deals  with  the  witness  at  paragraph  34  and  35  but
       concludes that his evidence "adds little weight to  the  Appellant's
       case" because "if true he is reporting what the Appellant  has  told
       him". In my judgement this is a fundamental misunderstanding of  the
       witness' evidence. The evidence of the Appellant and the witness  is
       that they knew  each  other  in  Addis  Ababa,  were  deported  from
       Ethiopia at the same time (if not together) and  met  again  amongst
       the deportee community  in  Assab.  This  is  corroborative  of  the
       Appellant's claim and should have  been  given  considerable  weight
       unless there was good reason not to do so. No such reason  is  given
       or indeed explored.
   15. So far as the Appellant's explanation of why he speaks Amharic as he
       does is concerned the Judge does not really engage with this at all.
       There is no analysis of  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  indeed  no
       findings made as to the chronology of his account or the  facts  put
       forward. There is, for example, no analysis of  how  he  might  have
       come to be in Addis Ababa and Assab with the witness if the  account
       that he gives is not true.

   16. In my judgement the Appellant's account as briefly summarised  above
       gives clear and plausible reasons why he speaks Amharic rather  than
       Tigrinya and indeed why he speaks  Amharic  like  an  Ethiopian.  In
       making her findings the Judge does not address any  of  the  reasons
       given by the Appellant and as such does not make any  findings  that
       address those reasons. Indeed, the findings made seem to  ignore  or
       overlook the evidence of the Appellant and his witness.


   17. In my judgment the apparent failure of the  Judge  to  consider  and
       address this evidence is a material error of  law.  It  is  possible
       that a Judge assessing the Appellant's evidence may have  reached  a
       different conclusion.


   18. The effect of this error must be to render the credibility  findings
       as a whole unsafe. Due to the nature of the  error  of  law  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction it is appropriate for this
       matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo
       with  no  findings  preserved  although  following  MST  and  others
       (National Service - risk categories) CG [2016} UKUT  443  (IAC)  the
       only real issue given the  Appellant's  age  is  likely  to  be  his
       nationality. Article 8 will also be in play  should  the  Protection
       appeal fail.


Conclusion

   19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.


   20. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed







J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date: 8 September 2017
