
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00588/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st April 2016                            |On 15th July 2016             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

                                     LT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal of Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Spicer  dismissing  an  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1979 and is a national of Sri Lanka.   He
    came to the UK as a student in September 2009 and became an  overstayer
    from May 2014.  In July 2014 he claimed asylum.

 3. The Appellant was brought up as a Christian.  His father  went  missing
    in 1983 during riots in Colombo.  Until 1995 the Appellant  lived  with
    his mother and brothers in Jaffna, when the family was  displaced,  and
    he subsequently settled in Trincomalee.  In 2003 the Appellant began  a
    computer  business  with  two  partners.   They  sold   computers   and
    accessories and carried out upgrading and repairs.

 4. According to the Appellant in 2005 he was  asked  to  repair  a  broken
    computer and was taken to an LTTE camp to do this.  He  was  introduced
    to an LTTE member, described as the Head  of  Intelligence  Operations.
    The Appellant was asked to stay in the LTTE camp and undergo  training.
    He felt that he could not refuse.  The Appellant spent  four  weeks  in
    the camp.  After this the Appellant was told that he was to go home and
    live as normal but  he  would  be  used  to  gather  information.   The
    Appellant returned to continue with his business.  Towards the  end  of
    November 2005 the Appellant was asked by the LTTE to contact a man  who
    worked for an NGO.  This man advised  the  Appellant  to  apply  for  a
    position  in  the   Leonard   Cheshire   Disability   organisation   in
    Trincomalee, which promoted the welfare of disabled  people.   The  man
    agreed to provide the Appellant  with  a  reference.   The  Appellant's
    application  was  successful  and  in  2005  he  was   appointment   as
    Development Officer, then  in  2008  promoted  to  Livelihood  Manager.
    Initially his task was to provide support to disabled people, including
    supplying prosthetic limbs.  Some of those involved were LTTE  members.
    In this role the Appellant attended NGO consortium meetings every week.
     He was given information at these meetings about security measures and
    housing projects to resettle people.  The Appellant was  told  to  pass
    this information on to an LTTE member, whom he  met  every  month.   At
    these meetings the Appellant was given the names of  LTTE  members  who
    required assistance.  The last such meeting took place  in  October  or
    November 2008, when the Appellant was told not to  gather  any  further
    information.

 5. According to the Appellant, in May 2009 he made  a  field  visit  to  a
    hospital and IDP camp.  He was stopped at a checkpoint by the army.  He
    and his friend were blindfolded and taken away in a van.  The Appellant
    was questioned about his friend and his background.  He was beaten with
    a pipe and his legs were burned with cigarette butts.  He was asked  if
    he had any dealings with the LTTE.  The Appellant  denied  working  for
    the LTTE.  The  Appellant  was  threatened  with  a  gun  and  sexually
    assaulted on two nights.  A  bribe  was  paid  to  secure  his  release
    without any conditions.  After this the Appellant returned to work  but
    he was afraid of being arrested again.  He applied for a  student  visa
    to come to the UK and he arrived in the UK in September 2009  with  his
    mother, who had obtained a visa  as  a  dependant  of  the  Appellant's
    brother, who was settled in the UK.

 6. When in the UK the Appellant was occasionally in contact with the  LTTE
    contact whom he used to meet monthly from 2005 until 2008.  He let this
    man stay in his family home in Jaffna.  The Appellant was then informed
    by his uncle, who lived next door to the family home, that this man had
    been arrested in April 2014.  The uncle said he  was  questioned  about
    the Appellant.  The security forces told  the  Appellant's  uncle  that
    they thought the Appellant and the man they arrested were  former  LTTE
    members.  The Appellant believed that when arrested the  man  had  told
    the authorities about the Appellant.

 7. The Appellant further stated he has been supporting the Tamil cause  in
    the UK.  He fears arrest on return to Sri Lanka,  followed  by  torture
    and inhuman treatment.

 8. The Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  the  Appellant's
    evidence credible.  The judge questioned  why  the  Appellant  had  not
    claimed asylum earlier.  The judge did not find it plausible  that  the
    Appellant had been trained by the LTTE for only four weeks whereas  the
    background information indicated that LTTE fighters underwent  rigorous
    training for four months.

 9. The judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had  worked  for  the  Leonard
    Cheshire Disability organisation but did not accept that  he  had  been
    supplying intelligence to the  LTTE  during  this  period.   The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had been detained in 2009 at the same  time
    as the friend with whom he was travelling.  The judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant was released without any conditions and no  further  interest
    was shown in him in the three months leading up to  his  departure  for
    the UK.  He was able to leave Sri Lanka on his own passport.

10. The judge accepted that the Appellant may have attended street protests
    in the UK but his attendance would not, without more, have  caused  him
    to be perceived as having a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism.

11. The judge then turned to the  question  whether  the  authorities  made
    enquiries about the Appellant in  Jaffna  in  April  2014.   The  judge
    rejected the Appellant's evidence in relation to this, as well  as  the
    written evidence he produced from individuals still in Sri Lanka.   The
    judge did not  find  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his  continuing
    communication with his LTTE contact to be credible.   The  judge  found
    that the reason for the Appellant's detention in 2009 was  because  the
    authorities were interested in the friend with whom he was  travelling.
    The  authorities  had  no  interest  in  the  Appellant  following  his
    detention.

12. The judge considered evidence of mental health problems experienced  by
    the  appellant.   The  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    diagnosed with PTSD and depression.  The judge looked  at  the  medical
    evidence and found that the Appellant's GP and specialist NHS  services
    had not assessed the Appellant as at risk of self-harm.

Application for permission to appeal

13. The application for permission to appeal challenged the  reasons  given
    by the judge for finding  parts  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
    lacking in credibility.   It  was  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
    explained his delay in claiming asylum.  There was country  information
    showing that training was provided for a period of four weeks for  some
    individuals rather than for three months.  It was further  stated  that
    the judge had been wrong to reject parts of the  evidence  provided  by
    letter by Rev Father HS in Sri Lanka.  This evidence was not challenged
    during the course of the proceedings and the Appellant  was  not  given
    the opportunity of commenting on the issues  raised  by  the  judge  in
    relation to the letter in the decision.   Concern  was  also  expressed
    about the  judge's  approach  to  a  letter  by  Mr  PT,  who  was  the
    Appellant's former supervisor in Leonard Cheshire Disability.

14. In the grant of permission to appeal it was pointed  out  that  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant had worked for an NGO in an LTTE  camp  and
    was tortured (including sexually) and scarred.  It  was  also  accepted
    that he had been part of the crowd  in  diaspora  activities.   It  was
    arguable that overemphasis had been given to  the  brevity  of  claimed
    LTTE training  relative  to  the  background  evidence.   It  was  also
    arguable that undue corroboration had been required  above  and  beyond
    the letter from the Rev Father HS.

15. A rule 24 notice was submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   This
    challenged whether the Appellant had provided an  explanation  for  his
    delay in claiming asylum.  It further stated that  the  judge  provided
    detailed and carefully reasoned findings for concluding that there were
    areas of  the  Appellant's  claim  where  the  account  given  was  not
    credible.  There was a clear finding that the Appellant's  profile  was
    not one that met the risk categories outlined in the  case  of  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 319.

Submissions

16. At the hearing before me, Mr Toal, for the Appellant,  began  with  the
    Respondent's claim that  LTTE  training  would  have  lasted  for  four
    months, according to the country information.  Mr Toal  submitted  that
    this was based on a Country of  Origin  Information  Report  which  was
    quoted in the refusal letter but was  not  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    source or provenance of this information was not  given.   Furthermore,
    the Appellant was not being trained as an LTTE fighter.  It  could  not
    be assumed that everybody assisting the LTTE was  given  three  months'
    training.  Furthermore, in the case of GJ and others, at paragraphs 358-
    359 it was accepted that an  individual  had  been  given  one  month's
    training  and  fifteen  days'  financial  training.   Nevertheless  the
    Secretary of State considered it implausible that the  Appellant  would
    have been given only one month's training.  Despite this  it  had  been
    accepted by the Secretary of State in GJ that the  fact  that  somebody
    had been given one month's training did not mean that  the  person  had
    not been recruited by the LTTE.  In the present case  the  judge  found
    that the Appellant had not been recruited by the LTTE but this  was  on
    the basis of the supposed discrepancy over the length of his training.

17. Mr Toal continued that the second issue in relation to credibility  was
    the judge's finding about whether the authorities had been looking  for
    the Appellant in 2014.  The judge had said that  this  claim  had  been
    fabricated by the Appellant following his screening interview.  At  his
    screening interview, however, (A5, 5.2) the  Appellant  said  that  the
    authorities had been to his old house asking about him.  The  Appellant
    said that the authorities had been to his old house in April 2014.  The
    judge was mistaken about the screening interview.

18. Mr Toal continued that the judge had not found  it  credible  that  the
    Appellant had had continuing communication with his LTTE contact.   The
    judge did not believe that this contact had  been  arrested.   Mr  Toal
    pointed out that at his asylum interview (B21, Q104) the Appellant said
    he had not been in communication  with  his  contact  until  2014.   In
    answer to the next question (Q105) he referred to  the  contact  having
    been arrested and the authorities then looking for the Appellant.   The
    judge was mistaken to state at paragraph 120 of the decision  that  the
    Appellant did not say at his asylum  interview  that  he  had  had  any
    recent communication with this contact.

19. Mr Toal referred to paragraph 98  of  the  decision,  where  the  judge
    questioned whether the information the Appellant  acquired  about  NGOs
    would benefit LTTE.  Mr Toal submitted that the Appellant had explained
    this in his witness statement (page 5, paragraph  8)  and  it  was  not
    reasonable for the judge to say that the Appellant  had  not  explained
    this.  The judge then at paragraph 99 found that the Appellant had  not
    supplied intelligence to LTTE although this finding was  isolated  from
    the judge's findings about the evidence as a whole.  It  appeared  that
    the judge's treatment of the CIO Report about the  length  of  training
    had been relied upon as a reason for disbelieving further parts of  the
    evidence without looking at the evidence as a whole.

20. For the Respondent, Mr Wilding submitted that the decision of the Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal was detailed and considered.  The judge  had
    been criticised for  assessing  the  evidence  in  a  compartmentalised
    manner instead of looking at it in the round.  Particular  sections  of
    the  decision  had  been  attacked,  such  as  the  part  relating   to
    recruitment and training.  Nevertheless at paragraph 84 of the decision
    the judge said he had looked at all the evidence in  the  round.   Even
    where the evidence was assessed in the round, it was necessary to start
    somewhere.  The judge had started with the  Appellant's  account  about
    joining LTTE, which was inconsistent with the background material.  The
    Appellant had not provided background evidence on this point and it had
    not been referred to in the skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge had been entitled to  find  that  the  Appellant's
    account of his training was inconsistent with the background  evidence.



21. Mr Wilding continued that  reference  had  been  made  to  the  country
    guideline case of GJ in which there was training for  one  and  a  half
    months.  It was difficult in  an  individual  case  to  rely  upon  two
    instances, one of which was against the Appellant and  one  in  favour.
    It did not follow from this that the background material relied upon by
    the Respondent was not right.  The Appellant had not given an  adequate
    explanation for why he was trained for only four weeks.

22. Mr Wilding then turned to the  screening  interview.   The  Appellant's
    evidence in his witness statement was that he knew in May 2014 that his
    LTTE contact had  been  arrested.   This  was  two  months  before  the
    screening interview.  Even if the Appellant did not know the details he
    might have mentioned that his former contact had been arrested.

23. Mr Wilding  further  submitted  that  the  medical  evidence  had  been
    considered in the round.

Discussion

24. I agree with Mr Wilding that in many ways the decision of the Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is detailed and considered.   Nevertheless,  it
    contains certain flaws.  These are of such significance that it is  not
    enough to remedy them that the judge has stated in paragraph 84 that he
    has looked at all the evidence in the round.

25. In particular, I accept the point made by Mr Toal that there was not an
    adequate basis for the judge to find that the period of time  given  by
    the Appellant for  his  training  was  inconsistent  with  the  country
    information relied upon by the Respondent.  Even taken at its  highest,
    this country information states no more than that  a  typical  training
    schedule for LTTE fighters is spread over four months.  It is difficult
    to see this as an adequate basis for finding that the Appellant was not
    recruited by the LTTE as an intelligence agent, not even a  fighter  as
    such, because he described his training as lasting for four weeks.

26. There is  a  further  significant  flaw  in  the  judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 114, where the judge states that although the Appellant  said
    in his evidence that the authorities had shown an interest  in  him  in
    April 2014 this was not mentioned at his screening  interview.   As  Mr
    Toal pointed  out,  this  is  clearly  a  mistake.   At  the  screening
    interview at box 5.2 the Appellant stated that the authorities had been
    to his old house asking about him.  Although the Appellant did not give
    a date for this, it ties in with his answer to Q105 at his later asylum
    interview, where he stated that in 2014 his LTTE contact  was  arrested
    and the authorities then started looking for him.  The judge refers  to
    this reply at paragraph 116 and compares it with  a  witness  statement
    previously made by the Appellant but crucially does not connect it with
    the Appellant's screening interview at 5.2.  The mistake  made  by  the
    judge, at paragraph 114, as  to  whether  the  Appellant  said  at  his
    screening interview that the authorities were looking for him,  remains
    uncorrected.

27. A further ground of the application, about the judge's treatment of the
    letter from Rev Father HS, was not addressed directly by  Mr  Toal  but
    was set out in detail in the application for permission to  appeal  and
    was included in the grant of permission.  In short, the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal accepted some of what was said in the  letter  from
    Rev Father HS but rejected part of it, which was a part relating to the
    events of 2014.  Admittedly, the judge places little weight  upon  this
    letter in respect of the Appellant's detention, as the writer  was  not
    personally involved in those events, though the judge did  accept  that
    the detention and mistreatment took place.  When  it  comes  to  events
    which were allegedly within the knowledge of Rev Father HS,  the  judge
    rejects his evidence.  One of the reasons for this was that  the  judge
    found it not credible that the landlord of the Appellant's family  home
    in Trincomalee would have contacted Father HS in  2014.   Although  the
    Appellant provides an explanation  for  this  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal it is stated that this issue was not raised during
    the hearing so the Appellant did not have the opportunity to  providing
    this explanation at that time.  While this point  does  not  carry  the
    same weight as the two earlier criticisms I have made  of  the  judge's
    decision, it is a further indication that the judge's findings are  not
    wholly sustainable.

28. I informed the parties at the hearing that in view of the errors of law
    in the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I  proposed  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  before  a
    different judge  with  no  findings  preserved.   Mr  Toal  asked  that
    findings be preserved  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    detained and tortured, as recorded by the judge at paragraph 108 of the
    decision.

29. I have not followed this request.  In my view, where an appeal is to be
    reheard before the First-tier Tribunal and there are a number of issues
    of fact to be decided and various evidential issues to be  weighed  and
    considered it is in principle undesirable to restrict the new  Tribunal
    in its consideration of the evidence.  In  this  appeal  I  acknowledge
    that  the  medical  evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's  scarring  seems
    compelling but the findings to be made upon this  evidence  will  be  a
    matter for the new Tribunal.

Conclusions

The making of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade at a  hearing
before a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order to  anonymity.   In  view  of  the
continuing nature of the proceedings I continue this order in terms of  rule
14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  in  the  following
terms.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date: 15 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

