


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00342/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  IAC Manchester                 |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 31 March 2016                         |On 13 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            lingeswaran sanmukam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy instructed under the Public Access
Scheme
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 6 April  1981.  He  entered
the United Kingdom on 23 October  2010  with  leave  as  a  Tier  4  general
student migrant valid until 24 February 2012, but was refused further  leave
to remain on 8 November 2012. He claims to have then returned to  Sri  Lanka
in June 2013 and to have re-entered the UK  on  11  November  2013  using  a
British passport belonging to  another  person.  He  claimed  asylum  on  13
November 2013. His claim was refused on 13 January 2014 and a  decision  was
made the same day to remove him to Sri Lanka.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal  was  initially
allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  August  2014,  but  following  a
successful application by the respondent for permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  set  aside  with  no
findings preserved. The case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
heard afresh. The appellant's appeal was then heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ransley on 10 March 2015 and was dismissed in a  decision  promulgated
on 18 March 2015. Permission has been granted again to appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk of persecution in Sri Lanka on the  basis
of his involvement with the LTTE. He claims that, whilst working  from  2005
to 2007 for a non-government organisation (NGO)  named  Foundation  for  Co-
Existence (FCE) as a community  care  coordinator  helping  victims  of  the
tsunami, he was ordered  by  his  senior  officer  to  assist  the  LTTE  by
transporting and burying landmines, weapons and  bombs.  He  was  forced  to
issue equipment to made-up victims of the tsunami which was  in  fact  given
to the LTTE. He was stopped and questioned by the army on 21  November  2007
when the LTTE attacked an army camp, but was released. He  then  decided  to
leave the NGO, in December 2007, and he worked for his father as  a  farmer.
He received a call from members of the LTTE who were planning to  attack  an
army base and who asked him to assist with transporting their people in  his
tractor. He assisted but then decided to leave the  country  as  they  would
not leave him alone. He found an agent who arranged a student visa  for  him
and he left Sri Lanka on 23 October 2010  and  came  to  the  UK.  When  his
application for further leave was refused in the  UK,  he  returned  to  Sri
Lanka on 27 June 2013.

The appellant claimed that on 26 October 2013 he was arrested from his  home
by TID officers and taken to a police station where he was  interviewed  and
accused of being a member of the LTTE. He was taken to a derelict house  and
then to the ground where he had previously buried the weapons for  the  LTTE
and was told to dig them up. He feared that the LTTE members  who  had  told
him to bury the weapons had been caught and  had  given  his  name.  He  was
given water mixed with urine to drink and was taken to an army camp. He  was
questioned and tortured. The following evening he was taken to  Colombo  and
the next day was taken to a court in Colombo  where  he  heard  the  charges
against him. He was then returned to the army camp and was  again  tortured.
He confessed to having assisted the LTTE but upon the orders of  his  senior
officer at the NGO. He was not taken back to court but was  ill-treated  for
the next two days and on three  days  he  was  anally  raped  by  the  chief
officer. On 2 November 2013, when the chief officer was driving him back  to
his room  after  raping  him,  he  fell  asleep  at  the  wheel  as  he  was
intoxicated. The appellant claimed that he managed to  escape  as  a  result
and on 11 November 2013 he left  the  country  with  the  assistance  of  an
agent. His family contacted him after he had arrived in the UK to  tell  him
that the authorities had visited his home looking for  him  on  15  November
2013 and that an arrest warrant had been shown to them.

The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  accept  his
account of having worked for an NGO and did not accept that he had  assisted
the LTTE. His account of his arrest, torture  and  escape  was  rejected  as
lacking in credibility. The respondent noted that the  appellant  had  scars
on his body but did not accept that they had been caused in the way that  he
claimed. The respondent did not accept that the appellant would be  at  risk
on return to Sri Lanka and considered that his removal would not breach  his
human rights.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by Judge  Ransley  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 10 March 2015. In her decision promulgated on  18
March 2015, the judge dealt with some procedural matters which  had  arisen.
The appellant had claimed to have problems with the court  interpreter,  but
the judge considered that no such problems had  arisen.  She  noted  further
that, part-way through cross-examination, the appellant  had  produced  some
notes from his  GP  and  some  photographs  showing  him  holding  placards,
neither of which his representative  had  had  knowledge  of,  and  she  had
decided to admit  that  evidence  although  she  considered  that  the  late
submission  of  the  evidence  reflected  adversely   on   the   appellant's
credibility.  Having  considered  the  appellant's  oral   and   documentary
evidence,  including  the  appellant's  medical  records  and  two   medical
reports, the judge accepted that the appellant had  worked  as  a  community
care coordinator for the FCE between 2005 and 2007 providing  assistance  to
victims of the tsunami. However she rejected the rest of  his  account.  She
did not accept that he had been ordered to  carry  out  activities  for  the
LTTE and did not accept that he had been arrested, detained and tortured  by
the Sri Lankan authorities. She gave no weight to the arrest warrant  relied
upon by the appellant and she  rejected  his  claim,  made  at  the  hearing
itself, as to his activities in the diaspora. She dismissed  the  appeal  on
all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on several grounds and was granted on 11 May 2015  on  the  ground
that the judge had not made a finding on the claimed rape and had failed  to
consider aspects of the psychiatric report which had been before her.


At the hearing Mr Paramjorthy expanded upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  Ms
Johnstone responded to those grounds in her submissions.

Consideration and findings.

Mr Paramjorthy asked me to find that the judge's finding on the  appellant's
behaviour, at [25] and [31], was troubling. He submitted that the judge  had
erred in law by making adverse findings against  the  appellant  because  of
his claim to have had problems with the  court  interpreter,  when  concerns
had been raised  about  the  interpreter  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing.
However, as I advised Mr Paramjorthy, there was nothing in the judge's  very
clear record of proceedings to suggest that any concerns had been raised  at
the outset of the hearing. On the contrary,  the  judge  had  recorded  that
there was confirmation from the interpreter  and  the  appellant  that  they
both understood one another and that is reflected at [22] of  her  decision.
Both the record of proceedings  and  the  record  of  the  evidence  in  the
judge's decision state that the first indication from, or on behalf of,  the
appellant of any interpretation problems  arose  after  the  close  of  oral
evidence and before submissions, when there had been  a  recess.  The  judge
noted  that  the  appellant's  solicitor  had  supported   the   appellant's
complaint, but had  not  raised  any  issues  at  all  throughout  the  oral
evidence. It is relevant to note that the judge's record  of  what  occurred
is fully supported by the presenting officer's record, who indicated in  his
summary that, aside from a couple of questions which had to  be  put  again,
the appellant's answers matched the questions put to him.

The judge, at [25] and [26], gave detailed consideration to the  appellant's
complaint  about  the  interpretation  and  provided  cogent   reasons   for
concluding that the appellant's complaint was not  genuinely  made  out.  It
seems to me that she was entitled to conclude as she  did  in  that  regard.
Likewise, I find no error of law in the judge's findings in  regard  to  the
late  submission  of  new  documentary  evidence  by   the   appellant.   Mr
Paramjorthy  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  particularise  why   she
considered the appellant's behaviour in  that  regard  to  be  manipulative.
However I consider that it is very clear from her findings at [31]  why  she
found that to be  the  case.  Whilst  the  description  of  the  appellant's
behaviour as manipulative  may  perhaps  not  have  been  the  best  use  of
language, I find no reason to conclude that the judge was  not  entitled  to
draw the adverse conclusions that she did from his behaviour or  that  there
was anything irrational or perverse in so doing. I therefore find  no  merit
in that ground of appeal.

The second ground challenges the  judge's  findings  at  [40],  whereby  she
found the appellant's account of his FCE vehicle  never  being  stopped  and
searched at checkpoints between 2005 and 2007 to  lack  credibility  because
the Sri Lankan army was engaged in armed  conflict  with  the  LTTE  at  the
time. The grounds assert that the judge's findings in that regard failed  to
engage with counsel's submission that there was a  ceasefire  at  the  time.
However, whilst the judge did not specifically refer to  the  ceasefire,  it
is relevant to note that the appellant's own evidence at questions  105  and
106 of his interview when asked about the  ceasefire,  was  that  there  was
still fighting prior to  the  end  of  the  ceasefire.  Accordingly  I  find
nothing material about the  judge's  failure  specifically  to  address  the
ceasefire and consider that she was entitled to make  the  adverse  findings
that she did in that regard.


 The third and fourth grounds relied upon by Mr Paramjorthy related  to  the
judge's findings on the two medical reports - the psychiatric report  of  Dr
Lawrence and the scarring  report  from  Professor  Lingam.  Mr  Paramjorthy
criticised the judge's finding that the experts were not  reliable.  However
that was clearly not her finding. She made no  adverse  findings  about  the
expertise of both doctors, but found that  the  reports  were  not  reliable
evidence in support of the appellant's asylum claim  for  the  reasons  that
she gave.


With regard to Dr Lawrence's report, it is relevant to note that  permission
to appeal was granted in this case by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett  on
the basis of the judge's findings in relation  to  that  report.  However  I
find no grounds  for  concluding,  as  the  decision  suggests,  that  Judge
Ransley had had  no  regard  to  Appendix  III  of  the  report  or  to  the
psychiatrist's conclusion about the appellant's claim to  have  been  raped.
It is clear that Judge Ransley gave  careful  consideration  to  the  report
and, at [52] to [58], she provided detailed reasons for placing the  limited
weight  that  she  did  upon  it.  Such  reasons  included,  at  [52],   the
circumstances under which the report was produced, and  also  Dr  Lawrence's
failure to explain the scores referred to at page 12 of  his  report,  which
Mr Paramjorthy accepted were not explained anywhere  in  the  report.  Judge
Ransley also noted Dr Lawrence's reliance  upon  a  rule  35  report  which,
albeit referring to concerns arising out of the appellant's  claim  to  have
been tortured, did not actually  make  any  diagnosis.  All  of  these  were
matters which the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  consideration  when
considering the weight to be attached to the report.

Likewise, the judge gave careful consideration to  the  GP's  notes  and  to
Professor Lingam's report in assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's
account of his arrest and ill-treatment. With regard to  Professor  Lingam's
report, she gave detailed reasons, at [61] to [64] for  placing  the  weight
that she did  upon  the  report.  Whilst  she  did  not  make  any  specific
reference to the case of KV (scarring - medical evidence)  [2014]  UKUT  230
there was nothing in her findings that was inconsistent  with  the  decision
in that case and nothing to suggest that  she  had  had  no  regard  to  the
relevant guidance therein. The judge noted that  there  were  two  different
kinds of scarring on the appellant's back and was entitled to  place  weight
upon the fact that the appellant was unaware  of  the  longer  marks  which,
significantly, were  not  consistent  with  the  forms  of  torture  he  had
described. Having considered the appellant's evidence as a  whole,  she  was
entitled to conclude that the scarring on the appellant's  back  could  have
been caused by other means than those claimed and to accord the weight  that
she did to that evidence. She was not required to make a finding as  to  how
the scarring was in fact caused but was entitled to reject  the  appellant's
account of its causation.

Accordingly, and contrary to the assertions in the grounds, it seems  to  me
that the judge did not err in law in her approach to the  medical  evidence.
She gave careful consideration to the two reports and to the GP's notes  and
assessed those documents in the context of  the  appellant's  own  evidence,
providing cogent reasons  for  giving  the  weight  that  she  did  to  that
evidence. She was entitled to reject the appellant's account of  his  arrest
and ill-treatment for the reasons given.


Whilst the grounds challenged the judge's findings  on  the  arrest  warrant
produced by the appellant on the basis  that  she  had  had  regard  to  the
findings of the First-tier Tribunal  in  the  previous  decision  which  had
subsequently  been  set  aside,  Mr  Paramjorthy   properly   withdrew   his
submission on that ground upon an acceptance that the appellant had in  fact
raised the matter himself in  his  supplementary  statement.  Judge  Ransley
went on to give full and detailed consideration to the  arrest  warrant  and
to the explanation offered by the appellant in his  supplementary  statement
in response to the concerns raised previously by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
She provided detailed and cogent reasons  for  concluding  that  the  arrest
warrant was not a reliable document. Indeed, other than criticising her  for
referring to the decision of the  previous  Tribunal,  the  grounds  do  not
challenge her findings in that regard.


Mr Paramjorthy's final submission was that  the  judge  had  erred,  in  her
adverse findings at  [73],  in  her  recording  of  the  evidence  that  the
appellant had escaped from Welikade prison. However it seems to me that  the
judge made no such error. The point made by the judge at [73] was  that  the
letter from the appellant's lawyer in Sri Lanka referred  to  the  appellant
having escaped  from  Welikade  prison,  which  was  inconsistent  with  the
appellant's own  evidence  that  he  had  escaped  from  the  army  camp  in
Batticaloa. That is clearly the case. The letter from the lawyer, R M  Imam,
is to be found at Annex C of a bundle of documents produced for  the  appeal
before the First-tier Tribunal, behind the arrest warrant, and  is  referred
to at [17] of the judge's  decision.  In  that  letter  the  lawyer  clearly
states that the appellant escaped from Welikada prison.  Yet  the  appellant
made no such claim in his evidence.  The  judge  was  accordingly  perfectly
entitled to rely upon that inconsistency  in  the  evidence  in  making  the
adverse findings that she did.


Mr  Paramjorthy  agreed  that  the  remaining  grounds  depended  upon   the
preceding grounds being made out. However, for the reasons given, I  do  not
accept that any of the grounds are made out. It seems to me  that,  contrary
to the assertions in the grounds and to Mr Paramjorthy's submissions,  Judge
Ransley was entitled to approach the appellant's evidence in  the  way  that
she did and that  she  gave  full  and  careful  consideration  to  all  the
evidence including the medical  reports  and  provided  cogent  reasons  for
giving the weight that she did to that evidence. She was  entitled  to  make
the adverse findings that she did and the conclusions that she reached  were
entirely open to her on the evidence before her.


I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.









                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
