

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00960/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 14 May 2013                                |On 03 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M R

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit instructed by K Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born  on  18  December
      1987.  She entered the United Kingdom on 9  May  2010  using  her  own
      passport with a student visa valid until 2  July  2012.   On  20  June
      2012, the appellant claimed asylum.  On 23 January 2013, the Secretary
      of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum under  para  336  of
      the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).   On 25 January  2013,  the
      Secretary of State made a decision  to  remove  the  appellant  as  an
      illegal entrant by way of directions to Sri Lanka.

   3. The appellant appealed  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Following a hearing, Judge Braybrook dismissed the appellant's  appeal
      on asylum and human rights grounds.   On 4 April 2013, the  First-tier
      Tribunal (DJ French) granted the appellant permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal on the ground that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably
      erred in law in reaching her adverse credibility finding.   Thus,  the
      appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Claim

   4. The appellant claims  to  fear  ill  treatment  from  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities.  Her claim is, in summary, as follows.  She  is  a  Tamil
      from Jaffna where she lived with her family.  Her father,  who  was  a
      fisherman, supported the LTTE.  He had been  detained  and  questioned
      numerous times.  The appellant and her elder sister also supported the
      LTTE from about 2004 onwards by doing administrative duties.   Neither
      the appellant nor any of her family were actual members of the LTTE.

   5. In 2006, the appellant, her father and  elder  sister  went  to  Vanni
      which was an LTTE controlled area.   Her  mother  and  other  siblings
      remained  in  Jaffna.   After  her  sister  contracted  malaria,   the
      appellant, her sister and father went to India leaving Colombo  on  24
      October 2007.  They stayed in India until their family told them  that
      it was safe to return which they did on 15 June 2009.  They flew  back
      to Colombo and then returned to their home in Jaffna.   The  appellant
      and her family no longer supported the LTTE.

   6. In November 2009 the appellant says that she was detained by  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities along with her father and elder  sister.   She  was
      fingerprinted, photographed and videoed.  She was questioned about her
      involvement with the LTTE and her father's role.  She says that during
      that detention she was ill treated including being beaten  and  burned
      with cigarettes. After ten days she was released on payment of a bribe
      by her uncle.  Her elder sister,  who  had  also  been  detained,  was
      released the day before the appellant and had been  raped  during  her
      detention.  Her uncle was unable to secure  her  father's  release  by
      payment of a bribe.  Following release, she stayed at home for a month
      and then went to stay in her uncle's home for  three  to  four  months
      before going to Colombo  in  March  2010  where  she  made  a  student
      application to come to the UK with the help of an  agent.   The  agent
      took the appellant to the airport, leaving her at the visitor's  point
      and she flew to the UK.

   7. The appellant fears that because of her previous detention in November
      2009 she will be of interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka on return
      and at risk of serious ill treatment.





The Judge's Decision

   8. The Judge did not accept the appellant's account.  She made an adverse
      credibility finding against the appellant.  First, the Judge  did  not
      accept the appellant's  account  to  be  plausible.   As  regards  her
      claimed detention and ill treatment in November 2009, the Judge stated
      that it was:

           "at odds with all their previous experience 2004-2009 when  they
           had been able to live and work and move around by road  and  air
           without raising any adverse attention."

   9. In particular, the Judge noted that the appellant and her  father  and
      elder sister had had no difficulty in leaving Sri Lanka to go to India
      or on returning to Sri Lanka from India in  June  2009.   Further,  as
      regards the appellant leaving Sri Lanka to come to  the  UK  in  March
      2010, the Judge doubted whether the authorities had  any  interest  in
      the appellant for two reasons.   First,  she  had  gone  to  a  police
      station to report her passport as lost in  order  to  obtain  (on  the
      advice of the agent) a new one which did not show her visit to  India.
      Having done that, she had obtained a new passport  from  the  passport
      authorities.  Secondly, she had been  able  to  exit  through  Colombo
      airport on her new passport without any  problems  being  experienced.
      These circumstances led the  Judge  to  doubt  that  she  was  of  any
      interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

The Submissions

  10. Both in the grounds and in his submissions, Mr Muquit  challenged  the
      Judge's adverse credibility finding on two principal grounds.   First,
      he submitted that the Judge had fallen into error in his treatment  of
      the expert report of Mr Andreas Martin,  Consultant  in  Accident  and
      Emergency Medicine dated 26 February 2013 which dealt with  the  scars
      upon the appellant's body.  Secondly, he submitted that the Judge,  in
      doubting the appellant's account of her detention in 2009 and  of  her
      exit from Sri Lanka in 2010, the Judge had failed to  have  regard  to
      the background evidence to which she was referred in reaching what, in
      effect, were findings of implausibility.   Mr  Muquit  submitted  that
      these errors were material to the Judge's adverse credibility  finding
      and her decision could not stand.

  11. Mr Wilding, who represented the respondent, submitted that  the  Judge
      had properly considered the expert report and had given it appropriate
      weight.  As regards the Judge's  overall  assessment  of  credibility,
      which Mr Wilding described as a "holistic exercise", the determination
      was well reasoned and his findings sound.  The  appellant's  challenge
      was no more than an attempt to reargue the case.

Discussion

  12. I deal first with the Judge's treatment of Mr Martin's expert  report.
      The report dealt with three sets of scars.  The first set ("scars  1")
      is on the appellant's back; the second  set  ("scars  2")  is  on  the
      appellant's upper chest; and finally there are two scars on each  calf
      of her lower leg ("scars 3").

  13. As regards "scars 1" and "scars 3", Mr Martin's  report  states  that:
      "[t]he appearance of the  scars  is  typical  of  injuries  caused  by
      intentional blunt trauma with a long narrow blunt implement".  He goes
      on to say that the scars could not  have  been  caused  by  accidental
      injuries and, looking at all their features, it "strongly  suggests  a
      non-accidental cause".   In his view: "[t]he cause of  these  injuries
      is an intentional one".  Mr Martin expresses the opinion that  it  was
      "extremely unlikely (if not impossible)" that the injuries were  self-
      inflicted.  It was, in his view, "most likely" that they  were  caused
      by another individual but: "from inspection  of  the  injuries  it  is
      impossible to be able to say if the injuries were caused by friend  or
      foes   as   the   appearance   of   the   scars   would   have    been
      indistinguishable."

  14. As regards "scars 2", Mr Martin states that: "[t]he appearance of  the
      scars is typical of injuries caused by being burned with a small round
      object such as the one described by the claimant".  I  interpose:  the
      claimant had said that  they  were  caused  by  hot  cigarette  butts.
      Having looked at the scars, Mr Martin expresses the view that:  "[t]he
      appearance of the  scars  is  homogenous  and  with  nearly  identical
      features which makes an accidental cause even  more  unlikely.  In  my
      opinion the most likely cause is an intentional one".  Mr Martin  goes
      on to express the view that it was possible, but  extremely  unlikely,
      that the scars had been self-inflicted.  In his view they  were  "most
      likely" caused by others and "[t]his is typical of the description  of
      events by the claimant of being tortured".   As  with  "scars  1"  and
      "scars 3" however, Mr Martin states that: "[f]rom  inspection  of  the
      injuries it is impossible to be able  to  say  if  the  injuries  were
      caused by friend or foes as the appearance of  the  scars  would  have
      been indistinguishable."

  15. Mr Martin then turned to deal with the age of  the  scars  and  states
      this:

           "Determining the age of the scars by just visual  inspection  is
           not a precise science and often there (sic) is just possible  to
           say that the injuries were mature or immature, enough to give  a
           very approximate range of time when the injuries could have been
           caused.  The quiescent nature of the scars seen  on  this  man's
           body means that they are matured and this is  inconsistent  with
           the time span described by the claimant".

  16. In his conclusions Mr Martin expresses the view that:

           "I have no doubt that the scars were the result of intentionally
           caused injuries and that there is a  high  likelihood  that  the
           injuries were caused by torture as described by the claimant."

  17. As will be clear, on  its  face  this  report  is  supportive  of  the
      appellant's claim and in particular  in  relation  to  what  she  says
      occurred to her when she was detained by the Sri Lankan authorities in
      November 2009.

  18. Having set out Mr Martin's experience  and  expertise,  the  Judge  at
      paras 16-19 set out extracts from Mr Martin's report.  At para 20  she
      noted his "very considerable expertise". Then at paras 21-24 the Judge
      analysed Mr Martin's evidence as follows:

           "21.  I noted that he had interviewed the appellant's through an
                 interpreter on 14 February 2013.  This was over three years
                 after the appellant's release and over two years after  her
                 arrival in the UK.  Mr Martin refers to the  difficulty  of
                 his task.  The appellant in  oral  evidence  said  that  Mr
                 Martin had not seen the colour  photographs  of  her  scars
                 taken in a studio towards the end of June 2012 relied on at
                 interview and this explains why there was no  comment  from
                 Mr Martin on the process of ageing  of  the  scars  in  the
                 intervening period.

             22. There is no indication with what other documents if any  Dr
                 Martin was supplied; he states only  that  his  report  was
                 compiled by 'examination  of  claimant/brief  outline  MR's
                 claim'.  There was no  suggestion,  for  example,  that  Mr
                 Martin had seen  the  appellant's  interview  record.   His
                 report suggests  he  had  limited  background  information.
                 There is no indication he had discussed with the appellant,
                 for example what treatment she had sought for her injuries.



             23. There were shortcomings in  Mr  Martin's  report.   In  the
                 course of his brief report he refers on two occasions to  a
                 'male  claimant.   This  was  of  particular   concern   in
                 paragraph 18 above where he refers to scars seen  on  'this
                 man's body.'  I noted  that  there  were  scars,  including
                 cigarette burns on her right foot, described  in  interview
                 (Q19) and for which a studio  photograph  was  supplied  to
                 which Mr Martin makes no reference at all.

             24. Mr Martin also appears to make  inconsistent  findings:  he
                 states at paragraph 18 above that the scars/cigarette burns
                 are 'inconsistent with  the  time  span  described  by  the
                 claimant' but a few lines later concludes that 'there was a
                 high likelihood that the  injuries  were  caused  by  being
                 tortured as described by the claimant.'"

  19. In the light of these matters, the Judge reached the following view in
      para 24 of her determination:

           "24.  Given these shortcomings  and  what  appeared  to  be  the
                 limited scrutiny given to the issues, I concluded  I  could
                 give little weight to his report.  Taking this into account
                 with the evidence overall, I was  not  satisfied  that  the
                 scars were inflicted in 2009 in the circumstances described
                 by the appellant."

  20. Mr Muquit accepted that Mr Martin's report should obviously  not  have
      referred to the claimant as "male" as he  had  done  on  a  couple  of
      occasions.   But,  Mr   Muquit   submitted,   these   were   obviously
      typographical errors.  Mr Martin had examined the claimant  personally
      and had produced photographs of her injuries.  He was obviously  aware
      that the claimant was female and, in any event, the  validity  of  his
      expert opinion did not depend on the gender of the claimant.

  21. Further, Mr Muquit submitted  that  in  paragraph  24  the  Judge  had
      misread Mr Martin's report as to the consistency of the scarring  with
      the timescale in which the claimant had said she had been ill treated.
       Mr Muquit referred me to a letter dated 9 May 2013 in which Mr Martin
      stated that when he had said that the nature of the scars means: "that
      they are matured and this is inconsistent with the time span described
      by the claimant", the sentence should have read: "this  is  consistent
      with  the  time  span  described  by  the   claimant."     Mr   Muquit
      acknowledged that the letter was not before the  Judge.   However,  he
      submitted that in context what Mr Martin had said in his  report  must
      obviously have meant precisely  what  he  now  said  was  the  correct
      reading of his report.

  22. Finally, Mr  Muquit  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  been  wrong  to
      downgrade the important of Mr Martin's evidence on the basis  that  he
      had not seen, for example, the appellant's interview  record  or  that
      the report did not indicate how long he had examined the appellant  or
      whether he had  discussed  what  treatment  she  had  sought  for  her
      injuries.  Mr Muquit submitted that Mr Martin's report was based  upon
      a proper examination of the claimant and he was clearly aware  of  the
      elements of her claim.

  23. I was referred by both representatives to a number  of  cases  dealing
      with the proper approach to medical reports when a Judge is  assessing
      credibility (JL (Medical Report - Credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145
      (IAC); SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302; HH (Ethiopia) v  SSHD
      [2007] EWCA Civ 306; SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155;  IY
      (Turkey) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 156; MO (Algeria) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA
      Civ 1276 and RR (Challenging Evidence) Sri  Lanka  [2010]  UKUT  00274
      (IAC)).

  24. In SA (Somalia), Sir Mark Potter set out the proper  approach  for  an
      expert when preparing a report, such as in  this  case,  dealing  with
      injuries and their causative agents as follows at [28]-[30]:

         "28.     In any case where the  medical  report  relied  on  by  an
             asylum   seeker   is   not    contemporaneous,    or    nearly
             contemporaneous, with the injuries said to have been suffered,
             and thus potentially corroborative for that very  reason,  but
             is a report made long after the events relied on  as  evidence
             of  persecution,  then,  if  such  report  is  to   have   any
             corroborative  weight  at  all,  it  should  contain  a  clear
             statement of the doctor's opinion as to consistency,  directed
             to the particular injuries said to have occurred as  a  result
             of the torture, or other ill treatment relied on  as  evidence
             of persecution.  It is also desirable that,  in  the  case  of
             marks of injury which are inherently susceptible of  a  number
             of alternative of 'everyday' explanations, reference should be
             made to such fact, together  with  any  physical  features  or
             'pointers' found which may make the particular explanation for
             the injury advanced by the complainant more or less likely.

         29.      In cases where the account of torture is, or is likely  to
             be, the subject of  challenge,  Chapter  Five  of  the  United
             Nations Document, known as the Istanbul Protocol, submitted to
             the United Nations High Commissioner for  Human  Rights  on  9
             August  1999  (Manual  on  the  Effective  Investigation   and
             Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
             Treatment or  Punishment)  is  particularly  instructive.   At
             paras 186-7, under the heading 'D.  Examination and Evaluation
             following specific forms of Torture' it states:

                  '186.      ....  For  each  lesion  and  for  the  overall
                      pattern of lesions, the physician should indicate the
                      degree of consistency between it and the  attribution
                      (a) Not consistent: the lesion could  not  have  been
                      caused by the trauma described; (b) Consistent  with:
                      the lesion could  have  been  caused  by  the  trauma
                      described, but it is non-specific and there are  many
                      other possible causes; (c)  Highly  consistent:   the
                      lesion could have been caused by the trauma described
                      and there are few other possible causes; (d)  Typical
                      of:  this is an appearance that is usually found with
                      this type of trauma, but  there  are  other  possible
                      causes; (e) Diagnostic of:  this appearance could not
                      have been caused in anyway other than that described.

                  187. Ultimately, it  is  the  overall  evaluation  of  all
                      lesions and not the consistency of each lesion with a
                      particular form  of  torture  that  is  important  in
                      assessing the torture story (see Chapter IV.G  for  a
                      list of torture methods).'

         30.      Those  requested  to  supply  medical  reports  supporting
             allegations of torture  by  asylum  claimants  would  be  well
             advised to bear those passages in mind,  as  well  as  to  pay
             close attention to the  guidance  concerning  objectivity  and
             impartiality as set out  at  paragraph  161  of  the  Istanbul
             Protocol."

  25. In JL, the Upper Tribunal pointed out:

         "Those writing medical reports are to ensure  where  possible  that
         before forming their opinions they study any assessments that  have
         already been made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration
         authorities and/or a Tribunal judge ..."

  26. At [29], the Upper Tribunal noted the need for an expert to follow the
      Istanbul Protocol, in particular, dealing with  different  degrees  of
      consistency.  The Upper Tribunal continued:

         "When considering causation of injuries said to have been inflicted
         by torture or other forms of ill-treatment, they  are  to  consider
         possible alternative explanations."

  27. In my judgment, that is precisely what Mr Martin did  in  his  report.
      He considered the options of accidental cause and non-accidental cause
      and, in relation to "scars 1" and "scars 3", concluded that they  were
      intentionally caused and it was "unlikely (if  not  impossible)"  that
      they  were  self-inflicted.   He  concluded,  consistently  with   the
      Istanbul Protocol, that they  were  "typical  of  the  description  of
      events by the claimant of being tortured."  He was not, however,  able
      to determine whether they had been intentionally inflicted by "friends
      or foes".  As regards "scars 2", he again considered  the  options  of
      non-accidental and accidental cause and concluded that they were "most
      likely" intentionally caused.  He considered it was extremely unlikely
      that the burn marks were self-inflicted although that was possible and
      he concluded that the most likely cause  was  by  others  and  it  was
      "typical of the  description  of  events  by  the  claimant  of  being
      tortured".

  28. On its face, these opinions merited a proper and  reasoned  engagement
      by the judge.  I see no basis for the judge  discounting  Mr  Martin's
      views on the basis set out in para 22 of her determination that he may
      not have seen the appellant's interview record, indicated how long  he
      examined the appellant or  whether  he  had  discussed  with  her  the
      treatment she had sought for her  injuries.   Mr  Martin  was  clearly
      aware of the essential  elements  of  the  appellant's  account.   His
      report states that in November 2009 she claims that she was taken to a
      camp where she was "interrogated and tortured:  she  was  blindfolded,
      kicked, beaten with blunt instruments (unable to describe them as  she
      was blindfolded), she was burned with hot cigarette butts and she  was
      sexually assaulted." Mr Martin  needed  to  know  no  more  about  her
      account in order to reach an opinion on the aetiology of her injuries.
       There is no basis for saying that he carried out anything other  than
      a full and professionally competent assessment.

  29. As regards the other matters relied upon by  the  judge,  Mr  Martin's
      reference to the claimant as being male  is  undoubtedly  unfortunate.
      But, equally,  those  references  are  clearly  typographical  errors.
      There can be no doubt that the judge was, as Mr Muquit submitted, well
      aware that the claimant was a woman.  He personally examined her.   In
      any event, those typographical errors in no way  directly  affect  his
      expert opinion on the cause of  her  injuries.   Whilst  the  mistakes
      might be described as 'sloppy', they do not detract from  the  overall
      professional content of Mr Martin's assessment.

  30. As regards the passage in his  report  in  which  he  deals  with  the
      consistency of the claimant's visible injuries with her being  injured
      in November 2009, it is undoubtedly unfortunate that a mistake appears
      to have been made.  It is worth noting that as  written  the  sentence
      does not in fact make sense at all.  It states:

         "the quiescent nature of the scars seen on this  man's  body  means
         that they are matured and this  inconsistent  with  the  time  span
         described by the claimant."

  31. Even on the judge's reading of this sentence the word "is" is  omitted
      between the word "this" and "inconsistent".  Clearly, this should have
      drawn to the judge's attention that this sentence needed very  careful
      analysis to determine its meaning.  Had that been done, it would  have
      been clear that the meaning of the sentence was  that  the  "quiescent
      nature of the scars" meant that they had "matured" and that  "this  is
      consistent with  the  time  span  described  by  the  claimant".   The
      combination of "quiescent nature" and "matured" clearly points to  the
      scars being of some age.  As Mr Muquit pointed out, the  Freedom  from
      Torture report entitled "Sri Lankan Tamils tortured on return from UK"
      dated 13 September 2012 (at pages  18-42  of  the  appellant's  bundle
      before the First-tier Tribunal) at page 24 states that:

         "The healing rate of scars is determined by a  number  of  variable
         factors and their appearance seldom changes significantly after  6-
         12 months when healing has  taken  place.   Therefore,  it  is  not
         usually possible to accurately determine the  exact  age  of  scars
         after this time."

  32. Even if Mr Martin did not have in mind this particular timescale,  the
      point is that  "maturity"  was,  in  his  view,  consistent  with  the
      claimant's case that she had been injured and the scarring occurred in
      November 2009.  That may not  be  forensically  the  appellant's  best
      point arising out of Mr Martin's report but, correctly read, it is  at
      least supportive to some extent of the appellant's account.

  33. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  her
      assessment of Mr Martin's report and the weight that she  attached  to
      it.

  34. Mr Wilding submitted that the report did no more  than  identify  that
      the scars had been intentionally inflicted but  whether  that  was  by
      "friends or foes" Mr Martin could not say.  This  was  not  an  error,
      therefore, that undermined  the  judge's  overall  assessment  of  the
      appellant's credibility.  In my view, that is not correct.

  35. It was never, so far as either representative could tell  me,  put  to
      the  appellant  at  the  hearing  that   these   injuries   had   been
      intentionally inflicted upon her by "friends", in effect  deliberately
      at her request to manufacture supporting evidence for her  claim.   It
      has never been expressly suggested that these injuries, typical of the
      torture described by the claimant, had realistically a different (from
      that claimed) third party cause.  That was a relevant  matter  in  the
      judge's consideration of the expert report together with all the other
      evidence in  the  case  in  reaching  her  overall  finding  (see,  RR
      (Challenging evidence)).  Because the judge took an adverse view of Mr
      Martin's report, she never grappled with his evidence and engaged with
      its terms and its implications in the light of all the evidence in the
      case.

  36. Although Mr Muquit candidly accepted that Mr Martin's report was  only
      a supporting part of the appellant's  claim  to  be  believed,  in  my
      judgment, in itself the Judge's  failure  to  properly  consider  that
      evidence requires that the adverse  credibility  finding  and  be  set
      aside.  It was an important piece of  evidence,  relied  upon  by  the
      claimant, and despite the other reasons given by  the  judge  for  not
      believing the appellant, it is, in my view, impossible to unravel  her
      credibility finding and to be satisfied that it would  have  been  the
      same even had she taken into account Mr Martin's report appropriately.

  37. In addition, there is also merit in Mr  Muquit's  further  submissions
      concerning the judge's other reasons for disbelieving  the  appellant.
      First, that there was,  in  effect,  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
      authorities would be interested  in  the  appellant  (and  indeed  her
      father and sister) in November 2009 when they had previously travelled
      to India in 2007 and  returned  in  June  2009  without  any  apparent
      interest being expressed in  them.   Secondly,  that  the  authorities
      could have no interest in the appellant as she had been able  to  exit
      Colombo Airport in 2010 on her own passport without  any  difficulties
      and,  indeed,  had  obtained  a  new  passport  from  the  authorities
      following her report to the police (disingenuously) that her  passport
      had been lost.  In both these findings, Mr Muquit submitted  that  the
      judge had failed to consider the relevant background evidence.

  38. As regards the former, Mr Murquit relied upon the Freedom from Torture
      report at pages 26-27 as follows:

         "In 3 cases it is not known with certainty whether this association
         with the LTTE  had  or  had  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities prior to the individual coming to the UK; the  other  3
         had been previously detained and tortured in Sri Lanka, two of them
         prior to coming to the UK and one of them when visiting Sri  Lanka,
         while resident in the UK on a student visa.

         The means by which the association with the LTTE was established or
         became known by the Sri Lankan authorities in the former 3 cases is
         not possible to establish with  certainty,  though  informants  are
         known to have been used to identify the  individuals  in  2  cases,
         prior to their detention."

  39. Mr Muquit submitted that this background evidence should have informed
      the judge's reasoning and ultimate finding on whether it was possible,
      for example, that the interest in the  appellant  and  her  family  in
      November 2009 (but not on exiting and entering Sri Lanka in  2007  and
      2009 respectively) may have been the result of informants.

  40. As regards the latter, namely the appellant's departure from Sri Lanka
      in 2010, Mr Muquit referred me to the Country  of  Information  Report
      for Sri Lanka at paras 32.01-32.2 and a letter from the  British  High
      Commission in Colombo dated 28 August 2008.  Extracts are set  out  at
      page 4 of his grounds of appeal.  He also drew  my  attention  to  the
      extracts from the COI Report for March 2012 at paras  25.18-25.21  set
      out in para 46 of the respondent's refusal  letter  dated  23  January
      2013.  That referred to a letter from the British High  Commission  in
      Colombo dated 5 January 2012.  Mr Muquit submitted that in the absence
      of a court order or arrest warrant there would be  no  relevant  check
      upon the appellant, who had a valid passport, which would lead to  her
      encountering difficulties on exit.

  41. I do not propose to set these extracts out at length.  Mr Wilding also
      relied upon them as demonstrating that there were a number of security
      checks through which the appellant would have had  to  pass  prior  to
      leaving Sri Lanka.  The  material  does,  indeed,  show  a  number  of
      security checks are in place.  The British High Commission letter of 5
      January 2012 that the Department of  Immigration  and  Emigration  are
      notified: "only when a court decides to impound the suspect's passport
      or an arrest warrant is issued."

  42. In those circumstances the letter continues:

         "The details of such persons will  be  placed  on  their  alert  or
         wanted list within their database.  There is no other mechanism  to
         ensure that the Immigration Officers are aware of  such  instances.
         Apart from these courts' powers, Immigration Officers have no power
         in law to prevent persons embarking.  The other  method,  which  is
         rare and case specific is that the State Intelligence Service (SIS)
         can  inform  Immigration  Officers  of  individuals  suspected   of
         terrorist activity and those on a wanted list.  Again  the  details
         of suspects will  be  put  on  the  DIE  database.   Without  court
         sanction, Immigration Officers are powerless to put  an  individual
         in detention if they are otherwise satisfied that they have a right
         to enter or live in Sri  Lanka.   The  State  Intelligence  Service
         (SIS) has an office adjacent to the immigration embarkation control
         and DIE officials can refer embarking passengers to  them  if  they
         think it necessary."

  43. In this case, Mr Muquit pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  never
      claimed that an arrest warrant had been issued against her or that any
      court sanction existed.  Indeed, she never claimed that she  had  been
      photographed.

  44. It seems to me that Mr Murquit's first point has some merit: the judge
      did not consider, and therefore, did not discount the possibility that
      an informant(s) had brought  the  appellant  and  her  family  to  the
      authorities' attention.  Of greater merit, however,  is  Mr  Murquit's
      second point.  The background evidence to which I have  been  referred
      was relevant in assessing whether the appellant's  claimed  exit  from
      Sri Lanka without hindrance was or was not plausible.  The evidence is
      not all one way as Mr Wilding submitted.  However, the point  here  is
      that the judge failed to grapple with this evidence  in  reaching  her
      finding that it was implausible that  the  appellant  left  Sri  Lanka
      unhindered.  That in itself, even without regard  to  the  first  less
      strong point, is also an error  of  law  and  further  undermines  the
      adverse credibility finding.

  45. Consequently, in my judgment, the judge's adverse credibility  finding
      cannot stand and her decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.

Decision and Disposal

  46. The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of
      law and its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  cannot  stand.   That
      decision is set aside.

  47. Both representatives invited me, if the  judge's  credibility  finding
      was set aside, to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  my
      view, that is the  appropriate  course  bearing  in  mind  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statements at para 7.2 and the nature and  extent
      of the fact-finding required.

  48. Consequently, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
      de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Braybrook




                           Signed


                           Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                           Date


