
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00486/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 October 2013                              |On 11 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       Jean Faustin Toumanga Kouembou
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Jackson Nicholson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Jean Faustin Toumanga Kouembou, was born on  16  February
    1985 and is a male citizen of Cameroon. A  decision  was  taken  on  19
    November 2012  to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum  and  to  give
    directions for his removal to Cameroon.  The appellant appealed against
    that latter decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge James) which, in
    a determination promulgated on 14 June 2013, dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In the period immediately before the First-tier Tribunal hearing  until
    after he was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appellant was not legally represented. Unfortunately, Judge Baker,  who
    granted permission on 26 July 2013, appears to have  misunderstood  the
    handwritten grounds of appeal submitted by the appellant.  Judge  Baker
    had  been  concerned  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  given   the
    opportunity "to be heard in  his  own  appeal";  she  appears  to  have
    assumed that the appellant had  not  been  present  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing at Hatton Cross because  he  had  been  in  detention.
    That was not the case.   The  parties  agree  that  the  appellant  was
    present at the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 12 March  2013  and  gave
    oral evidence that day.  He had been released from prison  and  granted
    temporary admission to the United Kingdom on 25 January 2013.

 3. Mr Nicholson acknowledged that the grant of permission put  his  client
    in some difficulties.  He did not seek at the initial hearing  to  rely
    on the proposed amended grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    his solicitors had filed on 21 August 2013.  Rather, having  regard  to
    Judge Baker's view (albeit based upon  an  inaccurate  factual  matrix)
    that it had been arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should
    have  adjourned  the  hearing,  he  submitted  that,  faced   with   an
    unrepresented appellant whose former representatives had indicated that
    additional documents (in particular, a magazine article and  a  medical
    report) would be forthcoming in time for the hearing, the judge  should
    have invited the  unrepresented  appellant  to  apply  (again)  for  an
    adjournment;  an application had been made by  the  appellant's  former
    representative but refused by Designated Judge Taylor  on  22  February
    2013 in the following terms:

         "Adjournment refused.  It is the credibility of the appellant as to
         his sexual orientation that is in issue.  A report from the  Bamber
         Foundation is unlikely to assist the Tribunal."

 4. The application for an adjournment by the previous solicitors (Fadiga &
    Co) had asked for further time to produce the Bamber Foundation  report
    together with a translated copy of the magazine/newspaper article which
    referred to the appellant.

 5. The adjournment of appeals before the First-tier Tribunal is subject to
    paragraph 21 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005:

    21 Adjournment of appeals

    (1) Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing of an

    appeal, he must-

    (a) if practicable, notify all other parties of the application;

    (b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and

    (c) produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon in support of

    the application.

    (2) The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an appeal on the

    application of a party, unless satisfied that the appeal cannot
    otherwise

    be justly determined.

    (3) The Tribunal must not, in particular, adjourn a hearing on the

    application of a party in order to allow the party more time to produce



    evidence, unless satisfied that-

    (a) the evidence relates to a matter in dispute in the appeal;

    (b) it would be unjust to determine the appeal without permitting

    the party a further opportunity to produce the evidence; and

    (c) where the party has failed to comply with directions for the

    production of the evidence, he has provided a satisfactory explanation

    for that failure.

    (4) Where the hearing of an appeal is adjourned, the Tribunal will fix
    a

    new hearing date which-

    (a) shall be not more than 28 days after the original hearing date,

    unless the Tribunal is satisfied that because of exceptional

    circumstances the appeal cannot justly be heard within that time; and

    (b) shall in any event be not later than is strictly required by the

    circumstances necessitating the adjournment.







 6. The main  issue  in  the  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  had  been  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim to be homosexual.   In  a  lengthy
    determination,  the  judge  made  detailed  findings  as  regards   the
    appellant's credibility and found that the appellant was not homosexual
    and  that  his  past  account  detailing  difficulties   arising   from
    homosexual relationships was not true.  He  found  that  the  appellant
    would not face a risk on return to Cameroon.  The judge  was  aware  of
    the application made  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  to  the  Bamber
    Foundation because he refers to it at [49] et seq.  He  observed  that,
    "as being gay is not an illness or a mental  disorder,  such  a  report
    from a psychiatrist or psychologist would add little to the appellant's
    claim as it is his credibility and his factual  claims  that  I  am  to
    assess.  Thus it is not known why an  appointment  was  made  with  the
    foundation on this particular point" [50].  The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant was to have an initial assessment with a psychologist  on  30
    April 2013.  There is  no  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  appellant
    attended  that  or,  indeed,  any  appointment  before  October   2013;
    certainly no report or letter was produced  by  the  Bamber  Foundation
    until 21 October 2013.  That report makes no reference to the appellant
    having been examined in April  2013;  Dr  Obuaya  prepared  the  report
    having examined the appellant on 1 October 2013.

 7.  As  regards  the  magazine/newspaper  article,  there  had   been   an
    untranslated copy of the document before  the  judge.   The  judge  was
    under no duty to consider it because there was no  English  translation
    (see Procedure Rules 2005, paragraph 52(3)).

 8. I reject Mr Nicholson's submission there  was  any  obligation  on  the
    judge  to  invite  the  appellant  to  renew  his  application  for  an
    adjournment.  There is no authority to support such a course of  action
    in the 2005 Procedure Rules nor am I aware of any jurisprudence on  the
    issue.  Paragraph 21 of the Rules refers to "where a party applies  for
    an adjournment" and to "on the application of a  party  ...";  clearly,
    there will be occasions when the Tribunal will, of its own  motion  and
    without an application from one of  the  parties,  adjourn  a  hearing.
    Such occurrences are, however, likely to be rare and will  most  likely
    occur where it is obvious that it would be impossible for the  Tribunal
    justly to determine an appeal without an adjournment.  That was not the
    case in the present appeal.  I find that Judge James had  no  cause  to
    revisit the refusal of an  adjournment  directed  by  Designated  Judge
    Taylor.  Indeed, Judge James went on in his determination to repeat the
    reason given by Designated Judge Taylor for refusing  the  adjournment,
    namely that a report from the Bamber Foundation was not likely to  cast
    any light upon the appellant's claimed sexuality.  I also find that  it
    is likely that the appellant had not attended the  psychologist  on  30
    April 2013 because, if he had done so, that attendance would have  been
    recorded in the report which would have been produced before 21 October
    2013.  Further,  the  judge  appears  to  have  had  no  difficulty  in
    understanding the appellant's case and his evidence in respect of which
    he has made very detailed findings.  I find that the judge has properly
    complied with the provisions of paragraph 21(3) of the 2005  Rules.   I
    find, having regard to the particular  circumstances  in  this  appeal,
    that the Tribunal was right to proceed with  the  hearing  because  the
    appeal could be justly determined without an adjournment.  I find  that
    Judge James has given clear  and  cogent  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeal and I have concluded that his determination is free  from  legal
    error.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 30 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
