
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00605/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Matthew Sowerby, Counsel, for S Satha & Co
                    Solicitors London
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8th January  1985.   He
    appealed against the Respondent's decision made on  10th  January  2013
    refusing his claim for asylum and his claims on humanitarian protection
    ground, under the immigration Rules and  under  ECHR.  His  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S J Walker on 25th June 2015.
     He dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 4th August 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson on  16th  September
    2015.  The grounds state that the judge erred in his  consideration  of
    the evidence about  continuing  interest  in  the  Appellant  post  his
    departure from Sri Lanka and he failed to take  into  account  evidence
    and/or materially erred in fact, by stating that the Appellant had  not
    claimed that any attempt to find him was made until  May  2011  as  the
    Appellant's evidence was that in the summer of 2010 his mother had told
    him someone was asking about him.   They  state  that  the  judge  also
    failed to consider the Court of Appeal's view,  expressed  in  MP  (Sri
    Lanka) and Another [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  The permission states that the
    judge found the Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  and  that  his
    injuries were consistent with his account of being tortured.   He  also
    accepted that the  Appellant  had  given  assistance  to  the  LTTE  as
    described but when assessing risk on return the permission states  that
    it is arguable that the judge made factual errors on  the  evidence  of
    the authorities' continuing interest in the appellant and  relating  to
    his  relationship  with  his  cousin  [RA],  who  was  in   charge   of
    intelligence for the LTTE.  The permission states that it  is  arguable
    that the judge erred in his assessment of risk on return  and  did  not
    properly apply the country guidance case of GJ and Others  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2013] UKUT 00319.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response which states that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge directed himself appropriately.  Although the grounds state  that
    the Appellant referred to his cousin in  his  asylum  interview  it  is
    clear from paragraph 59 of the decision that the First-tier  Judge  was
    aware that the Appellant did not mention his cousin  in  his  screening
    interview or his witness statements and so he found that the  Appellant
    did not remain consistent as to why he thought he was being  sought  by
    the authorities.  The response states that at paragraph  58  the  judge
    refers to the Appellant's evidence  that  an  arrest  warrant  was  not
    issued for him and so when the judge followed GJ and Others it was open
    for the judge to find that the Appellant would not be on a "stop"  list
    and that the authorities would not be interested in the Appellant.  The
    response states that the judge fully engaged  with  GJ  and  Others  at
    paragraphs 69 to 81 and assessed whether the Appellant would be at risk
    on return and it was open to the judge, based on the assessment of  the
    evidence, to find that the Appellant would not be at risk on return.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant referred me to the Appellant's  supplementary
    statement about the demonstrations he attended in the  United  Kingdom.
    I was referred to the case of YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360 in  this
    connection.

 5. Counsel submitted that the judge found the Appellant's  account  to  be
    credible relating to his detention, torture, confession and his release
    on a bribe.  He submitted that the judge misdirected himself as  people
    were looking for the Appellant as early as 2010.  With  regard  to  the
    Appellant's cousin [RA], the appellant referred to this cousin  in  his
    asylum interview and the judge misdirected himself when he  found  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk because of his sur place activities.

 6. I was referred to the Appellant's statement in which he states  he  was
    told by his mother that someone was looking for  him  in  2010  so  the
    judge's finding that there was no attempt to find the  Appellant  until
    2011 is not correct.  When his interview record is  considered  Counsel
    submitted that the authorities went to his house after he escaped  from
    detention.  Counsel submitted that this is an important  factual  error
    and the judge found the Appellant to be credible, so this point  should
    not have gone against his credibility.

 7. With regard to the Appellant's cousin, Counsel submitted  that  in  the
    Appellant's asylum interview he gave details of his cousin [RA] and  he
    adopted the interview record as part of his evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  Counsel submitted that the  judge  erred  in  his
    findings about this cousin and this is an  important  error  and  is  a
    misdirection  by  the  judge  and  this  should  not  go  against   his
    credibility.  He submitted that this cousin of the  Appellant  held  an
    important position in  the  LTTE  which  could  be  a  reason  for  the
    authorities being interested in the Appellant on return.  Counsel  also
    submitted that the fact that the Appellant had escaped  from  detention
    and is known to the authorities in Sri Lanka would put him at risk.  He
    submitted that because this cousin was in charge of intelligence in the
    LTTE the appellant's sur place activities are likely to  be  a  problem
    for the Appellant.

 8. I was referred to the said case of GJ and Others which refer to  people
    who are on a "stop" list having to give an address  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    then being visited by the authorities.  Counsel submitted that  if  the
    Appellant is on a "stop" list he  could  well  be  detained  after  his
    background is looked into.  He submitted that this claim is similar  to
    the case of GJ and I was  referred  to  paragraph  397  of  that  case.
    Counsel submitted that the authorities know about the Appellant's  LTTE
    activities and about his sur place activities in the United Kingdom and
    so the authorities in Sri Lanka are likely to find that this  Appellant
    had a significant role when he was  in  Sri  Lanka  so  his  sur  place
    activities are likely to be taken into account along with  his  adverse
    profile in Sri Lanka, putting him at risk on return.

 9. I was referred to the said case of YB (Eritrea). Counsel submitted that
    based  on  this,  the  film  and  the  photographs  of  the   Appellant
    demonstrating in the United Kingdom have to be given weight.  The  case
    of GJ indicates that the authorities will know  about  the  Appellant's
    activities and because of his adverse history he will  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  I was asked to find  that  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the decision in this case is well
    set out and refers to the Appellant's  evidence  and  the  authorities'
    actions in Sri Lanka.

11. With regard to the first ground and the Appellant being  sought  before
    May 2011, I was  referred  to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  at
    paragraph 28 when he states that he stopped studying gradually  in  the
    summer of 2010 because somebody was asking about him and he was worried
    about his family.  She submitted that his statement does  not  indicate
    that the authorities were seeking the  Appellant  in  2010,  just  that
    someone was looking for him.  She submitted that no-one was looking for
    him when he escaped in 2009 and the year's gap from the  date  when  he
    escaped until 2010 is significant as there is no explanation about  why
    there is this gap.  She submitted that the evidence in the  Appellant's
    statement is different from the evidence in his asylum  interview.   In
    his interview he was asked when he  first  knew  the  authorities  were
    going to his house looking for him and he said "September 2011 by post.
     Even before that they were coming home looking for me but she did  not
    tell me."  The Presenting Officer submitted that this is  contradictory
    evidence.

12. I was referred to paragraph 59 of the  decision,  in  which  the  judge
    compares what the Appellant said in  his  two  statements  and  in  his
    asylum interview and screening interview.  The judge  points  out  that
    there is nothing in the Appellant's witness statements about the arrest
    of his uncle's son and nothing to explain why this is a reason for  the
    authorities being interested in  him.   There  is  no  mention  in  the
    Appellant's screening interview that he was  being  sought  because  of
    what his uncle's son had told the authorities about him.   At  question
    187 of his substantive interview the Appellant is  asked  why  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities would suddenly be interested in him since  his  last
    arrest in 2008 and he said that "after he was set free  from  detention
    in 2009 they went to his house to look  for  him  and  then  after  his
    uncle's son, who is in the LTTE, was arrested, they started looking for
    him again."  She submitted that there is no reference to 2010  in  this
    answer and then on 5th May 2011 the Appellant states  that  his  cousin
    was arrested.  I was referred to paragraph 60  of  the  decision  which
    refers to the undated letter from the Appellant's  sister.   The  judge
    points out that there is no indication when the  visits  from  the  CID
    officers to the family home occurred.  He also  refers  to  the  letter
    from the Appellant's mother which states that she has  lost  her  elder
    son as a result of the Appellant's problems but again there is no  date
    on this letter.  There is then reference  made  by  the  judge  to  the
    letter from the priest and the Presenting Officer submitted that  there
    is no mention of visits by the  authorities  to  the  Appellant's  home
    address or of his brother's arrest in this letter.  The letter from the
    priest was written a year after the Appellant states  his  brother  was
    arrested.  The Presenting Officer submitted that when all  of  this  is
    considered the judge was entitled to find that the Appellant's evidence
    is not credible.  At paragraph 63 the judge  states  that  no  attempts
    were made to find the Appellant until May 2011 and this was  two  years
    after the Appellant had escaped and the  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to reach this finding  based  on  what  was
    before him and the differences in the statements,  the  interviews  and
    the letters which were before him.  She submitted that when  these  are
    all taken together they do not support the Appellant's claim.

13. With regard to the Appellant's cousin, the Presenting Officer submitted
    that the Appellant's representative is trying  to  re-argue  the  case.
    The judge in his decision finds it significant that there is no mention
    of the Appellant's cousin in the witness statement.  The judge  accepts
    that he is mentioned in the asylum interview but  he  also  points  out
    that there was no oral evidence given about the cousin at the  hearing.
    She referred to paragraph 59 in which the judge points out  that  there
    is very little detail given in the interview  and  very  little  detail
    given in  the  appellant's  statements.   She  submitted  that  in  the
    screening interview there was no mention of the Appellant being  sought
    because his cousin  was  arrested.   In  the  screening  interview  the
    appellant states he cannot go back to Sri Lanka because his brother has
    been arrested.  She submitted  that  the  judge  also  noted  that  the
    Appellant said he would supply evidence about his cousin and did not do
    so.  Although we now have a death certificate it  was  not  before  the
    judge.  At paragraph 65 of the decision the judge states that there  is
    no evidence to show the family connection  between  the  Appellant  and
    [RA], the said cousin.  She submitted that  if  this  is  an  important
    issue surely evidence could  have  been  produced  about  the  cousin's
    involvement with the LTTE.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is an absence of an  arrest
    warrant, (paragraph 58.)  Then at paragraph 62 the judge states that he
    does not accept that the Appellant's account of continuing interest  in
    him is  credible.   He  refers  to  the  Appellant's  account  and  the
    activities he took part in, not being particularly significant.   Again
    reference is made to there being no arrest warrant.  The judge draws  a
    conclusion from that, which is that the Appellant is of no  significant
    interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka.

15. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 66 of the  decision  which
    explains why the judge does not accept the Appellant's  evidence  about
    his cousin or the Appellant's relationship with him  and  refers  to  a
    nine month delay before the Appellant's brother was supposedly arrested
    as a hostage, for information about the  Appellant.   The  judge  finds
    that this delay goes against the Appellant's credibility.

16. I was referred to the case of GJ and  Others  and  the  question  of  a
    "watch" list if the Appellant flies back to Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 77
    of the decision the Presenting Officer submitted that because there  is
    no arrest warrant and no evidence of any extant court order the country
    guidance is that the Appellant's name will not be on a "watch" list  so
    he will not be stopped at the airport.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant admits that he  has
    not now been keeping up politically with the situation in Sri Lanka.

18. She submitted that even if the Appellant is credible this does not mean
    that there is continuing interest in him on return, or that he will  be
    at risk on return, as there is nothing to indicate that he  is  in  any
    way involved in destabilising the unified  state  of  Sri  Lanka.   She
    submitted that based on the objective evidence and  the  terms  of  the
    country guidance case of GJ and Others the appellant can return  safely
    to Sri Lanka.

19. The Presenting Officer referred me to paragraph  78  of  the  decision.
    This deals  with  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  would  be
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state.  The  judge  accepts  that  as  per  GJ  and  Others  past  LTTE
    activities are relevant but only if they indicate a present risk.   The
    judge finds that the Appellant's perceived past  activities  are  of  a
    relatively low order and although he has attended  some  demonstrations
    and has managed to be  photographed  this  is  the  sum  total  of  his
    diaspora activities.  The judge finds that the Appellant  will  not  be
    regarded as  a  committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to  promote  Tamil
    separatism within Sri Lanka.  The case of GJ  and  Others  states  that
    attendance at demonstrations is not evidence of a person being a  Tamil
    activist and each case has to be decided on its own facts.

20. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant's account up  to
    the date of his departure is credible.  He  submitted  that  if  it  is
    accepted that enquiries were being made about the Appellant before 2011
    this should be given weight as  this  was  after  the  war  ended.   He
    submitted  that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  cousin  was
    instrumental to the Appellant being arrested in  2008  and  so  if  the
    Appellant is found to be  credible  his  cousin's  activities  must  be
    accepted as well.  He submitted that the judge found the  Appellant  to
    be entirely credible but he failed to give weight to these two matters.
     He submitted that  these  are  significant  errors  and  must  form  a
    material error of law in the judge's decision.

21. With regard to the fact that there is no arrest warrant I was  referred
    to the COI Report in which it states that an arrest warrant will not be
    produced as arrest warrants are not served on individuals they are kept
    on file.  He submitted that no weight can be given to the fact that  no
    arrest warrant is available.

22. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

23. The judge found the Appellant to be credible up to  the  date  when  he
    left Sri Lanka.  His story is backed  up  by  the  objective  evidence.
    What happened to the Appellant is what happened to many young Tamil men
    before the war ended.  This does not single the  Appellant  out.   With
    regard to whether the Appellant was being sought  before  May  2011  is
    dealt with adequately in the judge's decision.  As pointed out  by  the
    Presenting Officer  his  mother  apparently  told  the  Appellant  that
    someone was looking for him but she does not mention  the  authorities.
    The judge refers to there being no arrest warrant for the Appellant.  I
    have noted the COI Report about this but the  Appellant's  evidence  is
    that there is no arrest warrant against him.  The judge points out that
    the Appellant's last arrest was in 2008 and if he was being  sought  by
    the authorities in 2010 there is no explanation of the  2  year  delay.
    At paragraph 59 the judge deals properly with the Appellant's  evidence
    of when he was arrested and when he was being sought.  The judge refers
    to there being no mention of the arrest of his cousin as his cousin  is
    only mentioned once in his interview and he then points  out  that  the
    letters supporting the Appellant's account, from his mother, sister and
    his priest are undated and the letter from the priest makes no  mention
    of the Appellant's brother being arrested  and  disappearing.   All  of
    these matters  go  against  the  Appellant's  credibility.   The  judge
    believes the Appellant up to the time he left Sri Lanka but he  clearly
    finds there are credibility issues in his evidence since he came to the
    United Kingdom.  He finds that, in any case, based on  the  Appellant's
    account, his activities in Sri Lanka were not significant.  He was  not
    an active fighter and he did not play a significant role in  the  LTTE.
    The judge admits that during the  civil  war  he  might  have  been  of
    interest to the authorities but since the war ended he finds that he is
    of no interest.   His findings are based on the evidence before him.

24. The judge points out the lack  of  any  evidence  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his cousin and the lack of  any  evidence  of
    his cousin's role in the LTTE.  Corroboration is  not  required  in  an
    asylum case but if it is possible to get evidence which would  help  an
    Appellant's case he should do so and the appellant has not done so.  At
    paragraph 69 onwards the judge considers whether the  Appellant  is  at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka now and refers in particular  to  the  said
    case of GJ and Others.  At paragraph 72 he refers to the change in  the
    situation in Sri Lanka since the end of the war and at paragraph 74  he
    accepts the Appellant's evidence of his post-diaspora activities but as
    these  amount  to   nothing   more   than   attendance   at   pro-Tamil
    demonstrations he does not find that these put him in any  danger.   He
    notes that the Appellant  was  no  way  involved  in  organising  these
    demonstrations and finds that he was not  a  member  of  any  pro-Tamil
    organisation based on his oral evidence.  He finds that on  return  the
    appellant will not be perceived to be  a  Tamil  activist  involved  in
    destabilising the unified state of Sri Lanka.

25. The judge at paragraph 78 finds the Appellant's name will not be  on  a
    "watch" list.  Proper reasons are given for this.

26. Based on what was before  the  judge  he  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did.  All the grounds  of  application  were  dealt  with
    adequately by him in his decision.

27. Any factual errors made by the judge are not material.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the judge's decision.   His
decision promulgated on 4th August 2015 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
on all grounds must stand.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
