
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/00626/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 June 2017                          | On 07 July 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    T K B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra, Solicitor from Harbans Singh & Co (Soho
                    Road) Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court.  I  make  this  order  because  this  appeal  arises  from  a
       protection claim and asylum  seekers  are,  generally,  entitled  to
       privacy.

    2. This is an appeal brought with permission of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Finch against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the
       appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
       that she is not a refugee or  otherwise  entitled  to  international
       protection.

    3. There are some  unusual  features  in  this  case  and  I  begin  by
       considering the appellant's immigration history.

    4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  She was born in January
       1949.  She entered the United Kingdom in April 2013 with her husband
       using a family visit visa.

    5. During the currency of that leave she applied for  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules and the application was refused in September 2013.
        She appealed and the appeal was heard and dismissed in  a  decision
       promulgated in April 2014.  Her appeal rights were exhausted in  May
       2014.

    6. On 15 October 2014 she asked for an appointment to claim asylum  and
       was given an appointment when she made her claim on 23 October 2014.
        Her husband was identified as her dependant.  On  4  December  2015
       her asylum claim was refused as "clearly unfounded" and she was told
       of that decision in January 2016.  She was  dissatisfied  with  that
       decision and sought judicial review.  Eventually the  decision  that
       the application was clearly unfounded was withdrawn.  As a result of
       the withdrawal of the certificate the decision of  4  December  2015
       (communicated  on  7  January  2016)  became  appealable   but   the
       respondent gave further reasons in a decision letter dated 22  April
       2016.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was an appeal
       against the decision for the reasons set out in that letter.

    7. I begin by considering  the  reasons  in  the  letter.   The  letter
       includes  a  column  identifying  the  appellant's  nationality  and
       states: "Afghanistan but removable to India also".

    8. The letter notes that the appellant said that she feared  return  to
       Afghanistan because she would face mistreatment because she  follows
       the Sikh religion.

    9. She outlined various significant events that had happened to her  in
       Afghanistan.  She said that somewhere around 1990 the  local  temple
       that she attended was attacked by Muslim gunmen and she was shot  in
       the leg.  Other people were killed during the same  attack  but  the
       police arrived and killed the gunmen.

   10. On a date that she could not recall during the war her  husband  was
       kidnapped in Afghanistan by the  Mujahideen  but  was  released  the
       following day.  About six or seven days later her son was kidnapped,
       severely beaten and released after two or three days on payment of a
       ransom.

   11. On a date she could not recall she left Afghanistan  for  India  but
       gave inconsistent answers indicating that she had  left  Afghanistan
       for India to see her children or that her children  accompanied  her
       to India.  She also claimed that she had  left  Afghanistan  because
       she was afraid after she had been shot at in the temple.

   12. Significantly, she said that she was given leave to remain in  India
       which she renewed every three months.  She remained in India for two
       or three years before returning to Afghanistan in the year  2000  to
       see her sons who had previously returned to Afghanistan.

   13. She said she claimed asylum in India in 2000.  On  an  unknown  date
       she returned to  India  after  two  or  two  and  a  half  years  in
       Afghanistan to protect her daughters from attempted  kidnap  because
       of the general security situation.  Her sons travelled to the United
       Kingdom.

   14. She claimed that she feared harm from the Taliban or the  Mujahideen
       because of her religion and the general poor security  situation  in
       Afghanistan.   The  refusal  letter  shows  that   the   respondent,
       correctly, corrected herself that a pre-requisite of a person  being
       recognised as a refugee is that she is  "outside  their  country  of
       nationality (or country of former habitual  residence  if  they  are
       stateless) and are unable  or,  owing  to  a  fear  of  persecution,
       unwilling to return to it before they can qualify for  international
       protection as a refugee ...".

   15. The  respondent  acknowledged  that  the  applicant  had  previously
       submitted a passport identifying her as a  national  of  Afghanistan
       and accepted that she is a national of Afghanistan as claimed.

   16.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the  applicant  follows  the  Sikh
       religion.  The respondent declined to decide if  the  appellant  had
       been shot in a Sikh temple as she claimed and found her evidence too
       vague to accept that her husband and sons had been kidnapped.

   17. At paragraph 23 the respondent said:

  "You have stated that you claimed asylum in India in 2000 (AIR q132-133).
   You have provided no supporting evidence of this application.   However,
  by your own account you returned to Afghanistan in  the  year  2000  (AIR
  q20).  Therefore, even if it were to be accepted  that  you  had  claimed
  asylum in India, which it is not, it is considered that  this  claim  has
  been invalidated, and any subsequent status you may have been granted  as
  a refugee, was revoked on account of your actions in re-availing yourself
  of the protection of Afghanistan".

   18. The Secretary of State then noted that the appellant had shown  that
       she had leave to remain in India where she was a long term  resident
       and had an Indian residency book.  She said she  had  two  daughters
       settled in India even though they were Afghan nationals.

   19. Her Afghanistan passport had an exit visa  from  India  and  also  a
       return visa valid for a single entry until 30 June 2014.  That  date
       had clearly passed.

   20. At the hearing of an appeal against an earlier refusal of asylum the
       Immigration Judge found that the appellant was entitled to  re-enter
       India and held that:

  "They are persons of Indian origin who have every right to a card  issued
  to such persons in accordance with the Indian Nationality Law regulations
  as known in the public domain.  This would  be  almost  made  certain  by
  their life there for fifteen years".

   21. It will be appreciated that when that decision  was  made  in  April
       2014 the appellant had shown she had a return visa  valid  until  30
       June 2014.

   22. The Reasons for Refusal Letter  then  referred  to  the  case  of  D
       (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  which  is  perhaps  better  known  as
       "Devaseelan".

   23. The Secretary of State then referred to the reported decision of  ST
       (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return)  Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT
       00215 (IAC)  which  summarised  other  case  law  and  included  the
       observation that a "claimant must demonstrate that  he  or  she  has
       done all that would be reasonably expected to facilitate return as a
       national of [in that case] Ethiopia".

   24. The Secretary of State then said at paragraph 29:

  "Following the principles of the above case,  taking  into  account  your
  previous lengthy period of right to reside in  India,  it  is  considered
  that the burden of proof is on  you  to  demonstrate  that  you  are  not
  entitled to return to India and that you have taken all reasonable  steps
  to facilitate your return to India".

   25. The letter then informed the reader that:

  "it is considered that you are able to obtain a legal right  to  re-enter
  and reside in India".

   26. The letter then looked at the risks  the  appellant  might  have  in
       Afghanistan and showed that the respondent did not believe that  she
       had been shot at or that her son and husband had been  kidnapped  as
       alleged or at all.

   27. The letter then referred to the guidance  given  in  TG  and  Others
       (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) (CG) [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC) where the Upper
       Tribunal found that some members of the Sikh and  Hindu  communities
       in Afghanistan continue to suffer harassment at the hands of  Muslim
       zealots but that members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
       Afghanistan do not generally face a real risk of persecution or ill-
       treatment.   However  the  same  decision  noted  that  "women   are
       particularly vulnerable in the  absence  of  appropriate  protection
       from a male member of  the  family"  and  that  a  Muslim  would  be
       unlikely to employ a  member  of  the  Sikh  or  Hindu  communities.
       Additionally, the letter acknowledged that the  difficulties  facing
       Sikh and Hindu and as the community Afghanistan  reduced  in  number
       the Gurdwara was less able to provide adequate support.

   28. At paragraph 29 of the decision the respondent said:

     "Following the principles of the above cases, taking into account your
  previous lengthy period of a right to reside in India, it  is  considered
  that the burden of proof is on  you  to  demonstrate  that  you  are  not
  entitled to return to India and that you have taken all reasonable  steps
  to facilitate your return to India.

  30  Based on the findings of the Immigration Judge, and  the  above  case
  law, it is considered that you are able to obtain the legal right to  re-
  enter and reside in India".

   29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that the  appellant  could  be
       returned safely to Afghanistan but also that the appellant could  be
       returned to India.  At paragraph 26 the judge said:

     "Judge Kanagaratnam also made findings about the  appellant's  ability
  to live in India.  I remind myself that the  appellant  and  her  husband
  left Afghanistan in 2000 and lived in India, lawfully, until they came to
  the United Kingdom in 2014.  They had  previously  spent  time  in  India
  before 2000.  They own property in India, which the appellant told me was
  still available to her and was currently locked up.   The  appellant  has
  two daughters in India.  She is still in contact with both of them.

  27  Judge Kanagaratnam found, at paragraph 11 of his  decision  that  the
  appellant (and her husband) were likely to be able  to  return  to  India
  even though their visa had expired on 30 June 2006.   The  appellant  has
  not successfully challenged this finding, which was the  basis  of  Judge
  Kanagaratnam's rejection of the appellant's claim  that  the  appellant's
  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  breach   the   Human   Rights
  Convention".

   30. Presently I am concerned with the question of whether the  appellant
       could be returned to India.

   31. I have read the decision of Judge Kanagaratnam.   It  was  certainly
       his view that the appellant could return to India but I do not agree
       that he found that it was irrelevant that the appellant at the  time
       of his decision still had leave to return.  I do not understand  the
       chronology because Judge Kanagaratnam said at paragraph  11  of  his
       decision:

  "The period of stay in India is until 30 June 2006.  There is no evidence
  before me to establish that the appellants do not have the possibility of
  returning to India a prospect which they claim to have  now  lost.   They
  are persons of Indian origin who have every right to  a  card  issued  to
  such persons in accordance with the Indian Nationality Law regulations as
  known in the public domain.  This would be almost made certain  by  their
  life there for fifteen years.  For all these  reasons  I  find  that  the
  removal of the appellants from the United Kingdom  would  not  cause  the
  United Kingdom to be in breach of  its  obligations  under  the  European
  Convention of Human Rights".

   32. The respondent directed herself  correctly  about  the  need  for  a
       refugee to be outside her  country  of  nationality  or  country  of
       habitual residence if she had lost her nationality.  I  struggle  to
       see why the Secretary of State, notwithstanding Judge Kanagaratnam's
       observations, considered the possibility of returning the  appellant
       to India.  She is not a national of India.  I am not  aware  of  any
       principle of international law that requires a potential refugee  to
       exclude the possibility of her being a national of a  country  where
       she happened to live for a time when considering a protection  case.
       The decision in ST considered the judgments in MA (Ethiopia)  [2009]
       EWCA Civ 289 but that concerned a case where a person was a national
       of a country that had divided.  It does not illuminate  an  approach
       to take when a person has happened to live in a country for a  time.
       The plain fact is that the appellant is not a national of India  and
       has not lost her Afghani nationality.  I can see no basis  on  which
       she can be returned  to  India  and  that  part  of  the  appeal  is
       essentially a red herring.  The judge was  wrong  to  say  that  the
       appellant could be returned to India.

   33. This of course is not the end of  the  matter.   There  was  also  a
       finding that the appellant could be returned  to  Afghanistan.   The
       difficulties facing Sikh and Hindu  communities  in  Afghanistan  is
       something that has taxed the Tribunal  for  many  years.   The  most
       recent consideration was in the case of TG and Others (Afghan  Sikhs
       persecuted) Afghanistan (CG) [2015] UKUT  00595  (IAC).   This  case
       recognised that there needs to be an individual  assessment  in  any
       case involving a Sikh from Afghanistan and particular  consideration
       needs to be given to the plight of lone women.  Here the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge was satisfied the appellant would not be returned  as
       a lone woman but with  her  husband,  and  was  satisfied  that  the
       appellant could raise capital by selling her property in India.   In
       other words, she would be neither alone nor penniless.  Nobody would
       expect a 68 year old woman from Afghanistan who  has  lived  in  the
       United Kingdom for some fifteen years to  approach  returning  there
       with any enthusiasm.  Clearly it would be difficult for her but  the
       evidence does not support a conclusion that she would be  persecuted
       or that her human rights would  be  contravened  by  reason  of  her
       returning to  her  country  of  nationality.   Here  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge, albeit in a rather brisk  way,  has  considered  the
       facts appropriately in the  light  of  clear  country  guidance  and
       nothing was placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to show that
       a different conclusion should have been reached and nothing was  put
       before me to show that the judge's conclusion was wrong.

   34. The judge clearly dismissed the appeal "under the Refugee Convention
       and Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention".  For  all
       practical purposes the decision on refugee, article 2 and article  3
       grounds will hang together. Article 8 can raise  separate  questions
       but there is no evidence that there were weighty "private and family
       life" matters  that  require  detailed  consideration.  Clearly  the
       appellant's status in the United Kingdom has  been  precarious.  She
       has not established a right to remain.

   35. I have reflected a little on this determination because it  concerns
       me that so much time has been given to the possibility of  returning
       the appellant to India which, in my judgment, is not  an  option  in
       this case.  It is my considered view that my conclusion that removal
       to India is not an option is  the  right  conclusion  and  attention
       ought to  have  been  focused  on  the  problems  of  returning  the
       appellant to Afghanistan.

   36. For the reasons outlined above I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did a satisfactory job in that part  of  the  decision  and
       reached a conclusion that was open for the reasons given.

   37. It follows therefore that I find no material error and I dismiss the
       appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 July 2017                    |





