

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
AA/00304/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Sent:                     |
|On 4 July 2013                               |On 5 July 2013            |
|                                             |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                     M K
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      22 May 2013 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson in respect  of  the
      determination of Immigration Judge Oxlade  who  dismissed  the  appeal
      following a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  by  way  of  a  determination
      promulgated on 1 May 2013.
   2.       The applicant is a Lebanese national born on 19 January 1983. He
      claimed asylum in December 2012 prior to the  expiry  of  his  student
      visa. His claim is that he is gay and that he would be at risk  if  he
      returned to Lebanon.

   3.       The application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State
      on 13 December 2012 and a decision to remove him by way of  directions
      was made.

   4.       The appeal came before me on 4 July 2013. I heard submissions on
      whether or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a  point
      of law.

   5.       At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated  that  I  would  be
      setting aside the determination and allowing the appeal. I now give my
      reasons for so doing.

Findings and Reasons

   6.       Mr Chelvan relied on two grounds. The first was that  the  judge
      erred in failing to  apply  the  reasonableness  test  when  assessing
      whether the appellant could internally relocate. The second was  based
      on a contradiction between the judge's acceptance of certain  evidence
      and her finding that the appellant would be able to  live  openly  and
      freely as a gay man in Beirut. I deal with each challenge in turn.

   7.       The judge accepted that the appellant was gay and accepted  that
      he would be at risk if he returned to his home area.  She  then  asked
      herself whether the appellant could relocate to Beirut  without  there
      being a real risk of persecution (at  paragraph  52).  Mr  Chelvan  is
      quite right to say that this is the wrong test and  Mr  Nath  did  not
      seek to challenge that. The judge should have been looking at  whether
      it would be reasonable to expect the appellant  to  relocate  and  she
      should have taken account of his personal circumstances,  as  detailed
      before her, in making that assessment. She failed to do  either.  That
      is an error of law. It makes the determination unsustainable.

   8.       With  respect  to  the  second  challenge,  I  was  referred  to
      paragraph 53 of the determination. In that paragraph the judge accepts
      that the government introduced anal testing in order to  identify  gay
      men. Mr Chelvan argued that despite  the  other  articles  before  the
      judge on gay tourism (geared, it  has  to  be  said,  towards  foreign
      tourists rather than locals), this evidence and the judge's acceptance
      of same showed that the appellant would not be able to live freely  in
      Beirut or anywhere else. Having considered the evidence  contained  in
      the bundle I concur with Mr Chelvan's submissions.   Whilst it may  be
      that the public have condemned such testing, the fact  that  they  are
      continuing  does  demonstrate  the  attitude  of  the  state   towards
      homosexuality.  It  therefore  directly  impacts  on  the  appellant's
      ability to live freely and openly as a gay man in Lebanon. This  being
      the case, I did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  hear  further  oral
      evidence from the appellant and Mr Nath did not indicate that  he  had
      any questions to  ask.  The  judge  erred  in  her  finding  that  the
      appellant would be able to live freely and openly without any fear  of
      persecution given the evidence before her on the attitude of the state
      (which she accepted).

Decision

   9.       The First-tier Tribunal made errors  of  law  which  render  the
      determination unsustainable. I set it aside and remake  the  decision.
      The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 grounds.

Anonymity

  10.       The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
      of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
      continue that order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      4 July 2013











