

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00879/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 - 21 October 2013                       |On 13 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Howard, Fountain Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history

    1. The Secretary of State appeals against the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge T.  Jones  following  a  hearing  before  him  on  16
       February 2010. For the sake of continuity, we shall refer to  JK  as
       the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal and the Court
       of Appeal.


    2. This is one of seven appellants whose appeals were remitted  by  the
       Court of Appeal in its decision SS & Ors (Zimbabwe) SSHD [2013] EWCA
       Civ 237.  One of the six appellants (SC) has been granted  leave  to
       remain by the Secretary of State.   We  heard  the  appeals  by  the
       remaining appellants on dates between 14 and 21 October as  directed
       by the Court of Appeal. Ms Isherwood represented the respondent  and
       Mr Howard the appellants in each case.  We heard generic submissions
       from the representatives on the current situation in Zimbabwe in the
       light of the further country guidance decision by the Upper Tribunal
       in CM (EM country guidance,  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00059 (IAC) approving the earlier country guidance  decision  in  EM
       (Zimbabwe)  &  Ors  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC)  and   specific
       submissions in each case at the conclusion of all the evidence.

    3. We  have  made  separate  determinations  for  each  appellant.  Our
       analysis of the case law is of application to all six appeals and is
       therefore reproduced without amendment in each  determination,  save
       where the specific circumstances of an appellant require  additional
       consideration.

    4. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on  13  December
       1973. He married S.E.K. in a traditional  ceremony  in  Zimbabwe  in
       1998. They have three children. A son, P, was born in Zimbabwe on 29
       October 1998. The appellant's wife entered the United Kingdom  as  a
       student in 2000, travelling alone. The appellant travelled to  South
       Africa in January 2002, claiming that he left as a  refugee,  having
       earlier left their  son  with  his  mother-in-law  in  Bulawayo.  He
       arrived in the United Kingdom with P where he was lawfully permitted
       to enter as a dependant of his wife or,  in  his  own  right,  as  a
       student. His leave to remain continued until 30 November 2007.

    5. Since the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom the couple  were
       married in a civil ceremony in June 2004. K  was  born  on  27  June
       2006.  Their third child was born after the appellant's  appeal  had
       been determined.  Both younger children  were  born  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

    6. The appellant did not claim asylum until 23 November 2009, by  which
       time he had been in the United  Kingdom  for  nearly  8  years.  His
       application was refused although he was granted discretionary  leave
       to remain in the United Kingdom until 22 December 2012. No  decision
       to remove him has been made.  This is a s. 83 'up-grade' appeal.

The determination of Judge Jones

    7. The determination of the appellant's appeal  heard  by  Judge  Jones
       followed  a  hearing  in  Bradford  on  16  February  2010.  In  his
       determination, the Judge rejected the  appellant's  claims  to  have
       been a member of the MDC in Zimbabwe or to have  been  detained  and
       ill-treated as  he  claimed.  He  rejected  the  evidence  that  the
       appellant had attended meetings in the United Kingdom  (in  relation
       to which he could not recall  the  location)  and  his  presence  at
       vigils outside the Zimbabwe High Commission since 2003 as an attempt
       "to embolden his claim in relation to MDC affiliation in the  United
       Kingdom". He rejected the evidence  of  a  MDC  membership  card  as
       materially assisting his claim as it had been  completed  after  the
       event with  the  relevant  ticks  and  initials  completed  at  what
       appeared to be the same time and by the same hand. He placed  little
       or no weight upon other written material from the MDC in the  United
       Kingdom. However, he allowed the appeal for  the  following  reasons
       set out in paragraph 27 of the determination:

         However, the appellant's claim bearing in mind the Country Guidance
         decision in RN (Zimbabwe)  [2008]  UKAIT  00083  is  such  that  in
         respect of the  appellant's  claim  highlighted  within  his  first
         statement that he would be unable to show support for  the  present
         regime is something that I find is  well  made  out,  applying  the
         appropriate standard, on the basis of imputed political opinion.  I
         find that he has a well founded fear of persecution and a real risk
         of his protected rights being breached at  this  time  if  he  were
         returned to his home country in light  of  this  authority.  It  is
         clear that he has not voted in any of the  more  recent  elections,
         that he has been in the United Kingdom for a significant period  of
         time, and if returned doubtless would be noted as  having  made  an
         unsuccessful claim which are in themselves  capable  of  giving  an
         enhanced risk on return. If challenged on return to his home  area,
         or even indeed if travelling if challenged, he would be  unable  to
         demonstrate any support for the present regime, and  be  completely
         unaware of campaign slogans or songs.  As  such,  determining  this
         appeal, I note reference therein to RN as regards  paragraphs  231,
         234 and 259 and the objective material supplied on  behalf  on  the
         appellant.

    8. The reference to paragraphs 231, 234 and 259 of the decision  in  RN
       was to incorporate the following reasoning in the determination:


         231. But,  apart  from  in  those  circumstances,  having  made  an
         unsuccessful asylum claim in the United Kingdom will make  it  very
         difficult for the returnee to demonstrate the loyalty to the regime
         and the ruling party necessary to avoid the risk of serious harm at
         the hands of the War Veterans or militias that  are  likely  to  be
         encountered either on the way to the  home  area  or  after  having
         returned there. This is because, even  if  such  a  person  is  not
         returning to one of the areas where risk arises simply  from  being
         resident there, he will be unable to demonstrate that he voted  for
         Zanu-PF and so  he  may  be  assumed  to  be  a  supporter  of  the
         opposition, that being sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk  of
         being subjected to ill-treatment such as to infringe article 3.


         234. For these reasons, a person not able to demonstrate loyalty to
         Zanu-PF or with the regime in some form or other will  be  at  real
         risk having returned to Zimbabwe from  the  United  Kingdom  having
         made an unsuccessful asylum claim. That will be regardless  of  the
         mechanics of his return. Those with whom he would have to  deal  in
         his home area or other place of relocation would be concerned, once
         he had failed to demonstrate any links with Zanu-PF, not  with  the
         method by which he had been returned from the  United  Kingdom  but
         simply with the fact that his having  made  an  asylum  claim  here
         demonstrated him to be a disloyal person who had not supported  the
         party in the elections and as a potential supporter of the MDC.


         259. The  fact  of  having  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         significant period of time  and  of  having  made  an  unsuccessful
         asylum claim are both matters capable of giving rise to an enhanced
         risk because, subject to what we have said at paragraph 242 to  246
         above, such a person is in general reasonably likely to be  assumed
         to be a supporter of the MDC and  so,  therefore,  someone  who  is
         unlikely to vote for or support the ruling party, unless he is able
         to demonstrate the loyalty to Zanu-PF or other alignment  with  the
         regime that would negate such an assumption.


    9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly, sitting as a Deputy Upper  Tribunal
       Judge, allowed the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
       as disclosing an error of  law  but  he  did  so  with  considerable
       hesitation and remarking that "the  judge  should  not  therefore  a
       reproach himself for what I have ultimately concluded was  an  error
       of law." In finding this error, Judge Kelly relied  upon  paragraphs
       246 and 230 in RN (in that order):


         246. So, this will be a question of fact to  be  resolved  in  each
         case. This may come down to a simple assessment of credibility. But
         immigration judges are well accustomed to making  such  judgements.
         An appellant who has been found not to be a  witness  of  truth  in
         respect of the factual basis of his claim will not be assumed to be
         truthful about his inability to demonstrate loyalty to  the  regime
         simply because he asserts that. The burden remains on the appellant
         throughout to establish the facts upon which he seeks to rely.


         230. It remains the position,  in  our  judgement,  that  a  person
         returning to his home area from the  United  Kingdom  as  a  failed
         asylum seeker will not generally be at risk on that account  alone,
         although in some cases that may in fact be sufficient to give  rise
         to a real risk. Each case will  turn  on  its  own  facts  and  the
         particular circumstances of the individual are to be assessed as  a
         whole. If such a person (and as we explain below there may be a not
         insignificant number) is in fact associated with the regime  or  is
         otherwise a person who would be returning to a milieu where loyalty
         to the regime is assumed, he will not be at any  real  risk  simply
         because he has spent time in  the  United  Kingdom  and  sought  to
         extend his stay by making a false asylum claim.


10. It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant commenced work as a
    Customs Officer in Harare in March 1994 when he was about 20 years old.
    He remained in post until he left Zimbabwe in  January  2002,  spending
    tours of duty in various other locations across Zimbabwe.

The decision of the Court of Appeal in SS and others (Zimbabwe) v SSHD

11. In SS and others (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 237,  the  Court  of
    Appeal in remitting the appeal to be re-heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    said, amongst other things, in relation to JK:


     1. The Upper Tribunal decided, by determination  dated  6  June  2011,
        that there had, on the  bases  advanced  and  by  reference  to  RN
        (Zimbabwe), been a material error of law on the part of the  First-
        tier Tribunal. It was among other things  held  "with  considerable
        hesitation"  that  there  was  insufficient  evidential  basis  for
        Immigration Judge Jones' conclusion that JK would not  be  able  to
        demonstrate his loyalty to Zanu-PF on return. In my view, a  proper
        basis was indeed made out for setting aside the decision  of  Judge
        Jones on the footing of a material error of law. The  decision  was
        set aside and a continuation hearing was directed, the findings  of
        fact of Immigration Judge Jones being preserved:  although  in  the
        event further oral evidence was permitted to be given by JK. At the
        continuation hearing, emphasis was placed by the Secretary of State
        on JK having been a customs officer in Harare and so would  be  one
        in respect of whom loyalty would  be  assumed.  Reliance  was  also
        placed on EM (Zimbabwe). The conclusion was that the  Secretary  of
        State's appeal should be allowed.
     1. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  was
        granted by Moses LJ after an oral hearing.
     1. I would reject Mr Mahmood's argument that JK's appeal now should be
        allowed outright. The appeal was by no means assured of success  in
        the  light  of  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and  the  country  guidance  in  RN
        (Zimbabwe), let alone  that  contained  in  EM  (Zimbabwe)  as  now
        restated in CM (Zimbabwe). In the light of the finding that JK  was
        a government customs officer for a number of years and one in  whom
        loyalty  would  be  assumed,  and  in  the  light  of  the  adverse
        credibility findings, it is by no  means  to  be  accepted  without
        further  examination  that  he  was  not   a   Zanu-PF   supporter,
        notwithstanding his sur place activities in the United Kingdom such
        as  they  were;  or  that  he  would  (if  stopped)  be  unable  to
        demonstrate loyalty or be required to lie.  Further  (although  the
        matter may need further investigation) the  milieu  from  which  he
        came also may suggest that he may not be at risk of  being  stopped
        and interrogated. But these further matters also  indicate,  in  my
        view, that it likewise would not be right to  dismiss  this  appeal
        outright.
     1. I can see no basis for saying that it would in any event be  unjust
        for the appeal not to be allowed outright but to  be  remitted.  We
        were told in fact that  SK  has  since  been  granted  five  years'
        discretionary leave to remain: but I do not think  that  can  alter
        the otherwise appropriate disposition.


   12. On 30 May 2013,I gave directions  for  the  resumed  hearing  to  be
       conducted on the basis of this direction.

The Country Guidance

   13. In CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00059, the Tribunal  reviewed  the  authorities  of  RN  (Returnees)
       Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083; RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ  1285:
       RS and Others (Zimbabwe - AIDS) Zimbabwe  CG  [2010]  UKUT  363;  HS
       (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094   and  in
       particular, the Country Guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  EM  and
       Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC).  The assessment
       in EM as to the position in Zimbabwe at the end of January 2011  had
       not been vitiated by the Tribunal's reliance on  anonymous  evidence
       from certain sources  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  Fact  Finding
       Mission report of 2010. The Tribunal was entitled to find that there
       had been a durable change since RN (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
       UKAIT 00083. The only change to the EM Country Guidance relating  to
       the position as at the end of January 2011 arose from the  judgments
       of member of the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.


   14. The guidance as re-stated,  with  the  appropriate  amendments,  was
       that, as a general matter, there was significantly less  politically
       motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with   the   situation
       considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the  evidence  did  not
       establish that, in general, the return of  a  failed  asylum  seeker
       from the United Kingdom, having no significant  MDC  profile,  would
       result in that person facing a real risk of  having  to  demonstrate
       loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

   15. The position was, however, likely to be otherwise in the case  of  a
       person  without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
       Kingdom after a significant absence to a  rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
       other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such  a  person
       might well find it difficult to avoid adverse  attention,  amounting
       to serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  figures  in  a  position  of
       authority or those whom they  controlled.   Such  adverse  attention
       might well  involve  demonstrating  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF,  with  the
       prospect of serious harm in the event of failure.

   16. In accordance with RT, persons not favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF
       were and remain entitled to international protection, whether or not
       they could and would do whatever might be necessary  to  demonstrate
       such loyalty.  However, the situation was  not  uniform  across  the
       relevant rural areas. For example, the evidence might disclose that,
       in the home village, ZANU-PF power  structures  or  other  means  of
       coercion were weak or absent.  That  said,  as  a  general  rule,  a
       returnee from the United Kingdom  to  rural  Matabeleland  North  or
       Matabeleland  South  was  highly  unlikely   to   face   significant
       difficulty from ZANU-PF elements,  including  the  security  forces,
       even if the returnee were a MDC member or supporter. (So, too,  with
       a returnee to Bulawayo, who would  not  generally  suffer  any  such
       adverse attention even if he or she had a significant MDC  profile.)
       There might be exceptions: an individual might be able to show  that
       his or her village or area was one that was,  unusually,  under  the
       sway of a ZANU-PF chief or the like.

   17.  A  returnee  to  Harare  would  in  general  face  no   significant
       difficulties, if going to  a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
       Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  was  more
       challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  would
       not face significant problems there  (including  a  'loyalty  test')
       unless he or she had a significant MDC profile,  which  might  cause
       him or her to feature on a list of those targeted for harassment, or
       would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
       adverse attention of ZANU-PF,  or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to
       engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming  to  the
       adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

   18. In relation to internal relocation, a person's home for the purposes
       of  internal  relocation  is  a  matter  of  fact,  not  necessarily
       determined by a person's rural  homeland.  In  most  cases,  it  was
       unlikely that a person with a well-founded fear of persecution in  a
       major urban centre such as  Harare  would  have  a  viable  internal
       relocation alternative to a rural area in the Eastern provinces. For
       example, relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)  might  be
       negated by discrimination, where the returnee  is  Shona.   However,
       internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or Bulawayo was,  in
       general, more  realistic  but,  as  the  test  was  whether  it  was
       reasonable/not unduly harsh, consideration had to be  given  to  the
       individual's social and economic circumstances.

   19. So much was stated to be Country Guidance.  In the course of CM  (EM
       country guidance; disclosure), the Tribunal  (as  at  October  2012)
       made an assessment - albeit not in an authoritative  capacity  -  of
       other evidence about Zimbabwe.   The picture then presented  by  the
       evidence  as  to  the  general  position  of  politically  motivated
       violence in Zimbabwe did not materially differ from the position  in
       EM and others (Returnees)  decided  on  14  March  2011.  The  fresh
       evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return  did  not
       indicate any increase in risk since HS (returning   asylum seekers);
       the evidence as to the treatment of those who had been  returned  to
       Harare Airport since 2007  meant  there  was  no  justification  for
       extending the scope of those who might be adversely regarded by  the
       CIO.

   20.  For  our  purposes,  this  summary  of  the  Country  Guidance   is
       sufficient.

The hearing before us

   21. The appellant comes from  the  Mabvuku,  described  in  a  Wikipedia
       extract provided by Mr Howard as a high density suburb, some  17  km
       east of Harare.

   22. In examination in chief, the appellant dismissed as  irrelevant  the
       fact that he was a customs officer. He joined as a cadet before  the
       MDC was born and claimed it would have  no  bearing  on  whether  he
       would perceived to be a supporter of ZANU-PF. He said he was born in
       Murewa where his mother comes from. His uncle still lives there.  He
       told us it is an area of poor economic activity and he did not  have
       the means to live there. It is situated  in  Mashonaland  East,  100
       miles from Harare.

   23. He described that his wife came from Murewa. She used to  live  with
       her mother there. He told us that he met his wife in Bulawayo  where
       his wife's mother had moved.

   24. He described his activities in the United Kingdom.  He  is  involved
       with Silence Breaker, a project where those involved  learn  how  to
       rebuild and restore donated used computers  which  can  be  used  to
       maintain contact with those back in  Zimbabwe.  It  is  linked  with
       Restoration  of  Human  Rights  (ROHR).  The  project  engaged  five
       participants in workshop activities.


   25. The appellant produced material that he had  been  approached  by  a
       friend in Zimbabwe, James Chidhakwa, who attempted to be selected as
       the MDC candidate for the Mabvuku Tafara constituency. He  described
       Mr Chidhakwa as one of his closest  friends.  He  produced  Facebook
       entries indicating that, using a pseudonym, he had communicated with
       Mr Chidhakwa. He had also provided Mr Chidhakwa with �20 in sterling
       to help his campaign.

   26. The pseudonym effectively concealed his  identity  and  he  gave  no
       clear  evidence  as  to  any  other  means  by  which  he  could  be
       identified.

   27.  In a statement made by the appellant on 22 August 2013 he said that
       he was a supporter of the MDC.  He told us  that  he  has  no  other
       involvement with the MDC in the United Kingdom.

   28. He described in paragraph 7 how he had spoken to his mother in  June
       2013 and she had told him  she  was  encountering  problems  in  her
       village  because  she  was  considered  an  outsider.  Although  the
       appellant attributed this malign activity to  his  involvement  with
       the MDC, he provided no basis for making this claim.  In particular,
       there was no evidence the village elders knew of his activities.  He
       also stated  that  on  31  July  2013,  his  brother  who  lives  in
       Mashonaland East told the appellant he was unable  to  vote  in  the
       July 2013 elections. There is background material that both the  MDC
       and ZANU-PF prevented voters from exercising  their  vote  but  this
       does not otherwise advance the claim of the appellant.

   29. Pausing there, it is difficult to attribute persecutory  motives  in
       the context of a land dispute unless  a  decision-maker  hears  from
       both sides (which he is never likely to do) and  hears  evidence  of
       the legal rights of those involved and  the  ability  of  the  legal
       owner to protect his rights.  We would not infer,  as  a  matter  of
       course, that the complainant is a victim without remedy.

   30.  In a manuscript statement dated 30 November 2009,  the  appellant's
       stated that his brother was then in Harare. He  also  spoke  of  two
       sisters both living in Harare.


   31. In his evidence to us, he  said  that  he  participated  by  sending
       clothes to a children's charity.  Save for the payment of �20 to  Mr
       Chidhakwa, he has not made any other contributions to  the  MDC.  He
       was not currently attending the vigil outside  the  Zimbabwean  High
       Commission and last attended on 24  October  2012.  Before  that  he
       attended a vigil in March 2011. He described how he  had  last  paid
       his membership contribution for the MDC in Zimbabwe in July 2012. He
       said that he would not claim to be a prominent member of the MDC. He
       accepted that he had requested a new card but it had not  been  sent
       to him.  Although he sends money to his brother and sisters, he  was
       not able to say it was used for his MDC subscription: he conceded it
       could have been used to purchase food.


   32. He described how he was in touch  with  three  of  his  former  work
       colleagues, two of whom were no longer working  for  the  Zimbabwean
       customs.

   33. In cross-examination he accepted that he has his mother, his brother
       and two sisters remained in Zimbabwe.  His  brother  lives  in  Glen
       Norah but he has family members in Mabvuku, including a sister and a
       cousin.  His siblings are married. He has many cousins, the children
       of his uncles and aunts. He described how, in the aftermath  of  the
       land dispute involving land owned or occupied  by  his  mother,  she
       herself had attended ZANU-PF meetings but only to avoid trouble. His
       mother's activities would not, therefore, prejudice to him, wherever
       his mother's true political affiliations lay.

   34. The appellant's wife was born in Gweru and lived  in  Bulawayo.  The
       appellant worked there.  In each of the three  Bulawayo  seats,  the
       MDC-T achieved convincing victories over ZANU-PF.

Our assessment

   35. It is clear from the evidence before us that Mabvuku is  represented
       in Parliament by the candidate  from  the  MDC.  The  full  election
       results following the Zimbabwe elections in  2013  are  provided  at
       pages 2167 to 2172 of the bundle.  In  Mabvuku,  the  MDC  candidate
       polled 7,917 votes while ZANU-PF managed 6,319. In  Glen  Norah  the
       voters also succeeded in placing an MDC candidate in Parliament.  He
       polled 6,672 votes whilst his ZANU-PF rival managed just  1,984.  We
       do not find it in any way surprising than very different  conditions
       arise in Mashonaland East where, in  Murewa  South,  ZANU-PF  won  a
       resounding victory winning 17,368 votes whilst the  MDC-T(Tsvangirai
       - the principal component of the fragmented MDC) only polled  1,729.
       In Murewa North, the gap between the two parties was  somewhat  less
       but ZANU-PF still succeeded in a substantial polling victory.


   36. These results are very much in line with the divisions drawn in  the
       country guidance.

   37. We are satisfied that the appellant has no MDC profile in the United
       Kingdom.  Indeed, the appellant really accepted this.   Nor  do  the
       activities that the appellant and his wife perform for the  Catholic
       Church, for children's  charities,  for  Silence  Breaker  create  a
       profile that would  be  of  interest  to  the  CIO,  even  if  those
       activities became known to it.  There was, however, no evidence of a
       mechanism by which those activities would come to the  attention  of
       the Zimbabwe authorities either here or in Zimbabwe or that, if they
       did, they would be perceived by the CIO as being anti-regime.

   38. In these circumstances, the appellant will not be  identified  as  a
       returnee or deportee with a profile that  is  likely  to  cause  him
       difficulty.  We are not required to  decide  whether  the  appellant
       could call upon his former colleagues in  the  Zimbabwe  Customs  to
       protect him because he will not need to turn to them.   Rather,  the
       appellant's account of his employment history in Zimbabwe  will  not
       result in any adverse inferences being drawn if he  is  required  to
       tell it.  There are a number of places to which the appellant  might
       return where he has lived  in  the  past  without  difficulty.   The
       evidence about the density levels of population centres in  Zimbabwe
       was inconclusive as discussed in the determination  in  relation  to
       B.C.  The Secretary of State did not argue that Mabvuku was a low or
       medium density area.  On the material before us it was not  possible
       to make a definitive assessment on whether it is a high density area
       but, for the purposes of this appeal only, we are prepared to accept
       that Mabvuku is such an area.   We  treat  it  as  part  of  Harare,
       although it is 17 km distant from it.

   39. In applying paragraph 215 (5) of CM we  focus  our  enquiry  on  the
       following considerations:

         (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

   40. The material we have seen clearly establishes an MDC presence  there
       and an electorate that has not been cowed by the activities of ZANU-
       PF.  That does not entirely eliminate the risk of marauding  ZANU-PF
       supporters attempting to  wreak  havoc,  particularly  at  times  of
       increased political activity.  But nor does it  establish  that  the
       ordinary MDC sympathiser stands at real risk from them.   Whilst  it
       is not material in this appeal, the background material relating  to
       the 2013 elections does not suggest there  was  the  same  level  of
       violence that so marred the 2008 elections.  Applying  the  criteria
       identified in CM, the appellant is not at risk of  serious  harm  on
       return to Mabvuku.

   41. We do not suggest the appellant should (or is required to) return to
       Mashonaland.

   42. It is also possible for the appellant to return  to  Bulawayo  where
       his wife lived and where he  worked.   This  is  identified  in  the
       background material as a place to which the appellant  might  safely
       return, with or without a significant MDC profile.  In so  deciding,
       we have applied the approved thinking set out in paragraph 215 (6  )
       of CM:

         (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

   43. Mr Howard submits that JK  speaks  Shona  which  he  argues  negates
       internal relocation as being viable (relying on the words in CM that
       'relocation to Matabeleland (including Bulawayo) might be negated by
       discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.'


   44. The US State Department Country Reports on  Human  Rights  Practices
       2011, published on 24 May 2012, noted that,  according  to  Zimbabwe
       government statistics, the Shona ethnic group makes up 82 percent of
       the population and Ndebele 14 percent.  Historical  tension  between
       the Shona majority and Ndebele minority resulted in  marginalization
       of the Ndebele by  the  Shona-dominated  government.   According  to
       Jane's Sentinel Security Risk Assessment:  Zimbabwe',  13  September
       2011, the Shona  majority  makes  up  around  75  per  cent  of  the
       population, the Ndebele minority comprise about  20  per  cent.   In
       paragraph 225, the Tribunal stated:

         225.    We accept the evidence of  the  appellants  that  a  Shona,
             without family or  other  significant  contacts  in  Bulawayo,
             seeking to move to that city  from  outside  Matabeleland,  is
             likely to face social difficulties, in addition to  others  of
             the kind we have just described.  In particular, he or she may
             face discrimination in relation to jobs and housing.   It  is,
             however, apparent from the evidence of  Professor  Ranger  and
             the civil society interviewees in  the  FFM  report,  that  in
             previous decades there was a significant pattern of  migration
             of Shona to Bulawayo in search of work, and that, as a result,
             some 20% of the population of that city is Shona.   It  would,
             accordingly, not  be  necessary  for  the  newcomer  to  speak
             Ndebele, in order to get by in Bulawayo,  although  linguistic
             problems may be relevant in determining the issue  of  whether
             it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for such a person  to
             live in that city.


   45. We note the use of the expression, 'may face  discrimination'.   The
       matter is not clear-cut.  It goes without saying  that  Zimbabwe  is
       not divided by linguistic differences or otherwise no Shona  speaker
       could live without persecution (or in circumstances where  it  would
       be unduly harsh for him to do so) in a Ndebele-speaking area or vice
       versa.  In the appeal of JK, the couple met in  Bulawayo  where  his
       wife lived and the appellant has worked there.  This is a  far  more
       telling piece of narrative, rooted in experience rather than in more
       abstract  terms.   There  is  no  evidence  that,  on  return   now,
       circumstances have so altered that the appellant  cannot  reasonably
       settle in Bulawayo.

   46. Mr Howard also seeks to rely upon  the  fact  that  members  of  the
       family of JK's wife, including her mother and  three  sisters,  have
       been involved with the MDC and were granted refugee  status  in  the
       United Kingdom in 2002.  Once again this is a factor  that  we  take
       into account,  without  (for  the  reasons  we  have  given  in  the
       preceding paragraph) treating it as a determinative risk category.


   47. The grant of refugee status to other family members  must,  in  some
       cases, be a factor to which considerable weight be attached.  In the
       case of a well-known dissident, whose activities are widely known in
       the public domain and who is granted refugee status, it  is  readily
       understandable that family members might be placed at  risk  by  the
       authorities in an oppressive regime whose actions are not always the
       result of rational thinking.  This may be  no  more  than  guilt  by
       association.  There is, therefore, nothing inherently improbable  in
       taking into account the fact that a relative has refugee status  but
       the circumstances must  be  examined  critically  to  determine  the
       weight to be attached to it as a factor.  Although this factor arose
       in the context of the appeal in JK, there may be other  examples  in
       the six appeals before us where the thinking is also applicable.

   48. In KM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
       EWCA Civ 275 (17 March 2011) Pill LJ recited in paragraph 6  of  his
       judgment the factual concession made by the Secretary  of  State  in
       the case of KM:


         6. On behalf of the Secretary of State, it  is  accepted  that  the
         appeal should be allowed to the extent of the case  being  remitted
         to the Upper Tribunal. The Secretary of State's reason was that "it
         is  arguable  that  the  [Tribunal]   failed   to   give   adequate
         consideration to the assessment of risk on return in light  of  the
         country guidance case of RN (Zimbabwe) and HS  (Zimbabwe)  and  any
         risk that may arise if the  appellant  were  to  be  questioned  on
         return regarding his son's asylum grant". I would add that, in  the
         light of the paragraphs from RN already cited,  the  absence  of  a
         'profile' in Zimbabwe is insufficient protection.  Support  for  or
         loyalty to the regime must be 'demonstrated'. At the hearing before
         this court, Miss Grange, for the Secretary of State, accepted  that
         there is a real risk  that  the  appellant's  son  having  obtained
         asylum because of his  MDC's  sympathies  would  come  out  on  the
         appellant's return.

       This was repeated by Lord Dyson when  the  matter  came  before  the
       Supreme Court:


         13. The Court of Appeal allowed his appeal and remitted the case to
         the Upper Tribunal. The leading judgment  was  given  by  Pill  LJ:
         [2011] EWCA Civ 275. The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
         appeal should be allowed by the Court  of  Appeal  because  it  was
         arguable  that  the  Tribunal   had   failed   to   give   adequate
         consideration to the  assessment  of  risk  in  the  light  of  the
         guidance in RN. ... It was conceded by the Secretary of State  that
         there was a real risk that 'the  appellant's  son  having  obtained
         asylum because of his  MDC's  sympathies  would  come  out  on  the
         appellant's return' (para 6 of Pill LJ's judgment);  and  that  the
         fact that KM's son had been granted asylum 'may place the appellant
         in an enhanced risk category by making it more difficult for him to
         demonstrate his loyalty to the regime' (para 12).

   49. Hence, the fact that KM was at risk because his son had been granted
       asylum was conceded by the Secretary of State.  No  such  concession
       was made by Ms Isherwood and rightly so because there is no evidence
       that this information will emerge.  First, the grant appears to have
       taken  place  in  2002.   Second,  the  process  of  recognition  is
       essentially a confidential one.  Third, the outcome  of  recognition
       is the grant of leave  to  remain,  endorsed  in  a  vignette  in  a
       passport which makes no reference to the  grantee  being  a  refugee
       from the country that has issued the passport.  The issue  of  leave
       to remain may have happened  for  a  number  of  reasons;  marriage,
       length of stay, student presence, work related reasons, avoiding the
       inference that the grant  of  leave  to  remain  is  short-hand  for
       refugee status.  Most importantly, there is  no  evidence  that  the
       Zimbabwe authorities are able to maintain a record of those  granted
       asylum by the United Kingdom authorities and then relate  the  grant
       back to family members, all the more so family members by  marriage.
       The logistics of such a process would be formidable.


   50. The appellant is not at risk at the airport in accordance  with  the
       guidance afforded by  HS  (Returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG
       [2007] UKAIT 00094 and SM and Others (MDC -  internal  flight-  risk
       categories) CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00100,  repeated  in  RN  (Returnees)
       Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083, upheld in EM and Others  (Returnees)
       Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) and confirmed  in  CM  (EM  country
       guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC) and in  the
       Court of Appeal.

   51. There is no Article 8 claim as  this  is  a  section  83  'up-grade'
       appeal.

DECISION

    The Judge made an error on a point of law and we substitute a
    determination dismissing the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.


                                                                       [pic]





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             23 October 2013






