
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00064/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2018                              |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iran,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Clemes of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent  on  18
    August 2016 dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent in December 2015 refusing to grant asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.  The appellant had first submitted an asylum claim in March
    2012.  This has been refused in July 2014.  After he had  been  awarded
    discretionary leave under the UASC policy until  2  February  2015,  he
    made an in-time application for further leave on 7 February 2015.   The
    appellant did not attend the hearing before the FtT judge.  The judge's
    reasons for deciding to proceed with the hearing  were  set  out  in  a
    paragraph 3:

         "3.  The appellant did not attend the hearing which was  called  on
             at 11.35 a.m.  There had been no appearance before  that  time
             and the Tribunal Clerk had kept a regular check on whether  or
             not the appellant had appeared.  The file was checked  and  it
             was noted that the appellant had  once  instructed  solicitors
             but that they had come off the record  as  of  28  July  2016.
             Notice of hearing had been sent to the appellant on 3 February
             2016.  A further notice had been sent on 20 July 2016  to  the
             appellant  at  his  address.   I  applied  Rule  28   of   the
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014
             and was satisfied that the appellant had  had  notice  of  the
             hearing and that - absent of any application to adjourn or any
             other communication  from  the  appellant  -  it  was  in  the
             interests of justice to proceed and hear  the  appeal  in  the
             appellant's absence."

2.   The appellant's grounds contend that the judge's  decision  to  proceed
    with the appeal in his absence  was  procedurally  unfair  because  the
    appellant only became aware that the FtT had heard  and  dismissed  his
    appeal  on  15  November,  when  it  was  received   by   his   current
    representatives, after they had requested a copy of the  decision.   It
    was contended that the appellant had previously pursued his claim in  a
    timely manner through representatives by  way  of  his  initial  asylum
    claim and subsequent application for discretionary leave which  led  to
    the refusal of his case and his appeal against it.

3.   At the hearing before me the appellant was unrepresented  but  said  he
    wished to proceed with the hearing.   I  then  heard  briefly  from  Mr
    Richards and the appellant in that order so as to  give  the  appellant
    the opportunity to hear the case against  him  before  having  to  make
    submissions himself.  In brief Mr Richards  submitted  that  there  had
    been no procedural unfairness.  The appellant  relied  on  his  witness
    statement with the  following  clarification.   Reminded  that  he  had
    received the  respondent's  refusal  decision  in  December  2015,  and
    exercised his right of appeal in time, the appellant said he  had  been
    in contact with his solicitors after lodging his appeal.  At some point
    in early 2016 he had been informed by his  solicitors  that  a  hearing
    date had been fixed for his appeal.  He had not been able  to  keep  in
    touch with his solicitors or the First-tier  Tribunal  because  he  had
    been homeless and had no legal aid.

4.   I do not find that there as any procedural unfairness on  the  part  of
    the judge.

5.   It is clear from the file that the  appellant  was  sent  a  notice  of
    hearing on 3 February 2016 and a further notice on 20 July 2016.  It is
    further clear from the file that on both occasions the notice was  sent
    to the appellant's last known address (Stroud Road,  Gloucester).   The
    appellant claims that he never received these notices  because  he  had
    not lived at the Stroud Road address for three years.  For the purposes
    of this appeal I am prepared to accept that this is correct.  Also  for
    the purposes of this appeal I am prepared to accept, in the appellant's
    favour, that it was difficult for him to inform the respondent,  as  he
    was obliged to do, that he had  changed  his  address  because  he  was
    moving from place to place and was of no fixed abode.

6.   However, there remains a major difficulty  for  his  submissions.   The
    records show that the appellant gave notice of  appeal  on  11  January
    2016.  In his Statement of Late Appeal signed on 20 November 2017,  the
    appellant confirms that he was told  by  his  previous  representatives
    that he had an appeal hearing in August.  In this statement  he  states
    that the hearing was in August 2017, but he accepted before me that  he
    was told about the August hearing in early 2016 and  that  cannot  have
    meant August 2017.

7.   Given that the appellant knew in advance about the month  (if  not  the
    precise date) of his hearing (August 2016) I conclude it was  incumbent
    on him to have taken active steps to attend it.  In  his  statement  he
    says that his previous solicitors did not give  him  any  paperwork  to
    confirm the August hearing.  This claim is difficult to square with his
    further claim that his  representatives  contacted  him  in  late  July
    stating that he needed to attend their  office  and  give  instructions
    about the appeal (he said he was  too  far  away  to  attend).   It  is
    reasonable to assume that the Migrant Legal Project would have reminded
    him of the date and place of hearing.  But even if  he  is  correct  in
    claiming he was never given either the date or the paperwork, this does
    not suffice to excuse his failure to contact his solicitors to find out
    the date or indeed to contact the  First-tier  Tribunal.   On  his  own
    account he did nothing.  He cannot have been  unaware  that  he  had  a
    hearing date coming up and that he let that date come  and  go  without
    doing anything about it.

8.   The appellant has sought to explain his inaction by  referring  to  the
    fact that he was homeless and moving from place to place, but I do  not
    consider that these difficulties suffice  to  explain  or  justify  his
    inaction in respect of the August 2016 hearing.  He has  not  suggested
    that during the time he was moving  about  or  that  he  had  lost  the
    contact details for his solicitors.  The file  record  shows  that  his
    previous representatives did not come off  the  record  until  20  July
    2016.  On his own account he had had several months to  obtain  precise
    details from his previous solicitors before they came off the record.

9.   Compounding the problems  with  the  appellant's  account  is  that  he
    continued to do nothing for over a  year.   From  his  own  account  no
    contact was made with his previous representatives until  October  2017
    when he took the file from his previous representatives and took  steps
    to instruct new representatives (who then obtained the FtT decision  on
    15 November 2017).  During all this time the appellant cannot have been
    unaware that his hearing date had come and gone, yet he did nothing.

10.  In assessing the issue  of  procedural  fairness,  I  have  taken  into
    account the various items of evidence that the appellant  had  sent  to
    the respondent including a statement from a psychotherapist dated  2014
    which sets out that the appellant has a fragile and volatile  state  of
    mind caused partly by the length of time the appeal process was taking.
     I note that the appellant's state  of  mind  did  not  stop  him  from
    adhering to time limits and keeping contact with representatives whilst
    lodging his appeal.

11.  The appellant contends that the procedural fairness he experienced  was
    aggravated by the fact that he had a good case because  the  respondent
    had accepted some important aspects  of  his  claim,  namely  that  the
    appellant was a national of Iran, Kurdish and that he had  exited  Iran
    illegally.  However, the basis of the appellant's claim for asylum  was
    that he was at risk on  return  to  Iran  since  he  had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities because he  had  worked  for  the  Kurdish
    Democratic   Party   (KDP),   recruiting   members    and    organising
    demonstrations.  The respondent had rejected this  claim  in  light  of
    material inconsistencies as well  as  some  implausible  aspects.   The
    appellant, even though represented at the time he appealed (and  for  a
    further  six  months)  took  no  steps  to  seek   to   explain   these
    inconsistencies or to adduce further evidence.  In such  circumstances,
    it was entirely fair and reasonable of  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant had not given a credible account.

12.  The judge further considered whether  the  appellant  was  nevertheless
    entitled to succeed in his appeal by virtue of his profile  as  a  Kurd
    who may have exited illegally.  The judge's  account  at  paragraph  19
    properly applied Tribunal country guidance (SB (risk on return, illegal
    exit) Iran CG UKAIT 00053) and the appellant's grounds wholly  fail  to
    identify any error of law in that assessment.

13.  I do not consider that the particulars of  the  appellant's  claim,  as
    analysed by the respondent and the judge, were such as to call for  any
    reconsideration on the basis of procedural fairness.

14.  For the above reasons:

     The  FtT  Judge  did  not  materially  err  in  law  and  his  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal is upheld.

15.    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 25 April 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

