
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 00944 2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2014                                 |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Delvalee Shellet-Ann Willie
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent appeared in person
                       RULING AND NOTE ON JURISDICTION

 1. This case comes before me as  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision by the First-tier Tribunal allowing the respondent's
    appeal against the decision to refuse her asylum.  I put  it  that  way
    quite deliberately and so doing should  immediately  alert  any  person
    aware of the procedures of this Tribunal to  the  possibility  that  an
    error has occurred. It is well-known, or  should  be  well-known,  that
    refusal of asylum  is  not  itself  an  appealable  decision,  although
    entitlement to asylum is very  often  raised  as  a  ground  of  appeal
    against a decision to remove.

 2. I was anxious to  find  from  the  papers  precisely  what  immigration
    decision was the subject of an appeal before me.  The only  immigration
    decision I could find on the papers that was relevant  was  a  decision
    made on 8 November 2013. It is described as a removal decision  but  it
    asserts unequivocally that the applicant is only able to  appeal  after
    removal.  It says:

         "You cannot appeal while you are in the United  Kingdom  because  a
         certificate has been issued under Section 94 of the  2002  Act  (as
         amended).  A notice of appeal is enclosed which explains what to do
         and an Immigration and Asylum Chamber leaflet which explains how to
         get help."

 3. The letter was accompanied by a Reasons for Refusal Letter of the  same
    date and that letter made it equally plain that the  decision  was  not
    appealable while the claimant was in the United Kingdom.

 4. It is therefore something of a mystery to me to know how it came  about
    that the appeal was heard and determined by a First-tier Tribunal Judge
    who had the assistance  of  Counsel.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    purported to allow the appeal that he thought was in front of him.

 5. I have gone through the papers with the assistance of Mr  Whitwell  for
    the Secretary of State and indeed the assistance of the respondent, who
    is an educated woman who conducted herself with dignity before  me,  to
    see if there is any sensible possibility of the papers before me having
    being overtaken by a subsequent  appealable  decision.  We  could  find
    nothing  that  suggests  that  that  has  happened  nor  is  there  any
    particular reason to think that a likely scenario.

 6. It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction
    to entertain this appeal and the most that I can do, and do do,  is  to
    rule that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  no  legal
    effect because it had  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  an  appeal.   I
    explained this to the respondent and strongly suggested that she  takes
    independent legal advice as a matter of urgency.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 June 2014                   |








