
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00329/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 19 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     SA
                          (An anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Heybroek, of counsel, instructed by Kothala &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Appellant, who was born on  1  December  1996,  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.  It is his case that his family moved to Pakistan when  he
    was a young child and that from around the age of  ten  he  started  to
    attend the Ma-az Bin Jabal madrassa. It is also his  case  that  in  or
    around January 2011 he was abducted by the Taliban. He escaped after  a
    month and an agent arranged for him to flee from  Pakistan  around  two
    months later.

 2. He entered the United Kingdom on 26 May 2011 on a passport in the  name
    of MA, who had been granted entry clearance as a student  on  12  April
    2011.  The Appellant applied for asylum on 21  December  2011  and  was
    interviewed about his application on 26 January 2012  and  27  February
    2012.  On 9 March 2012 the London Borough of Croydon assessed  his  age
    to be over  18  and  on  23  March  2012  the  Respondent  refused  his
    application for  asylum.  She  accepted  that  he  was  a  national  of
    Afghanistan but did not  accept  that  he  was  at  risk  there  or  in
    Pakistan.

 3. A further decision was made to refuse him asylum on  14  November  2013
    after it had been accepted that he was born on 1 December 1996. He  was
    granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum
    seeking child until 31 May 2014. He applied for further leave to remain
    on 20 May 2014. This application was refused on  1  December  2014.  He
    appealed against this decision on 29 December 2014.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rimington dismissed his appeal in a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 6 May 2015.  The Appellant  appealed  on  20
    May 2015. He asserted that the interpreter, who was used at the  appeal
    hearing, was  not  sufficiently  proficient  in  English  and  spoke  a
    different dialect  of  Pashto  to  the  Appellant.  This  lead  to  the
    interpreter  misunderstanding   questions   and   misinterpreting   the
    Appellant's  answers.  He   also   submitted   that   the   errors   in
    interpretation undermined the credibility findings made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 8 June 2015 who said that there was an arguable  error  of  law  and
    that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  needed  to  be  given  the
    opportunity to comment on application.

 6. In her Rule  24  response  the  Respondent  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  had  directed  herself  appropriately   and
    disclosed the Home Office Presenting Officer's minute, which included a
    passage which stated that "in cross  examination  there  was  an  issue
    about the interpretation. IJ intervene & Appellant confirm that he  was
    happy with the translation. PS  -  Appellant  is  also  able  to  speak
    English & chose to give evidence through the interpreter".

Error of Law Hearing

 7. On 2 October  2015  the  Appellant's  solicitors  had  written  to  the
    Tribunal requesting permission to adduce  further  witness  statements.
    These were an additional statement by the Appellant,  dated  2  October
    2015, which stated  that  during  the  hearing  he  realised  that  the
    interpreter  spoke  a  different  dialect  of  Pashto,  possibly   from
    Peshawar, which he was not familiar with.  He went on to say that as  a
    result he did not fully understand the questions he was being asked and
    believed that this led to him not adequately answering these questions.
    He also stated that the errors were so apparent that  his  friend,  AS,
    who had attended the appeal hearing, stood up and pointed out that  the
    interpreter was making mistakes. He added that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had asked him whether he was an interpreter  and,  when  he  said
    that he was not, he was asked to sit  down.   He  also  said  that  his
    friend subsequently put up his hand when further errors were  made  but
    was not permitted to speak. This account was  confirmed  in  a  witness
    statement by AS and a further statement by another of  the  Appellant's
    friends, NS.

 8. At the start of the hearing, counsel for the Appellant  explained  that
    it had not been possible  to  serve  these  witness  statements  at  an
    earlier date as the Appellant was raising funds to pay his  solicitors.
    I gave the Appellant permission to adduce these statements  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  proper
    notice had been given to the Tribunal,  a  reasonable  explanation  had
    been provided for the delay and it was in the interests of  justice  to
    do so. The Home Office Presenting Officer  made  no  objections  to  my
    doing so.

 9. Counsel for the Appellant then addressed me and argued that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should have put the matter  back  in  her  list  in
    order to make further enquiries or, in  the  alternative,  should  have
    adjourned the hearing so that it  could  be  heard  using  a  different
    interpreter. She also submitted that the decision  and  reasons  should
    now be set aside.  The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that  it
    was a question of fairness and accepted that although the Appellant was
    able to speak English, this was not his first language. He also  stated
    that he would not resist the appeal being remitted.

10. I have also taken into account the  comments  submitted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rimington. She said that she recollected someone at  the
    back of the courtroom raising questions about the  interpreter  on  one
    occasion. She went on to assert that he had said that  the  interpreter
    had  misinterpreted  the  word  "airport"  but  that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had told her that he had not asked about an airport.
    However, as counsel for the Appellant correctly  pointed  out,  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  the  representatives  could  not  speak
    Pashto, it was possible that the interpreter had mistakenly referred to
    an airport when speaking Pashto to the Appellant.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rimington also confirmed what was said by the
    Respondent, which was that the Appellant had agreed  to  continue  with
    the hearing. However, I accept the observation by his counsel that,  as
    he was still a very young man at the date of the hearing, he  may  have
    been influenced by the fact that she was a person in authority and  not
    pursued any objections at that time.

12. I looked at the Judge's record of proceedings but there was only a very
    brief  reference  to  the  interpreter  and  the  intervention  by  the
    Appellant's friend.

13. There was no reference on the file to any  specific  interpreter  being
    requested. However, I asked my clerk to check  with  those  responsible
    for booking interpreters at Taylor House.  They  informed  her  that  a
    Pashto Afghani interpreter had been requested. They also told her  that
    the interpreter was a national of Pakistan.

14. Therefore, it is clear that the Appellant's suspicion was  correct  and
    the interpreter was not an Afghan national and that he had requested  a
    particular dialect. It is also the case the Appellant and  two  of  his
    friends, who all spoke Pashto, believed that the  interpreter  was  not
    speaking the same dialect as  the  Appellant,  was  not  proficient  in
    English and was making mistakes. With all due respect to the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge this was an assessment which it was very  difficult  for
    her to undertake without making further enquiries.

15. I have reminded myself that in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT
    00105 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that "where there is a  defect  or
    impropriety  of  a  procedural  nature  in  the  proceedings  at  first
    instance, this may amount to a material  error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside"

16. I have also reminded myself of the need to apply anxious scrutiny in an
    asylum case.

17. In paragraphs 50 - 52  of  her  decision  and  reasons  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge relied on what she believed  with  inconsistencies  when
    coming to an adverse view of the credibility of his account.  If  these
    were caused by poor interpretation, they undermined her  findings.  The
    three witness statements now relied upon by  the  Appellant,  the  fact
    that the Judge and the Respondent accept  that  interpretation  was  in
    issue at the hearing and the fact that the interpreter was  a  national
    of another country all indicate that there  is  a  serious  possibility
    that the interpreter may not have interpreted accurately at the  First-
    tier hearing.

18. For all these reasons I am satisfied that for  procedural  reasons  the
    First-tier hearing was not conducted fairly and that this amounted to a
    material error of law. I am also satisfied that, as there will need  to
    be a complete re-hearing, this is a proper case for  remission  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

    Directions

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
         hearing.

    2.   The appeal should re-listed before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rimington.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Date 9th October 2015


    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
