
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        AA/00466/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination Sent:
On 23 April 2014            On 03 June 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. H. Naz of Morden Solicitors LLP.
For the Respondent:             Mr.  G.  Saunders,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Alis promulgated on  27  February  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's  decision  dated  7  January  2013  to
      remove the  Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  refusal  of  his
      application for asylum.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. His personal  details  are  a
      matter of record on file and are not reproduced here in line with  the
      anonymity  direction  that  has  been   previously   made   in   these
      proceedings, and which is hereby repeated and continued.


   3. The Appellant's immigration history is also  a  matter  of  record  on
      file, and is summarised at  section  2  of  the  cover  sheet  to  the
      Respondent's appeal bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
      unnecessary to reproduce it here: I reference it as is incidental  for
      the purposes of this decision.


   4. The Appellant applied for asylum on 28 October 2011 on the basis  that
      he claimed to be at risk if returned to Pakistan because of his faith.
      Although he was born into a Sunni Muslim family he  became  interested
      in the Ahmadi faith whilst in Pakistan, and subsequently converted  to
      the Ahmadi faith in April 2011 whilst studying in the UK.


   5. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter dated 6 January 2014,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision dated 7 January 2014 was  served  on  10  January
      2014.


   6. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out   in   his
      determination.


   7. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
      Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge RC  Campbell  on  18
      March 2014.


Consideration

   8.  The  Respondent's  representative  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal
      accepted the fact of the Appellant's conversion to  the  Ahmadi  faith
      since being in the UK (see determination at paragraph 56), as in  turn
      did the Judge (paragraph 66). The First-tier Tribunal Judge  concluded
      that the Appellant was not at risk when he  left  Pakistan  (paragraph
      55). Therefore the Judge was essentially  dealing  with  a  sur  place
      claim and was required to evaluate the Appellant's case with regard to
      the risk factors for  an  Ahmadi  in  Pakistan,  and  with  particular
      reference to the country guidance case of MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -
      Country Conditions - Risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389.


   9. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  indeed  direct  himself  to  the
      appropriate case law and set out the relevant passages  in  detail  in
      his determination.


  10. Pursuant to the Country Guidance, the key issue in the  appeal  became
      that of 'paragraph 2(i) behaviour': see paragraphs 119 and 120 of MN -
      and specifically  what  was  of  importance  to  the  Appellant's  own
      religious identity - a matter itself to be  evaluated  in  significant
      part on the basis of his own testimony and any supporting evidence  as
      to how he conducted himself in faith terms generally.


  11. In my judgement, in  evaluating  this  core  question  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge fell into error of law by relying upon the  Appellant's
      previous conduct in Pakistan in respect of his Sunni faith  as  a  key
      determinative factor in evaluating the Appellant's  likely  conduct  -
      and/or preferred conduct if free  from  any  risk  -  if  returned  to
      Pakistan as an Ahmadi. I find that the conduct of a person who  at  no
      point asserted a serious commitment to the Sunni faith, and indeed was
      exploring alternative  faith  interests,  is  in  no  way  a  reliable
      indicator of that same person's likely conduct and  preferences  post-
      conversion to a different faith. In short:  the  Appellant's  relative
      indifference to the Sunni faith is not a  reliable  indicator  of  his
      commitment to the Ahmadi faith.


  12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge plainly placed significant reliance upon
      the  Appellant's  previous  behaviour  in  Pakistan   prior   to   his
      conversion:

(i) "I cannot overlook the fact that when he had the opportunity  to  pursue
      his religious beliefs in Pakistan he chose to  do  so  in  private..."
      (paragraph 67).

(ii) "Although this appellant  stated  he  would  preach  openly  I  am  not
      satisfied he would, based on previous  conduct  in  Pakistan  when  he
      chose not to convert pursue his religious beliefs beyond listening  to
      the radio." (paragraph 17).


  13. Further, I find that I am unable to reconcile these  key  passages  in
      the concluding paragraphs of the Judge's assessment of the Appellant's
      asylum claim - and in particular the latter one - with the observation
      at paragraph 61 - "I also must take into account that his  involvement
      with the Ahmadi religion was totally different  prior  to  March  2011
      because firstly he was not a convert and secondly he  apparently  only
      followed the religion by listening to radio broadcasts."


  14. The error of law thus identified relates to the central element of the
      assessment of the Appellant's claim, and as  such  requires  that  the
      decision in the determination be set aside.


Remaking the decision in the Appeal

  15. I am satisfied that the decision in the appeal can be  remade  without
      hearing any further oral evidence. Despite the error identified  above
      in respect of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's evaluation of  the  risk
      on return, the Judge otherwise for the  main  part  made  clear  well-
      reasoned findings of primary fact, and  further  set  out  in  helpful
      detail key passages of the Appellant's testimony.


  16.  One  area  of  the  Judge's  assessment  that  does  require  further
      consideration and focus is in  relation  to  the  supporting  material
      submitted by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association for  the  UK  ('AMAUK').
      Indeed there is considerable substance to the Appellant's  submissions
      that the Judge also fell into error of law in his consideration of the
      supporting evidence: permission to appeal was granted in part on  this
      basis. In the event, however, because I  have  found  that  the  error
      identified above is so fundamental, it is unnecessary for me  also  to
      reach a formal decision on error  of  law  in  respect  of  the  AMAUK
      letter: the letter can in  any  event  be  approached  afresh  in  the
      context of remaking the decision in the appeal. Be  that  as  it  may,
      analysis of this  material  does  not  require  hearing  further  oral
      evidence.


  17. In all of the circumstances there is sufficient  material  before  the
      Tribunal to remake the decision without further evidential input.


  18. Save in so far  as  the  Respondent  now  accepted  the  fact  of  the
      Appellant's conversion to  the  Ahmadi  faith,  Mr  Saunders  repeated
      reliance upon the Respondent's RFRL, and in particular  paragraph  75,
      where reference is  made  to  the  Appellant  only  claiming  to  have
      practised his faith at a "low  level".  Mr  Saunders  also  emphasised
      paragraph 126 in MN in relation to evaluating sur place  claims  based
      on post-arrival conversion.


  19.  I  observe  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no  adverse
      assessment of the Appellant's general credibility. The only aspect  of
      his testimony that he did not accept was the Appellant's assertions as
      to what was important to him as an Ahmadi, and how he  would  wish  to
      practice his faith. As indicated above, the Judge essentially rejected
      these matters on the erroneous basis that the Appellant's approach  to
      his Ahmadi faith was  different  from  the  manner  in  which  he  had
      observed the Sunni faith, and the  limited  manner  in  which  he  had
      explored the Ahmadi faith prior to conversion. The First-tier Tribunal
      Judge otherwise identifies no basis  to  doubt  the  veracity  of  the
      Appellant's expression of his Ahmadi faith.


  20. The following passages setting out the Appellant's evidence are, in my
      judgement, particularly germane:

(i) "When he lived in Pakistan he followed the Ahmadi faith  in  his  heart.
      He had not converted because converts were not accepted  in  Pakistan.
      He did not act openly  because  he  feared  the  consequences  of  his
      actions and he was aware other people had been killed" (paragraph 38).

(ii) "In his oral evidence he confirmed that  having  lived  in  the  United
      Kingdom and converted and lived the way of an Ahmadi, without fear, he
      no longer wished to return to Pakistan because he  believed  that  not
      only would he face problems from his father, Mr Hussain and Mr Ghafoor
      but he would also be persecuted by others  once  they  discovered  his
      conversion. Having converted he  stated  he  would  have  to  continue
      preaching, even though to do so would place  his  own  life  at  risk"
      (paragraph 39).

(iii) "In answers put to him by myself he  stated  that  he  would  wish  to
      openly follow his religion if returned to Pakistan, despite the  known
      risks although he did not explain why he would do this. He  stated  he
      no longer felt able to just follow the  religion  in  his  heart,  but
      would wish to follow the religion fully as he had been  doing  in  the
      United Kingdom" (paragraph 59).


  21. I pause to observe in respect of  this  latter  passage  that,  in  my
      judgement,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  suggestion  that   the
      Appellant had not explained why he would wish  openly  to  follow  his
      religion is  unsustainable.  The  Appellant  had  explained  that  his
      experience of observing his faith openly was important  to  him  as  a
      matter of that faith, as was  practising  it  'fully'  which  involved
      preaching to others. In the context of religious  observance  that  is
      sufficient explanation. In any event the  Judge's  observation  misses
      the point that if the reason for not wishing to follow one's  religion
      openly is fear of harm, that may be sufficient to engage  the  Refugee
      Convention.


  22. Be that as it may, in my judgement it is clear that the Appellant gave
      evidence that it was important to him to practice his faith fully  and
      openly, and there was no basis to doubt his testimony in this regard.


  23. The Appellant had provided supporting evidence  of  the  fact  of  his
      conversion, and his observance of the Ahmadi faith from the AMAUK. The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge marginalised the significance of this letter
      because it was not itself supported by  other  letters,  and  was  not
      supported by  the  attendance  of  a  representative  from  the  AMAUK
      (determination at paragraph 58).


  24. In remaking this decision I do not adopt  that  approach.  As  Ms  Naz
      points out the AMAUK letter dated 31 January  2014  is  written  as  a
      culmination of a process of inquiry conducted by the AMAUK:  something
      of the organisational capability of  the  AMAUK  is  set  out  in  the
      country guidance case of MN at paragraphs 55 and 66, and  see  further
      the evidence set out at paragraph 297(iv). In all  such  circumstances
      it is not appropriate to marginalise the letter on the suspicion  that
      it may be based on information supplied by the Appellant alone and not
      based on  any  enquiries  made  by  the  organisation  itself.  In  my
      judgement the  letter  is  to  be  taken  into  account  as  providing
      corroboration of the Appellant's own account. There is  no  reason  to
      treat the letter at anything other than its face value.


  25. The letter provides corroboration of the  Appellant's  involvement  in
      the Ahmadi community both at a local  branch  and  Association  level,
      including participation  in  preaching  programmes  and  assisting  in
      holding preaching stalls.


  26. In all of the circumstances I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  been
      involved in the UK in 'paragraph 2(i) behaviour' as an aspect  of  his
      observation of his Ahmadi faith, and I accept  his  testimony  to  the
      effect that these are, to him, important  aspect  of  his  faith  with
      which he would wish to continue if he were returned  to  Pakistan.  In
      particular I find that the Appellant has been involved in,  and  would
      wish to continue  involvement  in  preaching  including  holding  open
      discourse about his religion with non-Ahmadis.


  27. Further to the risk assessment in MN, I am satisfied that such matters
      place the Appellant at sufficient risk of persecution were  he  to  be
      returned  to  Pakistan  at  the  present  time  to  give  rise  to  an
      entitlement to the international surrogate protection of  the  Refugee
      Convention.


Decision

  28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.


  29. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is allowed on  Refugee
      Convention grounds.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     2 June 2014


Anonymity Direction

In order to secure the anonymity of the Appellant I direct pursuant to  Rule
45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and
Section 11 of the  Contempt  of  Court  Act  1981  that  no  report  of  the
publication of these proceedings or of any part or parts of them shall  name
or  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  Reference  to   the
Appellant may be by use of his initials but not  by  name.  Failure  by  any
person, body or institution whether corporate  or  unincorporated  (for  the
avoidance of doubt to include a party to this appeal) to  comply  with  this
direction may lead to proceedings contempt of court.  This  direction  shall
continue in force until this Tribunal or an appropriate Court shall lift  or
vary it.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     2 June 2014

