
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00988/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th August 2015                           |On 17th September 2015        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                hassan panahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Shaikh of Counsel instructed by Morgan Dias
Immigration
     Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd February 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He  arrived  in  the  UK  on  11th
    February 2005 and claimed asylum.  He was removed to Greece on 12th May
    2005 but subsequently re-entered  the  UK  illegally,  providing  false
    details to immigration officials in 2008.   He  was  again  removed  to
    Greece in the same year. He applied for a marriage visa to  the  UK  on
    25th July 2011 in Italy which was refused and the subsequent appeal was
    dismissed on  15th  March  2012.   He  then  travelled  to  Sweden  and
    attempted to lodge an asylum claim  on  19th  November  2013.   He  was
    removed to the UK by the Swiss  authorities  on  26th  March  2014  and
    claimed asylum on the same day at Heathrow Airport.

 3. The basis for the present claim is that the appellant said that he  was
    a supporter of the KDPI, and distributed leaflets  for  them.   He  was
    arrested by the Ettelaat and  detained  for  six  months  before  being
    released and  fears  that  if  returned  he  would  be  killed  by  the
    government.

 4. The judge set out the evidence and concluded that there was no truth at
    all in his claims.  She recorded that, inter alia, he appeared also  to
    be someone who was willing to enter into a sham marriage  in  order  to
    gain entry into the UK and wrote:

         "To be clear I do not accept that he has  not  undertaken  military
         service, I do not accept that he left Iran illegally,  and  I  find
         that he has created a bogus asylum claim as a last ditch attempt to
         remain in the UK having exhausted all other options."

 5. She then considered the secondary argument put on his behalf which  was
    that the situation in Iran was such that failed asylum seekers  per  se
    were at risk of arrest and serious harm.

 6. She considered the Operational Guidance Note detailing risks to Kurdish
    activists which concluded:

         "There is no evidence to  suggest  that  an  applicant  of  Kurdish
         ethnic origin in the absence of any  other  risk  factor  would  on
         return face a real risk of ill-treatment or persecution to  Article
         3 level purely on account of his or her ethnic origin."

 7. She said that the appellant fell squarely within that category.

 8. The judge had been provided with a couple of decisions from  the  Upper
    Tribunal identifying an error  of  law  in  a  First-tier  decision  on
    substantially the same basis.  She distinguished the first  because  in
    that case the  appellant  would  have  to  conceal  her  conversion  to
    Christianity, and the second on the basis that this appellant would not
    have to lie.

 9. She considered a Country of Origin Information Report dealing with  the
    issue of failed asylum seekers which she said was limited  to  a  small
    number of cases when it was believed that some have been  arrested.  An
    Amnesty International Report relied  on  an  article  appearing  in  an
    Iranian newspaper in February 2011 which again  suggested  that  failed
    asylum seekers could be prosecuted.  The judge recorded that there were
    only three specific cases of arrest which  had  occurred  in  2010  and
    2011.  which was  insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  failed
    asylum seekers were at risk per se.  Had  there  been  further  arrests
    since 2011 she would have expected to see them reported.

10. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

11. There was no challenge to the judge's credibility findings but only  to
    the finding that he would not be at risk on account of having left Iran
    illegally and as a returning failed asylum seeker.

12.  First,  the  appellant  submitted  a  body  of  new  country  material
    postdating the country guidance case of SB (Iran) [2009] UKIAT 58 which
    showed an arguable risk on return for failed asylum seekers  which  was
    not properly considered  by  the  judge.   The  evidence  from  Amnesty
    International arguably  suggested  that  the  act  of  even  making  an
    unsuccessful asylum claim is perceived as a political act  against  the
    Iranian Government.  The appellant relied on the  decision  in  Farshad
    Kiani v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 01328 for the proposition  that  it  was  not
    necessary to be a member of a political party to  show  persecution  on
    the basis of political opinion.   The  appellant  also  relied  on  the
    respondent's  Operational  Guidance   Note   confirming   that   prison
    conditions in Iran are so poor that they breach Article 3 and  for  the
    acceptance in that note that opponents of the regime would suffer  ill-
    treatment amounting to persecution.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Baker on 17th April 2015 but subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Perkins on 24th June 2015.

Submissions

14. Ms Shaikh relied on her grounds and submitted that the  judge  did  not
    properly engage with  the  material  before  her  which  postdated  the
    decision in SB.  In particular, her analysis of  the  OGN  and  of  the
    Amnesty Report was inadequate.  She had not focused  her  mind  on  the
    process of return and failed to take into account  the  decisions  from
    two Deputy Upper Tribunal Judges identifying errors of law in decisions
    for exactly that reason.

15. Mrs Petterson defended the determination  and  submitted  that  it  was
    clear that the judge had analysed  the  documentation  before  her  and
    reached a decision open to her.  She drew my attention to the  previous
    entry clearance application which recorded that,  prior  to  2012,  the
    appellant had obtained an Iranian passport from a Greek  Consulate.  It
    was unlikely therefore  that  he  would  be  returning  without  proper
    documentation.



Findings and Conclusions

16. There is no substance in these grounds.

17. First it is quite clear that there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    credibility findings.  Those findings include a specific  rejection  of
    the appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Iran  illegally,  a  conclusion
    supported by the evidence in the entry clearance application  that  the
    appellant had obtained an Iranian  passport  in  August  2009  with  an
    expiry date of August 2014.

18. Second, it is simply untrue to say that the judge did not  engage  with
    the material.  She specifically considered  the  Amnesty  Report  which
    referred to a single article published on  26th  April  2011.   It  was
    plainly open to her to say that if asylum seekers were subjected to ill-
    treatment between 2012 and 2015 it is highly likely that there would be
    reports in the public domain and that the evidence from April 2011  was
    insufficient to demonstrate a real risk to failed  asylum  seekers  per
    se.

19. The fact that two Deputy Upper Tribunal Judges have found errors of law
    in decisions  which  did  not  engage  with  submissions  and  evidence
    provided in those cases is not authority for the proposition that there
    is any such error in this case.  Neither are binding on the judge,  but
    in any event were considered and distinguished  them  for  the  reasons
    given.

Decision

20. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

