
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00237/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2016                          |On 9 August 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     M V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Basharat, Counsel, instructed by M and S
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro (the judge), promulgated on 9 May 2016, in which
    she dismissed his appeal on all grounds.  The appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been against the Respondent's decision of 27 January  2016
    refusing protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.   His  protection  claim  was
    essentially based upon  a  perceived  association  to  LTTE  operatives
    leading  to  a  detention  and  ill-treatment  in  2010,  and   further
    activities undertaken whilst in the United Kingdom.  In addition to the
    protection claim the Appellant had married a  British  citizen  and  in
    that regard relied upon Article 8 ECHR.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge accepted that the Appellant had been detained and tortured by
    the Sri Lankan authorities in 2010, as claimed (see  paragraphs  63  to
    65).  However the judge did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  of
    continuing adverse interest.  In  this  regard,  having  cited  country
    information contained in the Respondent's guidance the judge found that
    the fact that the Appellant's family had not been  harassed  was  "good
    evidence" that  the  authorities  were  no  longer  interested  in  the
    Appellant (paragraph 68).  The judge went on to state: "For this reason
    I do not find the Appellant's claim that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    continue to have an interest in him is credible."

 4. At paragraph 69 the judge found that the Appellant's delay in  claiming
    asylum in the United Kingdom damaged his credibility.  At paragraphs 70
    to 73 the judge considers the Appellant's circumstances in the  context
    of the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  She finds there to  be  no
    risk to him on return based upon his past experiences in that  country.



 5. The judge then turns to look at the Appellant's  circumstances  in  the
    United Kingdom.  At paragraph 75 she notes the conclusions in  GJ  that
    the Sri Lankan authorities' approach is now  based  upon  sophisticated
    intelligence.  At paragraph 76 the  judge  appears  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had joined the British Tamil Forum at some  point  whilst  in
    the United Kingdom, that he had  attended  a  single  demonstration  in
    2012, and finally that he had not been politically active in the  Tamil
    cause whilst  here.   In  paragraph  77  the  judge  considers  country
    information contained in the Respondent's own guidance and at paragraph
    78 she makes reference to  paragraph  319  of  GJ.   In  light  of  the
    evidence and the country guidance and the country information the judge
    concludes that the Appellant's profile was non-political  and  that  it
    would not place him at risk on return.

 6. In respect  of  the  Article  8  claim  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    relationship between  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  was  genuine  and
    subsisting, but having regard to Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules
    and the decision of the Court of Appeal in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ  440
    she concludes that the Appellant's wife could follow him to Sri  Lanka.
    Thus the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. There are three grounds of appeal: first that the judge failed to  have
    regard to relevant evidence when considering the Appellant's activities
    in this country; second that the judge failed to have proper regard  to
    the country guidance in GJ as regards the Appellant's past  history  in
    Sri Lanka; third that the judge erred in her assessment of the  Article
    8 claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 3
    June 2016.  He granted permission in respect of grounds  1  and  2  but
    expressly refused permission in respect of ground 3.  In paragraph 3 of
    his decision Judge Page states in clear terms: "I am not satisfied that
    the remaining grounds are arguable if the Appellant  wishes  to  pursue
    these further then an application must be made to the Upper  Tribunal."



 9. No such application has been made to the Upper Tribunal in  advance  of
    the hearing or before me  Ms  Basharat  accepted  that  the  Article  8
    challenge was not a  live  one  and  the  appeal  was  limited  to  the
    protection issues.

The hearing before me

10. Ms Basharat addressed me first in respect of the detention issue.   She
    submitted that the judge had  erred  in  paragraph  68  by  effectively
    concluding that the lack of harassment of the  Appellant's  family  was
    determinative of the question of whether the Sri Lankan authorities had
    an ongoing interest in him.  I pressed her as to why this error, if  it
    was an error, was material to the outcome of the appeal.   Ms  Basharat
    submitted that the fact that the Appellant had  been  detained  was  in
    itself  sufficient  to  show  a  risk  on  return.   She  did,  however
    acknowledge that this issue was not the most significant aspect of  the
    challenge.

11. In respect of the United Kingdom activities, Ms Basharat submitted that
    the judge had failed to have regard to more recent country  information
    contained in the Asylum Research Consultancy report of March 2016.  She
    submitted that this  was  a  highly  relevant  document,  although  she
    acknowledged that there was nothing specific on those who were  members
    or sympathisers of the British Tamil Forum.   She  also  accepted  that
    there was no argument made before the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  before
    myself that GJ should be departed from.  Ms Basharat submitted that  if
    the judge had  properly  considered  the  Asylum  Research  Consultancy
    report she would have been bound to have found that the  Appellant  was
    now at risk on return, and this was so even applying  the  guidance  in
    GJ.

12. For the Respondent Ms Ahmed submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraph 68 must be read in light of what she said  in  paragraph  69.
    The judge was entitled to find that there was no risk on the basis that
    there was no evidence of family harassment.  Any error committed by the
    judge was in any event immaterial.  In respect of  the  United  Kingdom
    activities even  if  the  more  recent  country  information  had  been
    considered it would not have made a difference to the outcome in  light
    of GJ.  Ms Basharat had nothing  to  say  in  response  to  Ms  Ahmed's
    submissions.

Decision on error of law

13. As announced to the parties at the hearing, I find that  there  are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.

14. Dealing first with what I describe as the detention issue, it is  right
    of course that the judge accepted that the Appellant had been  detained
    (albeit for a short time), tortured, and then released upon payment  of
    a bribe.  The simple fact of the detention and ill-treatment  does  not
    of itself lead to a conclusion that this Appellant or indeed any  other
    Appellant would be at  risk  on  return  now,  however:  that  much  is
    abundantly clear from the decision of GJ.  Therefore it is important to
    look at what the judge said about an ongoing interest post-release.

15. If, for the sake of argument, I were to read what  the  judge  says  at
    paragraph 68 as showing that she regarded the lack of harassment of  as
    being determinative of the post-release issue, and that I  also  assume
    that this was an error, in my view the error was not  material  to  the
    outcome.  This is so for the following reasons.  First, the  judge  was
    fully entitled to conclude that the absence of any  harassment  of  the
    family was indeed a "good indicator" of an absence of interest  in  the
    Appellant.  Second, on the  Appellant's  own  evidence  there  were  no
    reporting conditions attached to his release (see question 115  of  the
    asylum interview), and the Appellant had not therefore not breached any
    by leaving the country.  Third, there was  no  evidence  whatsoever  to
    suggest that there were  any  legal  proceedings  ongoing  against  the
    Appellant. Fourth, the judge was entitled  to  rely  on  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum as having a damaging effect on his overall credibility.



16. Turning to the United  Kingdom  activities,  the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to find as she did, namely that the Appellant had only in fact
    attended a single demonstration in 2012 and had  not  been  politically
    active in the Tamil cause.  This finding is based  on  the  Appellant's
    own evidence as contained in questions 147 to 153 and 155 of the asylum
    interview.  His  involvement  in  pro-Tamil  activities  was  about  as
    minimal as one can imagine.  It is right that the judge  has  not  made
    express reference to the Asylum Research  Consultancy  report  and  has
    only cited information contained in the Respondent's guidance. That  is
    probably an error on the judge's part.  I have read through the  report
    for myself, having particular regard  to  the  passages  marked  by  Ms
    Basharat at the hearing.  There are clearly risks on return to  certain
    individuals depending on their profile; that much  is  recognised  both
    within this report and indeed of course  within  the  country  guidance
    contained in GJ.  However there has been no  suggestion  either  before
    the First-tier Tribunal or myself that the guidance  in  GJ  should  be
    departed from on the basis of the Asylum  Research  Consultancy  Report
    and having regard to the country information as a whole, in  particular
    the guidance set out in GJ and the findings in this particular case,  I
    conclude that the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's profile was not such as would excite a material interest on
    the part of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  whether  in  advance  of  his
    arrival, upon arrival or at any  time  thereafter.   Indeed  given  the
    level of his activities in this country it would be  difficult  to  see
    how an alternative conclusion could have been properly reached.

17. Having regard to what I have said above there are no material errors of
    law in respect of the protection claim.

18. The Article 8 issue is not before me  therefore  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
