
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00914/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel (instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 14 September 2015 against  the  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Britton made in a decision and reasons
         promulgated on 22 June  2015  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Iran, of Kurdish ethnicity,  born
         on 1 April 1996.  He left Iran on 1 July 2011 and  arrived  in  the
         United Kingdom on 11 August 2011.  He claimed asylum on  19  August
         2011, which was refused on 30 April 2012.  He was granted DLR as an
         unaccompanied minor until 1 October 2013.  His appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal under section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 was dismissed on 20 June  2012.   On  30  September
         2013 he applied for further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,
         which application was refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  5
         January 2015.  The Appellant stated that he  feared  to  return  to
         Iran because of his illegal exit, failed asylum claim  and  Kurdish
         separatist allegiance as seen in his  sur  place  activities.   The
         Appellant also made an Article 8 ECHR claim based  on  his  private
         life in the United Kingdom.

    3.     Judge Britton found that the Appellant was not at real  risk  on
         return to Iran, applying SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG
         [2009] UKAIT 00053.  He found that the Appellant was not a reliable
         witness.  He found that little had changed  since  the  Appellant's
         section 83 appeal was dismissed in 2012 and that Devaseelan (Second
         Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT
         00702  applied.   Any  interference  with  the  Appellant's  United
         Kingdom-based private life was proportionate to the legitimate  aim
         of immigration control.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.

    4.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Cruthers considered on his initial assessment that it was  arguable
         that Judge Britton's adverse credibility  findings  were  variously
         ill founded and misdirected, and, inter alia, that  the  judge  had
         misunderstood Devaseelan (above).  Judge Cruthers  added,  however,
         that the grant of permission to appeal was not to be  seen  as  any
         indication that the onwards appeal would ultimately succeed.

    5.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 dated 12  August  2015
         indicating that the appeal was opposed.  Standard  directions  were
         made by the tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of
         whether or not there was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    6.     Ms Foot for the Appellant requested  permission  to  expand  the
         grounds of appeal previously lodged, so as to argue that both Judge
         Britton and the previous judge, Judge Baldwin, had erred  in  their
         credibility  assessment.   They  had   taken   into   account   the
         Appellant's statement given at an age assessment  dated  12  August
         2011 which had subsequently been found  not  be  Merton  complaint.
         The application to amend was not opposed by  Mr  Staunton  for  the
         Respondent and was granted.

    7.     In summary, Counsel submitted that there were multiple errors in
         the determination, as had been set out in the permission to  appeal
         application.  The judge had not considered the Appellant's case for
         himself but had simply adopted the previous judge's findings.   The
         judge  had  not  dealt  adequately  with  the  Appellant's  Kurdish
         activist brother.  The judge had been wrong in his  whole  approach
         to the Appellant's Kurdish  flag  tattoo,  which  was  a  political
         statement.  The Appellant's motivation for his sur  place  activity
         was irrelevant.  The judge had given insufficient consideration  to
         the country background evidence concerning the position of Kurds in
         Iran.  The judge had not examined the evidence  the  Appellant  had
         submitted concerning his uncle properly.

    8.     Nor had the judge given any adequate attention to the Article  8
         ECHR private life claim which the Appellant had put forward,  which
         was a new claim.  JS (Afghanistan) [2013] UKUT 00568 had  not  been
         considered in relation  to  the  Appellant's  former  status  as  a
         "relevant child".  There had been inadequate findings and no proper
         analysis.  The decision and reasons should be set  aside,  and  the
         appeal reheard before another First-tier Tribunal judge.

    9.     Mr Staunton for the Respondent relied on the  Respondent's  rule
         24 notice.  He submitted that the decision and reasons disclosed no
         error of law.  The judge had considered the new evidence, of  which
         there had been very little,  and  had  applied  the  principles  of
         Devaseelan correctly.   The judge had given  adequate  reasons  for
         finding that the Kurdish flag tattoo did not place the Appellant at
         real risk on return.  None of the additional factors identified  in
         SB (Iran) (above) were present.  JS (Afghanistan)  (above)  had  no
         real relevance. The Appellant's complaints  at  most  were  just  a
         disagreement with the  judge's  proper  findings.   The  judge  had
         explained why he found that there was no real depth to the evidence
         and that the Appellant was not credible.  The decision and  reasons
         should stand.

    10.    Ms Foot in reply reiterated the faults which she submitted  made
         the determination unsafe.  There had not been voluminous Article  8
         ECHR evidence but even so there had been no context to the  judge's
         findings.

    No material error of law

    11.    The tribunal reserved its decision, which now follows.   In  the
         tribunal's view, the terms of the grant  of  permission  to  appeal
         were far too generous a response to what  was  in  essence  a  weak
         reasons challenge which was based on a superficial reading  of  the
         decision in issue.  The tribunal agrees with Mr Staunton  that  the
         grounds even in their expanded form are no more  than  disagreement
         with the judge's proper and sustainable findings.

    12.    The country background evidence concerning the position  of  the
         Kurdish minority in Iran was not in dispute before Judge Baldwin or
         Judge Britton.  The Appellant's appeal turned  on  his  credibility
         and, as that was found wanting, there was no need for any  detailed
         discussion of the country evidence, which had  been  summarised  at
         [18] to [20] of Judge Baldwin's determination.   The  illegal  exit
         plus asylum claim argument had been noted by Judge Britton  at  [9]
         of his determination and he gave adequate reasons for findings that
         SB (risk on return - illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053
         remained applicable on the facts he found: see the summary at [30].

    13.    It was contended that Judge Britton had adopted Judge  Baldwin's
         adverse credibility findings, which were infected by error  because
         of reliance on a statement  made  in  the  course  of  an  unlawful
         process, i.e., the non compliant age assessment.  In the tribunal's
         view  that  was  an  extravagant  submission.   At  [24]   of   his
         determination Judge Baldwin reminded himself that the Appellant was
         a  young  and  possibly  vulnerable  witness.   He  considered  the
         Appellant's claims with great care  and  examined  the  Appellant's
         previous statements for  their  consistency.   Judge  Baldwin  gave
         ample reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  bright  and
         articulate, not uneducated as the Appellant had claimed.  The judge
         was entitled to take his impression of  the  Appellant's  abilities
         into account, having reminded himself of his  youth  as  the  judge
         did.  There would  have  been  little  point  in  an  oral  hearing
         otherwise.

    14.    Judge Baldwin referred to the since discredited  age  assessment
         dated 12 August 2011 specifically at  [27]  of  his  determination,
         when considering the Appellant's claimed lack of contact  with  his
         relatives.  But the judge gave the Appellant  the  benefit  of  the
         doubt about whether or not he had lost a brother  detained  because
         of his activist opinion: see [28] of the determination.  The  judge
         gave a number of sound and free standing reasons for  finding  that
         the Appellant remained in contact with family members.   Thus  even
         if there were any substance in Miss Foot's submission (and  in  the
         tribunal's view there was none), it made no difference to the multi-
         faceted  credibility  assessment  reached  with   evident   anxious
         scrutiny to the lower standard.

    15.    Judge Britton rightly treated Judge Baldwin's  determination  as
         his  starting  point,  as  seen   at   [7]   of   Judge   Britton's
         determination.   There  had  been  no  appeal  of  Judge  Baldwin's
         determination and it was obviously a thorough and full decision  by
         an experienced judge, set out in detail and at appropriate  length,
         to which recognition was due.  Nor had there been any  real  change
         in the background  evidence  about  Iranian  nationals  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity.

    16.    At [9] of his own determination, Judge Britton  noted  what  was
         had been  said  to  be  the  new  material,  by  reference  to  the
         Appellant's solicitors' letter to the Secretary of State  dated  30
         September 2013.  That letter also set out the Appellant's Article 8
         ECHR claim, as the judge noted, and  to  which  the  tribunal  will
         return later in this determination.     The  new  elements  to  the
         Appellant's claim were his Kurdish flag tattoo, said to  have  been
         done  in  2013,  and   his   involvement   in   Kurdish   political
         demonstrations  in  the   United   Kingdom:   see   [17]   of   the
         determination.

    17.    Judge Britton addressed the new matters for himself,  and  found
         at [30] that there  had  been  no  material  change.   The  judge's
         finding that the Appellant's tattoo was  a  deliberate  attempt  to
         enhance his asylum claim was open  to  him  as  it  bore  upon  the
         Appellant's overall reliability  as  a  witness.   The  judge  also
         addressed the key issue, i.e., the perception that the tattoo might
         reasonably  cause  to  the  Iranian  authorities.   As  the   judge
         explained, the authorities  already  knew  that  the  Appellant  is
         Kurdish and the flag of itself  meant  nothing  more  than  showing
         that: see [27].  The judge gave secure reasons for finding that the
         Appellant's claimed sur place activities were minimal and were  not
         a source of potential real risk coupled with his flag tattoo.   The
         submission that Judge Britton failed to  consider  the  Appellant's
         claims properly must be firmly rejected.

    18.    The Appellant's claim that he had lost an activist  brother  was
         not the subject of any new evidence and  so  Judge  Baldwin's  open
         finding stood.  There was no new risk to be assessed.

    19.    Judge  Britton  refrained  from  saying  so,  but  the  evidence
         produced in support of the Appellant's private life claim was thin:
         see [8] of his witness statement dated 1 May 2015.  The independent
         evidence related mainly to his  education.   Only  one  friend  had
         provided a letter of support.  The Appellant was the  sole  witness
         at his appeal hearing.  The judge alluded to the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's private life at [29] of the determination.  Those facts
         were not in dispute.  The judge applied JS (above), by  taking  all
         relevant  factors  into  account,  as  summarised  at  (4)  of  the
         headnote.  The judge  applied  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and also considered  whether  there
         were any compelling matters which might have required the claim  to
         be  considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules:  see  [32].   The
         securely reached findings that the Appellant still  had  family  in
         Iran and remained familiar with Iran were, of course,  relevant  to
         the proportionality assessment.

    20.     In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the  judge's  decision  was   a
         comprehensive reflection  on  the  various  issues  raised  in  the
         appeal, and his findings were balanced and logical.  There  was  no
         error of law.  There is no basis for interfering with  the  judge's
         decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal,  which  dismissal  must
         stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
