
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00165/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 29 May 2013                                  |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                          upper tribunal judge pitt

                                   Between

                                Yaseen Nasiri
                         (Anonymity Order Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher, instructed by Maliks and Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 10 May 1984.



The Appeal

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 15 March 2004. He claimed asylum  on
    15 May 2010. His application was refused on 17 December 2010.

 3. His appeal against that refusal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Deavin in a determination dated 15  February  2011.  On  2  March
    2011, Immigration Judge Peart granted permission to appeal the decision
    of Judge Deavin to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge King decided on 12 May 2011 that the  decision  of
    Judge Deavin disclosed an error on a point of law such that  it  should
    be set aside and re-made on the basis that  none  of  the  findings  of
    Judge Deavin stood. In a  determination  dated  1  February  2012,  the
    appeal was again dismissed by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Malley.

 5. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    but this was refused on 2 May 2012 by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor.  The
    appellant then sought permission directly from  the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Permission was initially refused on the papers by the Rt Honourable Sir
    Scott Baker on 13 July 2012. Following an oral hearing,  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Lord Justice Richards on 18 October 2012.

 6. In a consent order dated 13 December 2012, Lord Justice  Davis  ordered
    that the determination of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Malley  be
    quashed and that the appeal should be remitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    for redetermination. Thus the matter came before me to be made  afresh,
    any previous findings having been set aside by the  decision  of  Judge
    King dated 12 May 2011.

The Appellant's Case

 7. The Appellant's case is set out in his four statements dated 19  August
    2010, 27 January 2011, 31 October 2011  and  22  March  2013  which  he
    adopted to stand as his evidence-in-chief at the  commencement  of  the
    hearing. I also had before me the appellant's screening  interview  and
    asylum interview record  together  with  all  of  the  other  documents
    contained in his  two  appeal  bundles  and  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter.  On the day of the hearing I  was  provided  with  Ms  Fisher's
    skeleton argument and a  Country  of  Origin  Information  Response  on
    Afghanistan dated 17 January 2013.

 8. The appellant's claim is that his father trained as a policeman and was
    also a member of Jamiat-i-Islami (JI). He served as a  policeman  under
    the regime of President Rabbani. He worked for a commander, Amir  Anwar
    Nasiri. The appellant's  father  also  worked  closely  with  Amanullah
    Gauzar, a sub-commander and a Tajik.

 9. When the Taliban came  to  power  in  1996,  like  many  Pashtuns,  the
    appellant's father and Amir Anwar Nasiri went to work  for  them.  Amir
    Anwar Nasiri and Amanullah Gauzar had already fallen out by  this  time
    and the  bad  blood  that  had  arisen  between  them  encompassed  the
    appellant's father. Amanullah Gauzar regarded the appellant's father as
    a traitor when he joined the Taliban.

10. When the Taliban was overthrown in 2001, the  appellant's  father  left
    Afghanistan with many  of  his  colleagues  and  went  to  Peshawar  in
    Pakistan. After some time he managed to send news to his family that he
    had escaped. In 2002 he returned to the family  home  and  remained  in
    hiding for 3 weeks. He would then return every 3 to 4 months  remaining
    for just one night.

11. In early 2003, a friend of the appellant's father, Maulavi Said  Karim,
    also a member of the Taliban, began to visit the family home.  He  told
    the appellant's mother that his father wanted the appellant to join the
    Taliban. The appellant's mother did not want him to do so.

12. After the fall of the Taliban, Amanullah Gauzar was on  the  government
    side as he had remained with JI who had  been  had  been  part  of  the
    Northern Alliance. In March or  April  2003,  approximately  twelve  of
    Amanullah Gauzar's men came to the family home in trucks. About five of
    the men, armed, came into the home and became  angry  when  the  family
    said that they did not know the whereabouts of the appellant's  father.
    The appellant was beaten up and cut with a knife and maintains that  he
    still  has  scars  from  this  attack.  Local  people  interrupted  and
    Amanullah Gauzar's men left.  The  appellant  went  to  stay  with  his
    maternal aunt the same evening. His father stopped coming to the family
    home after this incident and the  appellant  has  not  heard  from  him
    since.

13. Maulavi Said Karim continued to visit the  family  home  and  told  the
    appellant's mother that his father had insisted that  he  be  taken  by
    force to join the Taliban. The appellant's  mother  was  told  that  if
    anyone prevented the father's order, they  should  be  shot.  The  same
    evening the appellant's mother went to see him at his aunt's home.  She
    advised him to remain in hiding there. However,  the  appellant's  aunt
    feared further adverse  interest,  either  from  government  forces  or
    Maulavi Said Karim and, after a few  days,  said  that  she  could  not
    shelter the appellant any longer. The appellant's mother and his aunt's
    husband found an agent to take the appellant to the UK. Two weeks after
    Amanullah  Gauzar's  men  had  come  to  the  family  home,   he   left
    Afghanistan. His journey lasted many months and he  eventually  arrived
    in the UK on 15 March 2004. After he came to the UK he learned that his
    father's former commander, Amir Nasiri, and his son had been killed  in
    Pakistan in 2004.

14. The appellant maintains that he fears return to Afghanistan as he  will
    either  be  forcibly  recruited  by  the  Taliban  or  harmed  by   the
    government, as he  will  be  assumed  to  support  the  Taliban,  being
    additionally at risk because of the position of Amanullah Gauzar.



My Findings

15. In coming to my conclusions with respect  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim, I have taken into account all of the documentary and
    oral evidence and I have applied the lower standard of proof applicable
    to asylum claims.  However, I reject the  appellant's  account  of  the
    events for the following reasons.

16. As set out above, the appellant came to the UK on 15 March 2004 but did
    not claim asylum until 15 May 2010, over 6 years later. In addition, he
    claimed asylum only after he had been arrested by  police.  I  did  not
    find it at all credible that the appellant would have waited for over 6
    years to claim asylum if the events set out in his claim had  occurred.
    I find the timing of his claim in 2010, shortly after he  was  arrested
    by police, indicated that the claim was opportunistic and intended only
    to avoid removal rather than having any merit.

17. The appellant claims that he did not apply earlier as he was told  that
    if he did so he would be removed to Afghanistan. His evidence  in  that
    regard  was  highly  inconsistent  and  unreliable.  He  maintained  in
    paragraph 4 of his asylum statement dated 19 August 2010  that  he  did
    not apply earlier as "other Afghan friends in the community told me  if
    I claimed asylum I would be detained and deported".  He  maintained  at
    paragraph 28 of the same statement that on arrival in  the  UK  he  was
    given "misguided advice, telling me not claim asylum because I would be
    deported back  to  Afghanistan".  At  question  122  of  his  AIR,  the
    appellant stated that he did not claim earlier as "solicitors" had told
    him that he should not apply as he would be deported. At  question  123
    he was unable to name the solicitors but confirmed at question 124 that
    it was solicitors who had told him not to claim asylum.   He  indicated
    at questions 125, 128 and 129 that he had not thought to  mention  this
    seriously incorrect advice to his current solicitors.

18. In paragraph 16 of his witness statement  dated  27  January  2011  the
    appellant changed this account again, stating that it was "some Afghani
    interpreters working in Shepherd's  Bush  who  told  me  not  to  claim
    asylum." He changed his account still further, maintaining at paragraph
    16 that he had told his current solicitors that he had been  misadvised
    in the past but they had told him it was not important.  He  maintained
    that he had told the firm's interpreter about this  problem  after  the
    AIR but nothing further appears to have come from this, either. By  the
    time of his witness statement dated  22  March  2013,  the  appellant's
    evidence at paragraph 25 was that "people within the Afghan  community"
    had given him "misguided advice" with no mention of  either  solicitors
    or interpreters. In oral evidence before  me  he  stated  that  he  had
    received bad advice  from  "some  Afghan  guys",  initially  making  no
    reference to solicitors or interpreters giving him this poor advice. It
    was then put to him in cross-examination that he had said in  interview
    that solicitors had given him this bad  advice.  The  appellant  stated
    that it was interpreters who had been working for solicitors.

19. I found that this evidence could not in any way explain the appellant's
    6 year delay in claiming asylum. Further, at question 11 of his AIR the
    appellant stated that he came to the UK  specifically  because  he  had
    heard that "my asylum application will be accepted in the  UK  as  they
    are human loving people  (sic)."  This  is  not  consistent  with  what
    appears to have been an almost immediate change of mind about his claim
    being properly assessed in the UK when he arrived in March 2004.

20. The appellant maintains that since coming to the UK he has been  unable
    to keep in touch with his family. However, the evidence he gave on this
    matter was also highly inconsistent and unreliable. His evidence  about
    being out of touch with his family appeared to me  to  be  intended  to
    bolster his claim and that it was merely an attempt  to  show  that  he
    had no-one to return to in Afghanistan.

21. In his AIR at question 41 the appellant stated that he had  not  spoken
    to his uncle for a year. As the interview was conducted on 15  November
    2010 that would have been in the autumn  of  2009.  The  appellant  was
    unable to give any reason at question 46 as to why he  would  not  have
    contacted this relative for a year. In his witness statement  dated  27
    January 2011 the appellant stated at  paragraph  13  that  he  had  not
    contacted his uncle for a year as he did not want to put him in danger.
     If that was so, why had he contacted his uncle prior to  this,  for  a
    number of years after coming to the UK? Why had he not  stated  in  his
    AIR that he had not been in touch with his uncle for a year as  he  did
    not want to cause trouble for his uncle? This evidence indicated to  me
    that the appellant was not credible as regards contact with  his  uncle
    or other relatives in Afghanistan.

22. Further, in his oral evidence before me, the appellant stated  that  he
    had last been in touch with his uncle "a year  ago".  That  would  have
    been in the spring of 2012. If, as of January 2011 he had not wanted to
    contact his uncle because of the problems this might cause  his  uncle,
    why had he gone on to contact him in the spring of 2012,  nevertheless?
    The appellant also stated at the hearing that he had not been in  touch
    with his uncle as he had lost the telephone number of his uncle when he
    had moved house. He had tried to get in touch by other  means  but  had
    failed. He made no reference to  it  being  dangerous  to  contact  his
    uncle, the earlier reason given for not being in touch.

23.  The appellant's evidence about when he had been in contact  with  this
    uncle was, in addition, highly inconsistent with his  account  of  this
    uncle assisting him  to  obtain  his  father's  police  documents  from
    Afghanistan. In cross-examination before me, the appellant stated  that
    he had been in touch with his uncle when he claimed asylum  (May  2010)
    and asked for the police documents. This is  not  consistent  with  his
    claim in his interview conducted in November 2010 that he had not  been
    in touch with his uncle for a year. It is not consistent with his claim
    in his witness statement dated 27 January 2011 that he had not been  in
    touch with his uncle for a year.

24. There was a further problem arising from the appellant's oral  evidence
    about contacting his uncle around May 2010 when he  claimed  asylum  in
    order to obtain his father's  police  documents.  His  account  at  the
    hearing before me was that he telephoned  his  uncle  to  ask  for  his
    father's police documents. His uncle somehow got the documents and then
    a friend, Sher Agha, had sent them  to  the  appellant.  The  appellant
    stated in terms that he had not spoken to this friend about the  police
    documents, only his uncle. He had given his uncle his address in the UK
    and his uncle had given this address to Sher  Agha  who  had  sent  the
    documents to the appellant. At  questions  154  and  155  of  the  AIR,
    however, the appellant stated that his friend Sher Agha went  from  the
    UK to Afghanistan and met the appellant's uncle,  told  the  uncle  the
    appellant needed the police  documents  and  then  the  documents  were
    posted to him from Afghanistan by Sher Agha.

25. The appellant also stated in his AIR at question 39 that he was not  in
    touch with his mother, younger brother or  sisters  who  had  moved  to
    Jalalabad. He maintained at question 53 to 55 that he had not asked his
    uncle for an address for his mother and siblings and had not done so as
    his sisters were married and he did not have "any introduction" to  the
    family of his sisters' husbands and  had  not  thought  that  he  could
    contact his mother in this way. The appellant's evidence is  also  that
    this  uncle  and  his  mother  worked  together  to  get  him  out   of
    Afghanistan. He stayed in touch with his  uncle  for  some  years.  His
    uncle provided significant help some 7 years after the  appellant  left
    Afghanistan by obtaining his father's police documents. I did not  find
    it at all credible that the uncle would not have assisted the appellant
    to have some kind of contact with his mother and  younger  brother  and
    his sisters, even if his sisters had married and his mother and younger
    brother were living with the new relatives.

26. All of  this  evidence  about  contacting  his  family  in  Afghanistan
    suggested to me  that  the  appellant  was  someone  prepared  to  tell
    untruths in order to bolster his claim. I was fortified in this view by
    his own admission in evidence before me that when he  was  arrested  in
    2010, he lied to the police about when he had come to the  UK,  stating
    that it had only been a few months earlier, when it had been 6 years.

27. There were other aspects of the  appellant's  evidence  that  indicated
    that his account was not  credible.  At  the  hearing  before  me,  the
    appellant continued to rely on  the  witness  statement  of  a  distant
    relative, Mr Delvar Naseri. In his statement dated 31 October 2011, the
    appellant stated that Delvar Naseri knew his father  "very  well",  had
    lived close to the appellant's family in Kabul, no more than 10  minute
    away, and had attended the same local mosque. He had last  seen  Delvar
    Naseri in Afghanistan  in  2001  which  is  when  Mr  Naseri  had  left
    Afghanistan. In his witness statement dated  27  October  2011,  Delvar
    Naseri confirmed these matters. He also stated that he  knew  that  the
    appellant's father was in the police and was a member of JI and  served
    under Amir Anwar Nasiri.

28. At paragraph 6 of his statement, Mr Delvar Naseri indicates that:

         "I continued to see the appellant's father and  the  appellant  who
         was a young man by the time I left Afghanistan in 2001."

29. If that was so, it is very notable that Mr Naseri makes no reference at
    all to the appellant's father having joined the Taliban when they  took
    over in 1996 and worked for them until they were defeated in 2001.  The
    fact that he makes no reference  to  this,  despite  both  he  and  the
    appellant maintaining that he knew the appellant's father "very  well",
    together with the other shortcomings in the appellant's evidence, in my
    judgement, significantly undermined the appellant's evidence as to  his
    father being involved with the Taliban, a core aspect of his claim.

30. I accept that the documents provided by the appellant and the  evidence
    of Mr Naseri show that  the  appellant's  father  was  in  the  police,
    graduating in 1989, was a member of  JI  and  worked  for  the  Rabbani
    regime in 1992 under the command of Amir Anwar Nasiri. This  does  not,
    however, support the claims concerning enmity  from  Amanullah  Gauzar,
    his father  following  Amir  Anwar  Nasiri  into  the  Taliban  or  the
    difficulties faced by the appellant in 2003, however.

31. I did not find that the  country  evidence  or  Dr  Giustozzi's  expert
    report assisted the appellant. Dr Giustozzi's report,  consistent  with
    the other country evidence, sets  out  that  Pashtuns  from  Kabul  did
    become members of Jamiat-i-Islami and, later, joined the  Taliban;  see
    paragraph 4 of his report.  He sets out at paragraph 6 that Afghan sons
    will usually  follow  the  allegiances  and  wishes  of  their  father,
    considerable pressure being placed on them to do so. He considers  that
    the son of a Taliban member would therefore be viewed  as  someone  who
    had followed his father in supporting or joining the Taliban.  Nowhere,
    however, does Dr  Giustozzi  express  an  opinion  as  to  whether  the
    appellant's account of events in 2003 was credible or give  an  opinion
    on whether this appellant's father joined then the Taliban. Rather,  he
    takes the appellant's account at its highest and  assesses  whether  it
    would lead to a risk on return. The appellant's account  is  relatively
    simple. The fact that it is consistent in some regards with the country
    evidence is not, in itself, sufficient to meet even the lower  standard
    as regards credibility. That is additionally so  where  there  are  the
    shortcomings in the evidence as set out above.

32. In any event, Dr Giustozzi's  evidence  at  paragraph  7  on  Amanullah
    Gauzar is not supportive of the appellant's account, indicating that he
    obtained a position of power in 2006 rather than in 2003 which is  when
    the appellant claims he sent armed men to his home to find his  father.
    Further, the appellant claims that he will be forcibly recruited by the
    Taliban on return to Afghanistan. Dr Giustozzi rejects  the  likelihood
    of that happening in paragraph 18 of  his  report.  Even  the  risk  of
    adverse interest if the Taliban merely tried to contact  the  appellant
    is not suggested to be high by Dr Giustozzi, his assessment being  only
    that "some" risk would arise therefrom.

33. The appellant has provided photographs of scars on  his  arms  that  he
    claims were incurred during the attack by  Amanullah  Gauzar's  men  in
    2003. Without medical evidence as to whether these scars are in any way
    consistent with the manner in and date at which  the  appellant  claims
    they were incurred, I did not find any weight could be placed  on  this
    part of the appellant's evidence.

34. For the above reasons I concluded that the appellants claim that  faces
    adverse interest from either the Afghan government or  the  Taliban  is
    not credible. There is no reason to  believe  that  he  does  not  have
    family members, both immediate and more distant, available to offer him
    support on return. He cannot qualify for asylum  or  on  the  basis  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR as a result. He cannot qualify  for  Humanitarian
    Protection;  see  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG   [2012]   UKUT
    00163(IAC).

Article 8

35. The Appellant came to the UK when he was 19 years old  and  is  now  28
    years old. I accept that he has established a private life  in  the  UK
    during this time, albeit there was  nothing  before  me  to  show  much
    substance to that private life. None of those  vouching  for  his  good
    character attended the hearing to provide any further detail  to  their
    somewhat basic statements.  There was nothing to suggest that he has  a
    family life with anyone in the UK.

36. I accept that the low threshold for finding that the  decision  engaged
    Article 8 further was reached, that the interference was in  accordance
    with the law and  that  it  was  necessary  in  order  to  maintain  an
    effective immigration system.

37. I did  not  find  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to a private  life.  I  do
    not accept that he or any of  his  family  faced  any  difficulties  in
    Afghanistan. I do not accept that the  appellant's  family  left  their
    home in Kabul or that he cannot contact any of his family. He  will  be
    able to return to his family and be supported by them on his return. He
    lived in Afghanistan for by far the majority of his  life.  He  can  be
    expected to re-establish a private life there of  more  substance  than
    that he has in the UK. He has been in the UK illegally  throughout  and
    made an unsubstantiated asylum  claim.  I  found  that  his  return  to
    Afghanistan would be a  proportionate  interference  with  his  private
    life.

Decision

38. I re-make the appellant's appeal.

39. I  dismiss  the  appellant's  asylum,  human  rights  and  humanitarian
    protection claims.

Signed                                       Date: 6 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

