
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00382/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Lieu, as agent for IAC Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Libya who made a protection claim. That was
refused on 22 February 2016, and the Respondent relied upon Article 1F(a)
of the Convention. The Appellant's appeal against that decision has a sorry
history, which it is unnecessary to rehearse. Most recently however it was
heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox, who dismissed it in a decision
promulgated on 12 February 2018.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 9 March 2018 on the ground that it was arguable
the Judge had failed to conduct a fair hearing. The Respondent replied to
that grant with a Rule 24 response of 27 March 2018. This led Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge Appleyard to issue case management directions on 31 July
2018 concerning the preparation and exchange of evidence as to what had
occurred at the hearing.

Although the parties' responses to those directions appear to have been
mislaid by the Upper Tribunal it is clear to me that those directions were
complied with to the extent that witness statements were filed as directed,
by the two representatives who attended the hearing below (who are not Ms
Lieu or Mr Bates). The authors attended the hearing before me, expecting to
be tendered for cross-examination.

Once the appeal was called on for hearing the parties were able to agree
before me that Judge Cox had failed to dispose of all of the grounds of
appeal with which he was seised. The appeal had been remitted to the FtT
for a fresh hearing, and his decision failed to engage with the human
rights appeal at all. Since Article 3 had certainly been relied upon at the
hearing, even if Article 8 had not, both were agreed that this alone
constituted a material error of law. It was agreed that the issues raised
by the Article 3 claim were not disposed of by the Judge's findings in
relation to the exclusion of the Appellant as a result of the application
of Article 1F.

Having stood the appeal down for discussions between the representatives
further agreement between them was reached. There was no dispute over
whether the Judge had asked the number of questions of the Appellant
alleged, both in examination in chief and in cross-examination, or, in the
style alleged against him. Thus there had been over 40 questions from the
Judge, a large number of which were prefaced by the comment "I find it hard
to believe ...". On the other hand, although formal objection was taken on
the Appellant's behalf to both the style and quantity of the Judge's
interventions, with the complaint that he had taken upon himself the role
of cross-examiner, no formal application was made for him to recuse
himself, and list the appeal for hearing afresh before another Judge. Thus
both representatives were agreed that there was no need to tender the
former representatives for cross-examination. It is a matter for regret,
that this agreement was not reached earlier, as Judge Appleyard had sought
to achieve by his directions.

This agreement, which I applaud as eminently pragmatic, led to the
Appellant formulating the complaint in relation to the Judge's conduct as
follows; the agreed conduct engaged the appearance of bias principle and
rendered the hearing of the appeal procedurally unfair. The failure to make
a formal application to recuse himself could not cure that unfairness which
had already occurred. In short the damage was done. The Judge's own view as
expressed in his decision, that he had maintained an open mind throughout,
was ultimately immaterial, since it was not his view, but the view of the
notional fair minded and informed observer that was material. Any such
person would have been bound to conclude that there was a real possibility
of bias.

Because of the complaints that had been made to him during the course of
the hearing about his conduct, which, it is agreed, had not led him to
alter his conduct, the Judge sought to deal with and refute the appearance
of bias argument in the course of his decision [62-65]. In so doing he
referred himself to three authorities; JK (Conduct of hearing) Ivory Coast
[2004] UKIAT 61, XS (Kosovo- Adjudicator's conduct) Serbia & Montenegro
[2005] UKIAT 93, and, Sivapatham (appearance of bias) [2017] UKUT 293. In
my judgement a considered assessment of the principles set out in the
latter decision by McCloskey J ought to have led the Judge to conclude,
however unwillingly, that he had indeed gone too far. This was not a
complaint of actual bias - but of the appearance of bias, a more subtle and
sophisticated complaint - with the distinction rehearsed in both Alubankudi
(appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542, and in Singh [2016] EWCA Civ 492.
Perhaps he was too close to matters to be able to see the force of the
complaint, because in my judgement (as was the case in Sivapatham) the
Appellant has established on the agreed facts that the notional fair minded
and informed observer would have concluded that there was a real
possibility of bias.

In the circumstances, the Appellant has made out his case of procedural
unfairness, and the only proper course is that the appeal should be
remitted for hearing afresh. In circumstances such as this, where it would
appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the
First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive
the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly considered by
the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise
required is such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is
appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal;
paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
First tier Tribunal Judge Cox, at the North Shields Hearing Centre. An
Arabic (North African) interpreter is required. Since the Appellant has now
been cross-examined on two occasions at appeal hearings, and since both the
Tribunal file, and the files of the Appellant's former solicitors are in
some disarray, the following further directions are made, with any
documents to be filed at the North Shields Hearing Centre;

      1) The Respondent shall file and serve by 5pm 8 March 2019 a copy of
         the Presenting Officer's note of the oral evidence given by the
         Appellant before Judge Bradshaw.

      2) The parties representatives are to use their best endeavours to
         agree a note of the Appellant's oral evidence as given before Judge
         Cox, and shall file a copy of that note (indicating the substance
         of any alternate records as appropriate) by 5pm 8 March 2019.

      3) If the Appellant through his current advisers served and filed any
         written evidence in advance of the hearing before Judge Cox, the
         parties should assume that this is now lost, and should work
         together to reconstitute such evidence, so that the Appellant may
         file copies as an agreed bundle by 5pm 8 March 2019.

      4) In the event that the Appellant is advised to seek further expert
         evidence in relation to his past conduct in Libya then the
         Appellant's representatives must inform the Tribunal by 5pm 8 March
         2019 of that intention, and set out (i) the identity of the
         proposed expert, with an explanation of how they are said to have
         expertise on the issue, (ii) a realistic timetable for obtaining an
         extension to their public funding for that purpose, and, (iii) a
         realistic timetable for the receipt of any report. In the absence
         of such information the Tribunal will seek to list the appeal after
         8 March 2019 at short notice.

      5) If no further expert evidence is to be commissioned then the
         Appellant's representatives shall file and serve a skeleton
         argument by 5pm 8 March 2019. If such evidence is to be
         commissioned, then a skeleton argument is to be filed and served,
         together with the expert evidence in question within 7 days of its
         receipt.

      6) The appeal will be listed with one full day allowed. Subject to the
         directions above the listing will be expedited, and heard on the
         first available date. The parties should expect a listing may be at
         short notice, and to that end both representatives must by 5pm 8
         March 2019 file a schedule of their availability for March, April
         and May 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 8 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

