
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/09340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     KSG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1966.  On 15 August 2013 the appellant claimed asylum with his wife and
    two sons as dependents.

 3. The appellant's claim was that he,  and  his  family,  are  Sikhs  from
    Jalalabad in Afghanistan.   Until they left Afghanistan, the  appellant
    had  owned  a  grocery  store.   He  claimed  that  he   had   suffered
    discrimination and harassment whilst in Afghanistan including a violent
    attack by two men who came to his  shop.   He  also  claimed  that  his
    daughter, then aged 11, had been kidnapped by the Taliban and had  been
    raped before being released 4 or 5 days later after which she committed
    suicide.

 4. On 9 September 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and for leave on the basis of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State did not accept that  the
    appellant's account was genuine.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  9  December  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge
    McLachlan) dismissed the appellant's appeal.    First,  she  found  the
    appellant not to be credible and rejected his account of  what  he  had
    claimed had happened to him and his family in Afghanistan and  that  it
    was a "fabrication".  Secondly, the Judge found that the appellant (and
    his family) would not be at risk as  returning  Sikhs  to  Afghanistan.
    Finally, she dismissed the appellant's appeal under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds do not challenge the Judge's adverse credibility finding or the
    Art 8 decision.  However, the grounds argue that  the  Judge  erred  in
    finding that the appellant and his family  would  not  be  at  risk  as
    returning Sikhs.  The Judge failed properly to  take  into  account  an
    expert report from Dr Giustozzi which should  have  led  the  Judge  to
    depart from the (then) country  guidance  decision  in  SL  and  Others
    (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137.

 7. On 8 January 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kamara)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on that ground.

 8. On 16 January 2014, the Secretary of State filed  a  Rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the Judge's decision on the basis that the Judge  had
    taken  into  account  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  and  had  not  erred  in
    dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  he  had  not
    established that he (and his family) would  be  at  risk  as  returning
    Sikhs.

 9. The appeal was initially listed for hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 28 February 2014.  However, the appeal was adjourned in the light of
    the fact that the Upper Tribunal  was  about  to  hear  a  new  country
    guidance case dealing with the issue of the risk  (if  any)  to  Afghan
    Sikhs on return.  The appeal was again listed on 23 May  2014  but  was
    again adjourned on the same basis as the  new  CG  case  had  not  been
    promulgated.

10. The new country guidance  decision  in  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs
    Persecution) Afghanistan CG [2015]  UKUT  595  (IAC)  was  subsequently
    promulgated on 3 November 2015.

11. As a consequence, the appeal was listed for  hearing  before  me  on  5
    January 2016.

The Submissions

12. Mr Vokes, who represented the appellant, submitted that the  Judge  had
    erred in law by  failing  properly  to  consider  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi and, in particular, by stating inconsistently in paragraph 29
    that there was an: "extremely difficult situation experienced by  Sikhs
    in Afghanistan" and then in paragraph 31 stating that: "it would appear
    from the background evidence, that there is slow progress being made to
    address some of the Sikh grievances."

13. However, Mr Vokes candidly accepted that he was in some difficulties as
    a result of the new  country  guidance  case  in  TG  and  Others.   He
    acknowledged that the Judge's findings in paragraph 30  concerning  the
    appellant's and his family's circumstances in Jalalabad put him on  the
    "back foot" in establishing a real risk of persecution or serious  ill-
    treatment simply on the basis that the appellant and  his  family  were
    returning Sikhs.

14. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  Judge  had
    not erred in law and that the Judge's adverse finding on risk on return
    was sustainable.

15. In any event, Mr Richards submitted that given the Judge's findings  of
    fact that the family had prospered in  Afghanistan  and  had  not  been
    subject to any mistreatment as they  claimed  then,  following  TG  and
    Others, the appellant could not succeed in establishing a real risk  of
    persecution or serious ill-treatment  in  Afghanistan  as  a  returning
    Sikh.

Discussion

16. The basis of the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were,  in
    effect, that the evidence before Judge McLachlan required her to depart
    from the country guidance case of SL and Others as had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision upheld by the Upper Tribunal, in DSG and Others
    (Afghan Sikhs: Departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT  148  (IAC).
    The strength of that argument is said to lie in Dr  Giustozzi's  report
    which was before  Judge  McLachlan  in  which  he  identified  problems
    suffered by the Sikh community in Afghanistan.   The  Judge  summarised
    parts of Dr Giustozzi's report at paragraph 15 of her determination.

17. Dr Giustozzi gave expert evidence before the Upper Tribunal in the more
    recent country guidance case of TG and Others.  In that case, the Upper
    Tribunal reached the conclusion that the evidence  before  it  did  not
    establish that, as  a  generality,  members  of  the  Sikh  (or  Hindu)
    communities in Afghanistan faced a real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment because of their  religion  although  they  were  subject  to
    discrimination.

18. The Upper Tribunal's finding in this regard is summarised in paragraphs
    (i)-(ii) of the headnote as follows:

         "(i)      Some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
             Afghanistan continue to suffer  harassment  at  the  hands  of
             Muslim zealots.

         (ii)     Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan
             do not face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment  such
             as to entitle them to a grant of international  protection  on
             the basis of their  ethnic  or  religious  identity,  per  se.
             Neither  can  it  be  said  that  the  cumulative  impact   of
             discrimination suffered by the Sikh and Hindu  communities  in
             general reaches the threshold of persecution."

19. However, the Upper Tribunal  went  on  to  conclude  that  whether  any
    particular individual member of the  Sikh or  Hindu  community  was  at
    real risk of persecution was "fact-sensitive" having regard to all  the
    circumstances including five factors in particular, identified  by  the
    Upper Tribunal which they summarised in paragraph (iii) of the headnote
    as follows:

         "(iii)   A consideration of whether an  individual  member  of  the
             Sikh and Hindu communities is at risk real of persecution upon
             return to Afghanistan is  fact-sensitive.   All  the  relevant
             circumstances must be considered but careful attention  should
             be paid to the following:

               a. women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
                  appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

               b. likely financial circumstances and ability to access basic
                  accommodation bearing in mind

                    - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of
                      the Sikh and Hindu communities

                    - Such individuals  may  face  difficulties  (including
                      threats, extortion,  seizure  of  land  and  acts  of
                      violence) in retaining property and/or pursuing their
                      remaining   traditional   pursuit,    that    of    a
                      shopkeeper/trader

                    -  The  traditional  source   of   support   for   such
                      individuals,  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to
                      provide adequate support;

               c.  The  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the   practical
                  accessibility to a suitable place of religious worship  in
                  light of declining numbers and the evidence that some have
                  been  subjected  to  harm  and  threats  to  harm   whilst
                  accessing the Gurdwara;

               d. Access to appropriate education for children in  light  of
                  discrimination against Sikh and  Hindu  children  and  the
                  shortage of adequate education facilities for them."

20. These findings were made taking into account  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence
    about the situation of Sikhs in Afghanistan.

21. It is clear to me that Judge McLachlan did consider the evidence of  Dr
    Giustozzi which she summarised in paragraph 15 and to  which  she  made
    further reference in paragraph 29.  In those paragraphs the Judge  said
    this:

         "15.     ... In his report filed on behalf of  the  Appellant,  Dr.
             Giustozzi  referred  to  the  significant  reduction  in   the
             population of Sikhs and Hindus in  Afghanistan,  a  population
             declining to the extent of over 90%  from  what  it  had  been
             prior to the war.  Hindus and Sikhs have been targeted  across
             Afghanistan  being  perceived  to  be  valuable  victims   for
             kidnapping or for looting, given  their  traditional  business
             activities and modest prosperity in  trade.   The  police  and
             judiciary are ineffective to  act  to  protect  Sikhs.   Their
             community leader has raised at the highest level the  question
             of the illegal occupation of 250 houses belonging to Sikhs  in
             Kabul alone.  Although approaches have been  made  by  leading
             Sikh community members to President Hamid  Karzai  to  provide
             restitution and effective protection to  the  Sikh  community,
             despite statements by President Karzai  that  action  will  be
             taken to restore the rights of Sikhs, little  has  been  done.
             The Sikhs are easy targets  for  abuse  given  their  minority
             status.  It  is  difficult  to  resist  the  Muslim  majority.
             Mistreatment  and  societal   discrimination   against   Sikhs
             continues to be  reported.   Harassment  of  adult  Sikhs  and
             Hindus occurs, particularly at the bazaar, and  Sikh  children
             commonly are  caught  up  in  fights  between  themselves  and
             Muslims.  Attempts are made to  forcibly  convert  Sikhs  from
             their religion to become Muslims.  The  community's  tradition
             of  cremation  is  particularly  targeted  and  obstructed  by
             aggressive Afghan Muslims.  Dr. Giustozzi refers to  potential
             problems the appellant would have if  he  were  to  return  to
             Afghanistan  without  the  capital  required  to  re-start   a
             business.  He would find it difficult to earn his  livelihood.
             He would continue to face discrimination and abuse,  as  would
             his dependants.  Costs of living are  comparatively  high  and
             housing is difficult to secure.

             ...

         29.      ... I have considered the background evidence provided  by
             both the Appellant and the  Respondent  as  to  the  extremely
             difficult situation experienced by Sikhs  in  Afghanistan.   I
             acknowledge the concern evident in the relentless  decline  in
             the Sikh and Hindu populations over a relatively short  period
             of time, the societal discrimination and the violent incidents
             that, from time to time, have  affected  the  Sikh  community.
             Particular reference is  made  to  problems  suffered  by  the
             community in Kabul in Dr. Giustozzi's report.  Gurdwaras  have
             closed  and  Sikh  cremations   face   particular   risks   of
             acrimonious attacks by Muslims.

22. Having taken this evidence into account the Judge reached the following
    conclusion in paragraphs 30-31: that the evidence  did  not  warrant  a
    departure from the country guidance  case  of  SL  that  had  held,  in
    effect, that there was no general  risk  of  persecution  to  Sikhs  on
    return to Afghanistan.  The Judge said this:

         "30.     However, while the  Appellant  and  his  family  may  face
             discrimination  and  harassment,   the   Appellant   did   not
             demonstrate that he  suffered  worse  than  that.   He  ran  a
             prosperous business in Jalalabad within the bazaar.  According
             to him, he gave his friend, Haji, the stock  in  the  shop  in
             exchange for help to enable his family to travel  to  the  UK.
             The stock was worth $40,000 to  $45,000,  a  relatively  large
             amount when one considers the salary and living costs referred
             to in Dr Giustozzi's report.  He  had  operated  his  business
             without apparent incident with the  possible  exception  of  a
             robbery in 2011, for some ten years.  He was able to employ an
             assistant.  His family were able to attend the Gurdwara  where
             his children were sent to school.  The family was involved  in
             the Sikh community  in  Jalalabad.   The  Appellant,  in  oral
             evidence, referred to cremations  taking  place  each  time  a
             member of the Sikh community dies; he thought  these  happened
             up to between two and five times a year.  He did not  indicate
             any difficulties or interference with  such  ceremonies.   The
             Appellant referred to Muslim customers who patronised his shop
             his  Muslim  doctor  and   his   Muslim   friend,   Haji.   He
             differentiated between Taliban and other Muslims, claiming his
             problems were with the former only.

         31.      I am not satisfied that there is  any  real  risk  to  the
             Appellant and his family members upon return to Jalalabad, his
             business, the Sikh community and wider Muslim community there.
              I conclude that the family members will be able  to  practice
             their religion.  Despite  discrimination,  lax  and  sometimes
             corrupt  police   procedures,   and   ineffective   government
             measures, it would appear from the background  evidence,  that
             there is slow progress being made to address some of the  Sikh
             grievances.  I find that the Appellant does  not  qualify  for
             refugee status and is not at real risk  for  breach  of  human
             rights under Articles 2 and 3.   Likewise,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant does not qualify for humanitarian protection.    Day
             to day life may be difficult for Sikhs in Afghanistan but I am
             satisfied that the Appellant and his family have not  suffered
             violence and will not suffer serious harm.  I do not find this
             to be a situation where  I  should  depart  from  the  country
             guidance afforded to SL."

23. I do not accept Mr Vokes' submission that the Judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider Dr Giustozzi's evidence or  that  she  made,  as  I
    understood the submission, inconsistent statements in paragraphs 29 and
    31 that the position of Sikhs was "extremely difficult" whilst, at  the
    same time, stating that "slow progress" was being made to  address  the
    grievances of Sikhs.  Nothing in the evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi  given
    before the Judge, which was in substance also his  evidence  given  for
    the Upper Tribunal in TG and Others, required the Judge  to  find  that
    the appellant was at real risk of persecution as a  returning  Sikh  to
    Afghanistan.

24. In any event, as Mr Vokes effectively  acknowledged,  applying  TG  and
    Others the Judge's findings in relation to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and his family (in paras 30 and 31) provide  no  sound  basis
    for a finding that the appellant (or his family) has established  their
    claims for asylum, to humanitarian protection or under Article 3 of the
    ECHR.

25. Even if the Judge's decision was set aside, in  my  judgment  the  only
    proper finding that could be made in the light of TG and Others is that
    the appellant has failed  to  establish  any  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment on return to Afghanistan.  The appellant was, and
    no doubt could in  the  future  become,  a  successful  businessman  in
    Jalalabad.  He had experienced no ill-treatment at the hands of  Muslim
    or others.  He was  able  to  practice  his  faith  and  his  shop  was
    patronised by Muslims, his doctor was a Muslim and he had at least  one
    Muslim friend.  His children were able to attend school and his  family
    were able to attend the Gurdwara.

26. Taking into account all the relevant circumstances, in particular those
    set out by the Upper Tribunal in TG and Others in  para  (iii)  of  the
    headnote, the appellant has not established he and his  family  are  at
    real risk of  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan because of their religion.

27. Consequently, even if the decision of Judge McLachlan was set aside, in
    remaking the decision the appellant's appeal falls to be  dismissed  on
    all grounds.

Decision

28. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on all grounds.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


