
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: AA/01113/2015         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|ON       |4 MARCH 2016              | |ON 18 March 2016                     |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |LS                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order made)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to  all,  whether  or  not
    parties to this case. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms N Ahmed, of  Counsel  instructed  by  Malik  &
                 Malik Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Asjad  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated  on  30  March  2015,  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 8 January 2915 to remove her from the UK.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania. She claimed that she  had  been
    kidnapped and trafficked and that she was therefore  at  real  risk  of
    persecution and treatment in breach  of  Article  3  in  Albania  as  a
    trafficked woman.

 3. At the hearing, I drew Mr Staunton's attention to some difficulties  in
    the decision of the judge which, in my preliminary  view,  appeared  to
    indicate that the judge may have applied the wrong standard of proof in
    assessing the credibility of the applicant.

 4. In response, Mr Staunton relied upon the  respondent's  Reply  dated  4
    August 2015. He was content for me to decide the appeal on the material
    before me.

 5. I am satisfied that the judge did apply the wrong standard of proof.  I
    will now give my reasons.

 6. I have taken into account that the judge directed himself correctly  on
    the applicable standard of proof at paras 4 and 5. At para 4, he  said,
    in relation to the asylum claim, that he applied the lower standard  of
    proof identified in Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97. At para 3, he  said,
    in relation to Article 3, that it was for the appellant to satisfy  him
    that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  she  will  be
    exposed to a real risk of torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or
    punishment.

 7. I have also taken into account the fact that the judge  again  referred
    to "the lower standard of proof" at para 11.

 8. However, elsewhere in the decision, the judge used phrases  which  were
    consistent with the application of too high a  standard  of  proof.  In
    particular, I noted the following:

    i)   At paragraph 14, he said:

         "It is highly likely that the 'trauma' that the appellant's sister
             referred to in the  medical  report  referred  to  a  possible
             breakdown following the death of her Father and her  inability
             to conceive children."

    ii)  Again, at para 14, he said:

         "I do not find it likely that the trauma refers to the  kidnapping
             as had that been the case, the Hospital would  have  mentioned
             and referred to it as well as the treatment that was given."

    iii) At para 16, in reaching his conclusion on the evidence  of  Ms  P.
         Smith that there had been a mistake in interpretation in the report
         of a mental health assessor, he said:

         "I find it highly likely that this is an accurate record  of  what
             [Ms Smith] told the mental health assessor."

    iv)  At para 20, he said:

         "I doubt the credibility of the appellant's kidnap and trafficking
             is probable because ..."

 9. The phrase quoted above from para 20 is particularly  worrying.  Whilst
    it may be that a single one of the remaining examples set out above may
    not have been sufficient to lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  judge
    applied the wrong standard of proof, the cumulative effect  of  i)-iii)
    taken together  with  iv)  which,  as  I  said,  I  found  particularly
    worrying, are such that I am satisfied that the  judge  did  apply  too
    high a standard of  proof  notwithstanding  that  he  directed  himself
    correctly at paras 4 and 5.

10. I considered whether the judge's decision could nonetheless stand given
    his alternative finding that, even if the  appellant  is  a  victim  of
    trafficking, internal relocation was a viable option.  I  am  satisfied
    that it cannot. This is because it is clear that his assessment of  the
    availability of  internal  relocation  relied  upon  his  view  of  the
    appellant's medical condition, pursuant to the country guidance case of
    AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80  (IAC),  whereas
    it is clear from his adverse credibility assessment  that  he  did  not
    believe the evidence before him that the appellant  was  an  individual
    who needs a great deal of help from another person.

11. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the  judge  materially
    erred in law. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge.

12. The effect of my decision is that the appellant's appeal will  need  to
    be determined on the merits on all issues.

13. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

14. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.(b).  In  addition,  given
    that I have decided that the appellant's case will need to  be  decided
    on the merits on all issues and having regard to the Court of  Appeal's
    judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of  the  view
    that a remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  right  course  of
    action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the  merits  on
all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad.




Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
