
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/01427/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                       Decision  &   Reasons
Promulgated
On 7th March 2016                                             On  5th  April
2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                   MRS GJ
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Jegarajah (Counsel) instructed by A.P Solicitors
For the Respondent: Miss Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rose dated the 31st March 2015, in which  he  dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal on  his  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
      human rights grounds.


   2. Within the Grounds  of  Appeal  it  is  argued,  inter  alia,  by  the
      Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in  failing
      to allow the appeal, given that he had accepted:





        i) that the Appellant's husband had spied for  the  LTTE,  telecast
           their  videos,  transported  fuel  [for]  the   LTTE,   arranged
           transportation and accommodation for LTTE members;
       ii) in January 2009 the Appellant's husband had been abducted by pro-
           government paramilitaries and beaten and later released;
      iii) the family relocated following the abduction, but  despite  that
           the Appellant's husband was sought by the Karuna group and  that
           in September 2009 he went into hiding;
       iv) the Karuna group and the Army visited the  family  home  looking
           for the Appellant's husband frequently;
        v) that on the 7th May 2010 the Appellant was attacked violently by
           the Karuna group and suffered a miscarriage as a result;
       vi) again in July 2010 she was beaten severely  for  not  disclosing
           her husband's whereabouts;
      vii) on the 4th March 2012 the Appellant was arrested and taken to an
           Army camp. She was questioned about  her  husband's  whereabouts
           and other prominent LTTE members;
     viii) on the 5th March 2012  she  was  released  through  bribery  and
           reporting conditions were imposed.


   3. It is contended that the Appellant's husband is still  in  hiding  and
      that all of the arrests in this case  post-dated  2009  and  that  the
      Upper Tribunal in the case of GJ had stated that "the GOSL  no  longer
      relies principally  on  checkpoints  and  searches;  its  approach  is
      intelligence led and it has sophisticated, extensive  intelligence  as
      to those who are seeking to destabilise the unitary state, within  the
      Diaspora and in Sri Lanka itself".  It  is  argued  that  nothing  has
      changed since  the  Appellant's  arrests  and  torture  and  that  the
      Appellant has left the country in breach of reporting  conditions  and
      that therefore this is a case which should have been allowed.


   4. Although permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge White on the 5th May 2015,  permission  to  appeal  was
      then subsequently granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on the
      10th July 2015 when he found  that  "In  view  of  the  many  positive
      credibility findings made by the FTTJ, which include an acceptance  of
      the activities of the appellant's husband on behalf of  the  LTTE,  as
      well as her own detention and ill-treatment, it is arguable  that  the
      Judge erred in finding that she was not at risk of persecution in  Sri
      Lanka".



   5. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 reply dated the 17th August  2015,  it
      is  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed   himself
      appropriately and that in the Country Guidance case of GJ and  Others,
      the Tribunal had identified the category of persons who  would  be  at
      risk of ill-treatment upon return and that guidance  was  subsequently
      endorsed by the Court of Appeal in the case of MP. It is  argued  that
      Judge Rose properly had regard to those cases and applied the guidance
      to the present case and that the finding that the  Appellant  did  not
      engage any of the categories identified in GJ was a finding  that  was
      open to him on the evidence  and  that  he  was  entitled  thereby  to
      dismiss the appeal against refusal  to  grant  asylum  status.  It  is
      argued that the Judge directed himself appropriately.



   6. In her oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Jegarajah  first
      asked for the anonymity direction  to  be  maintained.  This  was  not
      objected to by Miss Brocklesby-Weller, and  in  the  circumstances,  I
      therefore do maintain the original anonymity order made by the  First-
      tier Tribunal, given the nature of the risk said to be  faced  by  the
      Appellant from the Sri Lankan authorities.



   7. Ms Jegarajah sought to argue that  the  finding  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  were  irrational  in  refusing  the  appeal  and  that
      inadequate reasons had been given for the refusal. She sought to  rely
      upon paragraph 306 of the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
      Country Guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
      Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  in  which  it  was  stated  that
      "President Rajapaksa has repeatedly stated that the GOSL's approach to
      security is  now  intelligence-led.  The  security  service  debriefed
      thousands of Tamils at the end of the  civil  war  and  the  GOSL  has
      available to it sophisticated, high-quality intelligence, enabling  it
      to evaluate and assess the risk posed by particular  individuals  both
      within and without Sri Lanka" and the further finding at paragraph 310
      that "there is no evidence that strip searches occur at  the  airport;
      the GOSL's approach is intelligence led rather than  being  driven  by
      roundups and checkpoints as it was during the civil war".



   8. She referred me to the body  map  of  the  scarring  suffered  by  the
      Appellant at page 20 of the bundle, and as to the answers given by the
      Appellant in interview. She asked me to bear in mind that the conflict
      in Sri Lanka ended in on the 18th May 2009 and that in respect of  the
      answers given by the Appellant in interview, the Appellant  stated  at
      page H9 of the Respondent's bundle at question 18 that "in 2009 a  man
      came to my house to kill my husband. My husband escaped. My son and  I
      remained in the house. They came several  times  looking  for  me  and
      harassed me. I told them I did not know where he was. I had nobody  to
      help me. My husband used to come once a month or two to help me, which
      I did not tell them. I was pregnant, on my way back  from  the  clinic
      Karuna's men saw me and got suspicious about how I could get  pregnant
      without my husband. They came to my house and beat me up on May 7th, I
      think, 2010". She referred me to paragraph 25 of the  interview  where
      the Appellant stated in answer to the question as  to  when  she  last
      spoke to her husband on the phone "May 2010 after  they  came  to  the
      house and beat me up, when I lost the baby".


   9. Ms Jegarajah said that the Appellant's evidence regarding the help her
      husband had given to the LTTE was set out in answer to paragraph 30 of
      the interview in which the Appellant had said that "I don't know  what
      he did, he said he had distributed propaganda leaflets. We lived in an
      Army controlled area, so the LTTE asked him  to  raise  awareness  and
      collect money for them. He also showed videos about the LTTE  and  the
      Tamil plight in Sri Lanka. He also gathered information about the Army
      and STF officers". She told me that in interview at  question  31  the
      Appellant had also stated how her husband was a  driver  and  that  he
      carried parcels to LTTE areas for them and  that  a  question  34  the
      Appellant had said that  her  husband  had  her  told  that  he  found
      accommodation for LTTE members who  came  to  the  area  and  that  at
      question 38 the Appellant had said that her husband was an LTTE spy.



  10. Ms Jegarajah next referred  me  to  question  53  in  respect  of  the
      problems that the Appellant said she had started having  in  May  2010
      and that the Appellant had said that she was pregnant and had gone  to
      a clinic and that the authorities had gone to check  about  her  visit
      and they had got it confirmed that she was pregnant but that "the same
      night they came to the house at night. I was feeding my son.  Two  men
      came and went rampaging in the house. They asked where my husband was,
      I said I did not know. One of them kicked  me  and  asked  how  I  got
      pregnant. I fell against the wall and fell unconscious. My son started
      screaming and fell on top of me. They did not even care,  they  kicked
      me and pulled my screaming son away. They pulled my nightie. People in
      the neighbourhood heard my screams  and  came  outside  my  house  and
      witnessed what was happening. They kept repeating  and  asking  me  to
      show where my husband was. They said I knew  where  he  was  and  kept
      hitting over and over again and threatened to harm me and  my  son.  I
      pleaded and asked to be left alone and  told  them  I  would  take  my
      husband to them when he contacts me".


  11. Ms Jegarajah next referred to question 77 in the interview  where  the
      Appellant detailed what had happened to her in July 2010 and, in reply
      to a question as to what had happened in July 2010 the  Appellant  had
      stated in interview "they came, hit me, asked where my husband was and
      how many times he had been. I strongly believed  that  they  had  been
      informed. I was kicked with heavy boots and hit on my right wrist with
      a baton. One stamped on my back with a boot. I  screamed  and  my  son
      woke. They kept hitting me over and over. They searched the house  and
      left saying I had to produce my husband in a week  or  my  son  and  I
      would be shot at".



  12. Counsel next took me  to  question  96  of  the  interview  where  the
      Appellant stated that she been taken to an Army base with her  son  in
      2012 and that in talking  about  that  detention,  the  Appellant  had
      stated how she had been taken to a room, her hands had been  tied  and
      she had been sat on a chair when a man had hit her from the front  and
      that she had been hit with hard cardboard and  that  they  had  pushed
      dirty socks into her mouth and then slapped her then she was hit  with
      cardboard on her thighs and talked about how  she  had  been  sexually
      assaulted and touched inappropriately.



  13. The Appellant then gave evidence in that interview how a gun had  been
      pointed at her head and how she had been threatened  with  being  shot
      and that they had threatened also to  shoot  her  son.  The  Appellant
      detailed these answers between questions 92 and question  122  of  the
      interview. She also detailed within those answers how they would bring
      her son into the room and threaten to shoot him if she  did  not  tell
      them where her husband was. It was stated that it was the  Appellant's
      case that she had been arrested on the 4th March 2012 and released  on
      the 5th March 2012.


  14. Ms Jegarajah on behalf of the Appellant then took me to  the  relevant
      paragraphs of the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rose.  She
      first highlighted how within the Judge's finding starting at  [27]  of
      the decision made he had taken account of the matters  raised  in  the
      asylum decision, but had noted that the medical  report  provided  for
      the appeal was dated  the  26th  March  2015  and  was  therefore  not
      available as at the date of the decision.



  15. At [28] the Judge had noted that the medical expert  had  considerable
      experience in provision of medical reports on victims of  torture  and
      that the Judge had noted  how  the  expert,  Mr  Izqierdo-Martin,  had
      concluded that the scars on the Appellant's upper limb were typical of
      injuries intentionally caused  by  sharp  implements  and  was  highly
      consistent with the mechanism of injury described  by  the  Appellant,
      namely being scratched by the fingernails  during  her  detention  and
      that the scars on her lower limbs were said to be typical of  injuries
      caused  by  being  intentionally  beaten  with  a  long  narrow  blunt
      implement as described by the Appellant at [29]. At [30] the Judge had
      found that "Overall, Mr Izqierdo-Martin's opinion is that most of  the
      scars are typical of intentionally caused injuries and are  likely  to
      be caused by a third-party as described by  the  Appellant".  He  also
      considered that it was extremely unlikely that  the  injuries  to  the
      lower limbs were self-inflicted.


  16. Ms Jegarajah then referred me to [31] where the Judge  found  that  he
      had no reason to find that the probable cause  of  the  injuries  were
      self-inflicted by proxy and that the Judge had thereby ruled out self-
      infliction by proxy and that the Judge stated that the  Appellant  had
      not exaggerated her injuries. She noted that the Judge had also  found
      that although the Appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka in 2012  using
      a passport in her own name, by  her  own  account  she  had  not  been
      stopped at the airport as a result of arrangements having been made by
      the agent who assisted her and that in the Judge's finding at [39] "it
      is plausible that the Appellant was able, through an agent, to procure
      safe passage through the airport".



  17. At [41] the Judge had found specifically that "having  considered  the
      evidence in the round, my findings are as follows. I  am  prepared  to
      attach some weight to the Appellants account as to  the  events  which
      led to her leaving Sri Lanka. However, I attach little weight  to  her
      account of her involvement in demonstrations in the UK".



  18.  Ms Jegarajah therefore argued that although the Judge has  discounted
      the sur place argument, he had accepted  the  Appellant's  account  of
      what happened to her in Sri Lanka. However, she went on to argue  that
      the Judge's findings in light of these positive  credibility  findings
      as to the Appellant's account in Sri Lanka were  irrational,  and  had
      not properly been explained, such as to be inadequately reasoned.  She
      argued that although the  Judge  had  correctly  identified  the  risk
      categories set out within the case of GJ (Sri Lanka) between [45]  and
      [48] and the Judge had considered the Appellant's evidence as  to  her
      husband's activities in support of the LTTE at [49] such as  he  found
      that "none of these activities indicated that the Appellant's  husband
      was himself a high level member of the LTTE or that he is now  someone
      who is likely to be perceived as a threat  to  the  integrity  of  Sri
      Lanka as a single state" and he found that there is no  evidence  that
      the Appellant's name was on a stop list.



  19. Ms Jegarajah argued that given conflict had  ended  on  the  18th  May
      2009, and yet on the account accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      the authorities were interested in the Appellant's husband not only in
      2009, but also in 2010 and 2012 to the extent that  she  was  tortured
      and threatened that both herself and her son  would  be  shot  if  her
      husband was not produced, the Judge's findings that she would  not  be
      at risk  upon  return  were  irrational  and  had  not  been  properly
      explained, given that all of the arrests and treatment which the Judge
      accepted post-dated the end of the conflict in 2009 and that what  had
      to be considered was not simply  the  activities  of  the  Appellant's
      husband, but the  view  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  to  the
      activities of the Appellant's husband and the risk that  he  posed  to
      the integrity to Sri Lankan as a single state.



  20. She argued that if the Appellant's husband was  still  wanted  by  the
      authorities to that degree up to 2012, why he would no  longer  be  of
      interest to the authorities, and in such circumstances his wife  would
      be at risk upon return, given that she was a lever used to try to  get
      to the Appellant's husband. She asked  me  to  find  that  there  were
      material errors of law and to remake the decision allowing the appeal.


  21. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent Miss  Brocklesby-Weller
      relied upon the Respondent's Rule 24 response. She  argued  the  Judge
      had properly considered the cases of GJ and MP and that the categories
      set out therein were exhaustive and that the Judge had  correctly  set
      out the husband's activities and found that he was not  a  high  level
      member of the LTTE or someone  who  was  likely  to  be  perceived  as
      affecting the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state and  the  Judge
      at [50] had found that "even if,  as  the  Appellant  maintained,  her
      husband has remained in hiding, it does not follow that in fact he  is
      still of interest to the authorities or to the Army in Sri  Lanka,  so
      that the Appellant would be at risk because she would be perceived  as
      someone who could provide information as  to  his  whereabouts".  Miss
      Brocklesby-Weller agreed that the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  GJ,
      was considering the categories of people who would  be  at  risk  upon
      return to Sri Lanka following the end of the civil war.



  22. I reserved my decision on error of law and materiality.




My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  23. The  summary  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rose  as  to  what  the
      Appellant's case was is set out at [6] to [8] of the decision.  Within
      these paragraphs, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose found that:


      "6. The Appellant maintained that her husband had supported the  LTTE.
      He was seized by the Karuna group in 2009  and  severely  beaten.  The
      family moved, but the Appellant was threatened and  as  a  consequence
      her husband left home and started living in hiding, coming  home  once
      or twice a month. In May 2010, the Appellant was seen by a  member  of
      the Karuna group, as she returned from  the  clinic,  whilst  she  was
      pregnant. She was  attacked  at  night  and  asked  of  her  husband's
      whereabouts. Members of the Karuna  group  came  again  in  July  2010
      looking for her husband and she was severely beaten for not disclosing
      details of his whereabouts. She sustained injuries for which  she  was
      treated by an Ayurveda doctor. Her attempt to go to the UK failed.


      7. In March 2012 she was arrested by the Army and  the  Karuna  group,
      fingerprinted and photographed. She was questioned about  her  husband
      and where he was hiding, and was ill-treated and beaten. Under duress,
      she signed a book. She was then released from  detention  through  the
      payment of a  bribe,  arranged  by  her  mother-in-law.  She  went  to
      Colombo, and in May 2012, she left Sri Lanka and went to Malaysia. She
      stayed there for two months and then travelled to the UK with her son,
      arriving on the 25th July. While in the UK, she had been  involved  in
      Tamil Diaspora activities.


       8. At the Appellant's asylum interview (AIR 152) she  was  asked  who
      she feared in Sri Lanka, and she referred to  the  'Karuna  group  and
      Army '."


  24. I do accept First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose between [28  and  31]  that
      the Judge properly considered the evidence regarding the scarring  and
      the report of Mr Izquierdo-Martin, and that the Judge  had  noted  how
      the scars to the Appellant's upper  limbs  were  typical  of  injuries
      caused by sharped implements  and  were  highly  consistent  with  the
      mechanism of injury described by the Appellant, namely being scratched
      by the attackers fingernails during her detention and how the scars on
      her lower limbs were said to have been typical of injuries  caused  by
      being intentionally beaten with a long  narrow  blunt  instrument,  as
      described by the Appellant. He also noted that Mr Izquierdo-Martin had
      considered that the scars were extremely unlikely to have  been  self-
      inflicted at [29 and 30] of the decision. It is also clear that  Judge
      Rose discounted the possibility of self-infliction by proxy at [31] he
      also found that the Appellant had not exaggerated her injuries  within
      that paragraph. At [32] the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  further  found
      that although the Appellant's application had been made using a  false
      name, which he found may indicate that she was prepared to use  deceit
      in order to come to the UK, it was consistent with the  Appellant  and
      her husband seeking to flee from Sri Lanka. First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Rose then between [33 and 37] gave clear and adequate  reasons  as  to
      why the Appellant's sur place activities were rejected.


  25. However, the Judge went on at [41] to say  that  he  was  prepared  to
      attach some weight to the Appellant's account of the events which  led
      to her leaving Sri Lanka, but  was  attaching  little  weight  to  her
      account of involvement in demonstration in the UK.



  26. Although First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rose  therefore  gave  clear  and
      adequate reasons discounting the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities,
      there were no parts of the Appellant's account of what had happened to
      her in Sri Lanka, which he regarded as being false or implausible. The
      Judge appears to accept the entirety of the Appellant's account as  to
      what happened to her in  Sri  Lanka,  including  the  beating  of  her
      husband in 2009, and her own beating in 2010 whilst pregnant, and  her
      arrest, detention and torture in March 2012. None of these aspects  of
      the Appellant's case were rejected by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



  27. It is apparent from this that the Judge  having  accepted  these  core
      parts of the Appellant's account, he must also have accepted that  the
      Appellant's husband was still of sufficient interest to the Sri Lankan
      authorities in 2009, 2010, and 2012, such as to lead  to  her  husband
      being beaten, the  threats  made  to  the  family  in  2009,  and  the
      Appellant being beaten in May 2010, July 2010 and March 2012.  All  of
      these arrests post-dated the end of the civil  war  on  the  18th  May
      2009. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  that
      the Sri Lankan authorities must have  still  been  interested  in  the
      Appellant's husband in 2010 and 2012, even though this was at  a  time
      when as was set out within the Country Guidance case of GJ, the  focus
      of the Sri Lankan government's concerns had changed since the  end  of
      the civil war in May 2009 and the LTTE in Sri Lanka itself was a spent
      force with no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil  war  and
      that the categories of persons  at  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      serious harm on return Sri Lanka, whether in detection  or  otherwise,
      were after the civil war and still are, as set out  within  GJ.  These
      included "individuals who are, or perceived to be,  a  threat  to  the
      integrity of Sri Lankan  as  a  single  state  because  they  are,  or
      perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  to  post  conflict
      Tamil separatism within the diaspora  and/or  renewal  of  hostilities
      within Sri Lanka".


  28. Therefore, although First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose has at [49] set out
      his reasons for finding that the Appellant's husband was  not  a  high
      level member of the LTTE, in terms  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
      interview that her husband had simply distributed propaganda leaflets,
      collected money for the LTTE, showed videos about  the  LTTE  and  the
      Tamil plight in Sri Lanka, and had gathered information about the Army
      and about a special Army force the STP, had been  a  driving  for  the
      LTTE and had found accommodation for LTTE members who came to the area
      and was a LTTE spy rather than a member  and  had  provided  financial
      assistance for LTTE members.



  29. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose  has  failed  to  explain  the
      apparent inconsistency between his findings  regarding  the  low-level
      activities undertaken by the Appellant's husband, and  his  acceptance
      regarding the treatment suffered by her husband  and  by  herself  and
      other threats made to her and her son, not only in 2009, but  also  in
      2010 and 2012. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to  adequately
      explain, giving his findings  that  the  Appellant's  husband  was  of
      sufficient interest to the authorities not only in 2009, but  also  in
      2010 and 2012 such as to lead to the Appellant being beaten, even when
      pregnant, and having been tortured to the extent of  leaving  scarring
      set out within the medical report in 2012 by the authorities  to  find
      out her husband's whereabouts, why this would mean that the  Appellant
      would not still be at risk from the Sri Lankan authorities if she were
      to be returned, in order to place pressure  upon  her  to  reveal  the
      location and whereabouts of her husband.



  30. The Tribunal has to consider not only the actual activities undertaken
      by the Appellant's husband, but also the perception of the Sri  Lankan
      authorities as to his activities and the threat that he posed  to  the
      integrity of Sri Lankan as a single  state.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge has failed to consider this and has failed to  properly  explain
      the inconsistencies in respect of the treatment  of  suffered  by  the
      Appellant and her husband and the threats made, and his findings as to
      the low-level activities  carried  out  by  the  Appellant's  husband.
      Although  clearly  in  this  regard  the  focus  of  the  Sri   Lankan
      authorities has changed since the end of the civil  war,  as  set  out
      within the Country Guidance of GJ, it is significant  in  this  regard
      that all of the arrests and treatment found by the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge post-dated the end of the civil war. The  Judge  has  failed  to
      explain in such circumstances why  the  Appellant's  husband  was  not
      perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as being a threat to the unity
      of a single state in Sri Lanka, otherwise  to  fall  within  the  risk
      categories of GJ, even if the activities were in fact limited.


  31. The  inconsistent  findings  and  failure  to  properly  explain  such
      inconsistency does amount to a material error of law,  such  that  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rose  is  set  aside,  and  the
      matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  tribunal  for  rehearing
      before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Rose.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rose  contains  a  material
      error of law, such that the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Rose
      is set aside;
      The case is remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing  de
      novo, before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rose.

      Signed
      Dated 7th March 2016

      R McGinty
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
