
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01540/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 13th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                               mohammad Zandi
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  who  claims  to  be  a  Christian
    convert.  His appeal against a decision to remove him following refusal
    of his asylum claim was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Broe
    following hearings on 8th April and 16th June 2014.  The Appellant, who
    is representing himself but with the  assistance  of  Lifeline  Options
    Community, applied for permission to appeal to this Tribunal.

 2. The primary ground of application was the absence of  findings  on  the
    evidence of one of the witnesses, Delsoo Heidari.  It was said that the
    judge had failed to make a finding upon the evidence of  that  witness.
    It was further said that the judge  in  disbelieving  the  evidence  of
    other witnesses had not stated whether he regarded them as  deluded  or
    as parties to a plan to give false witness.  Finally reference was made
    to background evidence as to the position of Christians in Iran and the
    potential relevance of the decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v
    SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.   In  granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Denson expressed the view  that  the  testimony  of  the
    witness Heidari was  crucial  in  making  any  credibility  finding  in
    relation to the Appellant's account and that the failure to make such a
    finding was an arguable error of law. Following the grant of permission
    to appeal the  Respondent  put  in  a  response  under  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rule 24 stating that although the judge's  failure  to  refer
    expressly to the evidence of the witness was  unfortunate  it  did  not
    establish an error capable of vitiating the outcome of the appeal.

 3. At the hearing before me the Appellant appeared in person.  Although he
    speaks some English  it  is  far  from  fluent.   There  was  no  Farsi
    interpreter available.  He  was  assisted  by  Mr  Forbes  of  Lifeline
    Options Community in  the  capacity  of  a  McKenzie  Friend.   As  the
    Appellant was representing himself I asked Mr Mills to address me first
    so there was clarity as to the likely issues.  He relied upon the  Rule
    24 response.  The Appellant had in fact also put in  a  reply  to  that
    response which  was  copied  for  the  Presenting  Officer.   Mr  Mills
    accepted that some would say that it  was  legally  erroneous  for  the
    judge not to have made express findings on the evidence of  Mr  Heidari
    but he contended that if  this  was  the  case  the  omission  was  not
    material. The evidence of that witness could not have  made  sufficient
    difference for the Appellant to be believed in the  light  of  previous
    adverse findings and  the  judge  had  given  other  good  reasons  for
    disbelieving that  the  Appellant's  claimed  conversion  was  genuine.
    Whether other witnesses were deluded or conspiring made no  difference.
    It did not matter whether they were tricked or were disingenuous.   The
    judge did not believe their evidence which was  intended  to  establish
    that the Appellant was a genuine convert.

 4. The Appellant then addressed  me,  having  discussed  matters  with  Mr
    Forbes.  He said that the witness Heidari  had  explained  how  he  had
    converted to Christianity in England and how they had been in the  same
    house.  He had given the witness a Bible and encouraged him  to  follow
    Christianity.  The witness had liked the Bible.  He went to church  and
    had since converted.  Mr Mills then submitted that what  the  Appellant
    had said did not really take the matter any further than what had  been
    recorded in the judge's decision at paragraphs 24 and 25.  I said  that
    I wished to check the judge's Record of Proceedings before coming to  a
    decision.  Mr Mills accepted that if I found there was a material error
    the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing.  It would not have been possible for me
    to deal with the matter as there was no interpreter present and neither
    were any of the witnesses.

 5. The decision of Judge Broe is a careful and detailed document.  I  have
    checked the Record of Proceedings and it does appear that the  evidence
    of Mr Heidari as set out in his letter which  he  adopted  and  in  his
    evidence as recorded at paragraphs 24 and 25  of  the  decision  covers
    substantially what was said.  Those paragraphs read as follows:

         "24. Mr Delsoo Heidari gave evidence and adopted as his statement a
             letter in which he said that he met the Appellant in Iran when
             they worked together in a factory.  He next saw him in  London
             in 2011.  He said that the  Appellant  invited  him  to  be  a
             Christian but he did not have enough knowledge.  The Appellant
             gave him a Bible in Farsi which gave him an eagerness to  find
             out about Christianity.  He has been to church  to  boost  his
             knowledge and would like to prepare for baptism.

         25.  When cross-examined he said that he met the Appellant in  this
             country because he was 'at the same  address  that  I  lived'.
             They had not discussed Christianity  before  he  came  to  the
             country.  He said that he had been  granted  leave  to  remain
             because he had converted."

 6. It was apparent from the Record of Proceedings that  the  reference  in
    paragraph 24 to "He did not  have  enough  knowledge"  related  to  the
    witness rather than to the Appellant.  It was also stated in  the  oral
    evidence that the witness had been granted asylum on the basis  of  his
    conversion.  He had been baptised in early 2013.

 7. It is not in dispute that the judge did not make any  specific  finding
    upon whether that evidence was true or not.  As the Respondent accepted
    that was unfortunate.  It may well be that even if the judge had  found
    that the evidence given was  true  that  he  would  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant himself  was  being  duplicitous  in  his
    behaviour towards the witness.  However there is  no  finding  in  that
    regard.  On  the  other  hand  given  the  context  that  the  witness,
    according to his evidence, was led into  the  Christian  faith  by  the
    Appellant, who lent him a Bible in Farsi and encouraged him to read  it
    and that subsequently that witness has been baptised and, I  was  told,
    has been accepted as a refugee on the  basis  of  his  conversion  then
    potentially that evidence might have led to a different conclusion.  It
    is impossible for me to speculate as to what  the  judge's  view  would
    have been had he made an assessment of that evidence, as he should have
    done, and weighed it in the round with the other evidence given.

 8. It has recently been made clear in the reported decision of MK (duty to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)  that  reasons  must  be
    given for believing or not believing evidence.  In this case there is a
    lack of a finding as to  whether  the  evidence  was  believed  or  not
    believed at all; a fortiori that must be an error of  law  and  it  was
    material as it could have led to a different conclusion.   I  therefore
    set aside the decision of Judge Broe.  It is necessary for the whole of
    the evidence upon which findings have been made  to  be  considered  in
    order to reach a sustainable conclusion. I  noted  that  there  was  no
    challenge by the Appellant to the decision relating to Article  8  ECHR
    and it does seem unlikely that the Appellant could succeed  under  this
    head if he fails otherwise. However I will not restrict  the  terms  of
    remittal in case other factors have intervened.

 9. I was not in a position to rehear the appeal in any  way  on  the  same
    occasion for the reasons mentioned above. This matter turns  very  much
    on credibility.  As fresh findings of fact fall to be made in the light
    of all of the evidence and having regard to  Statement  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper
    Tribunal I remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the
    provisions  of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 in accordance with the directions below.

Notice of Decision

The making of  the  decision  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
material error on a point of law and I have set aside  that  decision.   The
appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-decided   in
accordance with the directions below.

No anonymity direction is made.


 DIRECTIONS MADE UNDER SECTION 12(3)(A) AND 12(3)(B) OF THE TRIBUNALS COURTS
                          AND ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007


(1)  The judge or judges of the First-tier Tribunal who  are  to  reconsider
    the appeal should not include Judges Broe or Crawford.

(2)  None of the findings of Judge Broe are preserved.

(3)  The appropriate hearing centre is Birmingham  and  a  Dari  interpreter
    will be required.

(4)  The parties are to serve upon the Tribunal  and  upon  each  other  any
    other evidence, including witness statements, upon which they  seek  to
    rely at least seven days before the hearing.



Signed                              Date   12 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

