
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01657/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 7 January 2014 and 3 June 2014             |On 18 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               JJ (Sri Lanka)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McKenzie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant JJ is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 10 October 1977.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse asylum dated 31 January 2012.  The appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Judge Kelsey in a determination dated 14 May  2012.   On  7  June  2012
    Judge Baird granted permission to appeal.  That was because  she  found
    Judge Kelsey was confused about the "two asylum interviews".   Further,
    that it was arguable Judge Kelsey failed to consider  the  evidence  in
    the round and in particular that he failed to give adequate reasons for
    rejecting the evidence of Dr Martin and the appellant's claim  to  have
    been arrested and ill-treated.

 2. The appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  who  on  8
    October 2012  found  that  Judge  Kelsey's  determination  contained  a
    material error of law in failing to take into account the fact that the
    appellant mentioned his injuries to his back at screening  on  14  June
    2011, in failing to appreciate that the appellant was not  asked  about
    his injuries at his first interview and his confusion  about  when  the
    appellant first disclosed those injuries had significantly affected his
    assessment of the appellant's credibility.  Further, that he  erred  in
    failing to take into  account  medical  opinion  that  the  appellant's
    injuries were consistent with the time span described by him.

 3. The case came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances to be re-made.
     She dismissed the appeal in a determination promulgated on  2  January
    2013.  When application for permission to appeal the decision of Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Frances was heard by Judge Macleman, Judge of  the
    Upper Tribunal, he refused permission.  In his reasons for decision  he
    said:

         "There are  five  points  in  the  application:  (1)  paragraph  24
         contains no error.  The finding that the appellant was deliberately
         injured did not compel a finding that he was detained and  tortured
         as claimed, provided that such a conclusion was properly  reasoned.
         (2) sound principles on evaluation of torture claims are  set  out,
         but it is not shown that the judge failed to follow these.  (3) the
         determination makes very clear findings on the centrepiece  of  the
         claim, in particular at paragraph 45.  (4) and (5) are only further
         disagreements.   The   application   does   not   show   that   the
         determination as a whole is arguably wrong in  law,  and  does  not
         disclose issues apt for the court."

 4. Sir David Keene in the Court of Appeal gave permission to appeal  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman's decision on 4 July 2013 and  on  18  November
    2013, Lord Justice Moses ordered by consent that  the  decision  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Frances promulgated on 2 January 2013 be  quashed.
    [2] of Lord Justice Moses order reads as follows:

         "The respondent accepts that the UTIAC had no proper basis for  its
         conclusions for the following reasons:

         (a)  The UTIAC erred in law by failing to apply the correct test in
             assessing the evidence of scarring to the claimant and  failed
             to follow the guidance in RC v Sweden (App No  41827/07/07,  9
             March 2010) by not shifting the onus to the  SSHD  as  to  the
             causation of the scarring.

         (b)  The  UTIAC  wrongly  failed  to  put  its  conclusion  to  the
             appellant that the scarring, while deliberate  and  not  self-
             inflicted, had been inflicted in a manner other  than  in  the
             circumstances claimed by the appellant.

         (c)   The  UTIAC  wrongly  concluded  that  there   were   material
             discrepancies in the appellant's account of torture."

 5. Lord Justice Moses ordered that the material error  of  law  identified
    warranted  the  remittal  of  the  appeal  back  to   the   UTIAC   for
    reconsideration of the appellant's appeal.

 6. Thus the matter came before me for re-hearing.  On 7 January  2014  the
    hearing was adjourned by consent to await a psychiatric report  on  the
    appellant from consultant psychiatrist  Dr  Wilhelm  Skogstad  and  the
    outcome of the hearing in the Court of Appeal of GJ Sri Lanka CG [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC).  When the appeal came back before me on 3  June,  the
    outcome of the appeal against GJ in  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  still
    awaited.   The  evidence  prepared  for  the  hearing   comprised   the
    appellant's bundle (263 pages plus a supplemental bundle), including  a
    statement of the appellant dated 28 May 2014, statement of S H dated 30
    May 2014, statement of T R (undated), statement of B M J  V  (undated),
    statement of M C R (undated) and statement of K R (undated).

 7. Ms Holmes told me she did not propose to go behind  the  report  of  Dr
    Skogstad and that she  accepted  what  he  had  to  say  regarding  the
    appellant's state of health and causation of what Dr Skogstad describes
    as his mental disorder at [5.2]  of  the  report.   Ms  Holmes  further
    conceded that given the report, the appellant's  credibility  regarding
    events in Sri Lanka and in particular, the issue of an  arrest  warrant
    against him, were no longer in issue.  She told me she accepted that an
    arrest warrant had been issued, such that when I put to  her  that  the
    appellant would be identified as being on a "stop list"  such  that  he
    came within the risk categories identified in GJ she did not demur.

Summary

 8. I find that the appellant has proved to the  lower  standard,  applying
    the country guidance case law and the country evidence that  he  is  at
    real risk on return to Sri Lanka as a person of adverse interest to the
    authorities.

 9. The asylum grounds of appeal have been  made  out  as  have  the  human
    rights grounds in relation to Articles 2 and 3.  The appellant  has  no
    need of humanitarian protection under the Rules as he is a refugee.

Decision

10. Appeal allowed.

Anonymity direction is continued.


Signed                              Date 4 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The appellant is granted anonymity unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court
otherwise directs.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  for
contempt of Court.






Signed                              Date 4 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart










