
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            mr benyam neldemaryam
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton, Counsel, instructed by Blavo and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart (Judge  Bart-Stewart),  promulgated  on  11
    June 2015, in which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  That  appeal
    was against the Respondent's decision of 9 January 2015 to  refuse  his
    asylum claim and to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on  6
    July 2015.

Background

 3.  Appellant has always claimed to be an Eritrean national, although  the
    Respondent believes him to be Ethiopian. He was born on 24 April  1994.
    His claim was essentially as follows. He had been born in  Eritrea  but
    left aged only one year old. He lived in Ethiopia until  his  departure
    in 2012. On his account, he had had no lawful status in Ethiopia. As  a
    teenager, the Appellant had helped to distribute leaflets on behalf  of
    the OLF. As a result, he had been arrested  and  detained.  He  escaped
    from detention and then fled the country.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 10 January 2014 after a long and hazardous journey.

 4. In rejecting the Appellant's claim, the Respondent concluded  that  his
    account was not credible. It was found that he was in fact an Ethiopian
    national. Alternatively, he could at  least  obtain  such  nationality.
    Further, his account of helping the  OLF  and  of  being  detained  was
    rejected. It was proposed to remove him to Ethiopia.

The decision of Judge Bart-Stewart

 5. The issue of the claimed OLF assistance and detention are dealt with at
    paragraphs 29-32 of the decision. She  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    embellished his  account  of  the  OLF  activities,  and  that  it  was
    inconsistent with the country information. In respect of the arrest and
    detention, she found that it was implausible that the  Appellant  would
    have gone to his local area after his claimed escape. It was found that
    the Appellant had not been arrested and was not at risk of persecution.

 6. In respect of  the  nationality  issue,  Judge  Bart-Stewart  found  at
    paragraph 33 that it was implausible that that Appellant  had  attended
    school unless he was registered with  the  Ethiopian  authorities.  She
    does not accept that he was born in Eritrea. In paragraph  34  evidence
    from the Appellant about photographs and information provided to him by
    an elderly woman is rejected. An attempt by the Appellant  to  approach
    the Ethiopian authorities in  the  United  Kingdom  is  dealt  with  in
    paragraph 35. It is said  that  this  evidence  added  nothing  to  the
    overall claim. Paragraph 36 takes into account the Appellant's  failure
    to claim asylum on route to the United Kingdom. In paragraph 37,  Judge
    Bart-Stewart concludes that the Appellant had failed to  show  that  he
    was Eritrean, and that is was more likely that he  was  Ethiopian.  She
    further states that in any event the Appellant could acquire  Ethiopian
    nationality through the provisions of the 2003 Proclamation.

 7. Paragraphs 38-39 relate to Article 8 but have no relevance here, as the
    conclusions are not challenged by the Appellant.

The grounds of appeal

 8.  The  grounds  take  issue  with  Judge  Bart-Stewart's  findings   and
    conclusions on the OLF issue and that  of  nationality.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on all grounds.

The hearing before me

 9. Ms Smeaton relied on her grounds and skeleton argument. The Appellant's
    challenges should be viewed cumulatively. On the OLF issue, two of  the
    three reasons provided for rejecting the account are unsustainable.  In
    respect of the detention and escape, there is no finding on the act  of
    escaping, as opposed to what the Appellant did thereafter. There are no
    reasons for why the  Appellant's  subsequently  movements  were  deemed
    implausible. On nationality, there were inadequate reasons for why  the
    claimed Eritrean nationality was rejected, given that registering  with
    the  Ethiopian  authorities  was  not  the  same  as  having  Ethiopian
    citizenship. The country information cited in  respect  of  the  school
    issue did not support the finding made.  The  Judge  appeared  to  have
    conflated the possibility of being  an  Eritrean  registered  with  the
    Ethiopian authorities with that of actual Ethiopian citizenship.  There
    was inadequate consideration of the 2003 Proclamation. It was confirmed
    that the conclusions at paragraphs 34-36 were not challenged.

10. Mr Melvin relied on his expanded rule 24 notice and the case of  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC). The second
    sentence of paragraph 33 made it clear  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    registered and he then attended school. Judge Bart-Stewart  found  that
    the Appellant was not Eritrean. The Appellant had failed to obtain real
    evidence  about  his  true  nationality.  In  respect   of   the   2003
    Proclamation, the Appellant had had a bank account and an  income.  The
    findings should be seen in the round.  The  Appellant  was  in  reality
    seeking to re-argue matters that had been determined by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

11. I reserved my decision in this case. Having given careful consideration
    to Judge Bart-Stewart's decision as a whole, the grounds,  submissions,
    and the case of Shizad, I conclude that there are  material  errors  of
    law such as to render the decision unsustainable.

12. I have of course borne in mind that extensive and detailed reasons  are
    not required in most, if any, cases. However, there  must  be  adequate
    reasons, and any reasons which are  provided  must  be  sustainable  by
    reference to the evidence and applicable standard of proof.

The OLF and detention issues

13. The finding that the Appellant's account of assistance for the OLF  was
    incredible is based upon three reasons set out in paragraphs 30 and 31.
    The first of these is fully sustainable, namely that the Appellant  had
    sought  to  embellish  his  account  in  paragraph  7  of  his  witness
    statement. That part of the statement is inconsistent with the  answers
    given in the asylum interview.

14. The second reason provided is that paragraph 18 of the  same  statement
    showed that the Appellant had an "intimate" knowledge of the Oromo  and
    OLF, and any suggestion to the contrary was inconsistent. With  respect
    to Judge Bart-Stewart, it is very difficult to see how the contents  of
    paragraph 18 of the statement can properly lead to the conclusion  that
    the Appellant in fact had an  intimate  knowledge  of  a  cultural  and
    political movement. The link between the evidence and the reason is not
    sustainable.

15. The third reason is, on my reading of paragraph 31,  that  the  country
    information adduced by the Appellant showed that he ought to have known
    more about the Oromo and OLF. The problem with this reasoning  is  that
    it assumes that information obtained by relevant  NGOs  (in  this  case
    Human Rights Watch)  would  be  available  to  ordinary  people  within
    Ethiopia. It assumes a level of engagement with  the  media,  and  also
    that the media was willing or indeed able  to  report  on  the  arrests
    cited in the report. No reasons are given to  support  the  assumptions
    which have been made. The third reason is therefore unsustainable.

16. Therefore, two of the three reasons are flawed. When combined  with  my
    conclusion on the other challenges, the single  sustainable  reason  is
    insufficient to support the overall findings of Judge Bart-Stewart.

17. Turning to the detention  and  escape,  Mr  Melvin  suggested  that  by
    setting out a brief summary of the  Appellant's  account,  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart was in effect saying why she rejected it. This is  because  the
    first sentence of paragraph 32 states that she found the account of the
    escape to be unlikely. This argument overlooks the fact that  the  only
    reason provided in the paragraph relates to the  Appellant's  movements
    after the escape, not the account of that event itself. To this  extent
    I agree with Ms Smeaton's challenge.  As  I  read  the  paragraph,  the
    finding is that the account of the escape is rejected. The sole  reason
    for this is that the Appellant went back to his local area. There is no
    reason as to why the act of escape itself  is  being  rejected.  In  my
    view, clear reasons (albeit briefly expressed) on the core issue of the
    act of escape itself were required.

18. There have been material errors of  law  on  the  core  issues  of  OLF
    assistance and the escape from detention.

The nationality issue

19. The primary finding in paragraph 33 is in  effect  that  the  Appellant
    must have been registered with the Ethiopian authorities  in  order  to
    have attended school. If Judge Bart-Stewart  was  basing  this  finding
    upon pure speculation or an assumption that the  Ethiopian  educational
    system operated in a similar way to that  in  the  United  Kingdom  she
    would have erred. However, country information is cited in  support  of
    her finding, that being paragraph 3.17.4 of the Respondent's OGN, and I
    assume that she was relying  on  this.  The  passage  cited  speaks  of
    "citizenship"  being  the  key  to  the  absence  of  restrictions   on
    education, amongst other things.  The  difficulty  with  the  reasoning
    employed is as follows. The  attendance  at  school  is  premised  upon
    country information indicating that citizenship is necessary.  However,
    Judge Bart-Stewart is finding in  this  core  paragraph  not  that  the
    Appellant was an Ethiopian citizen, but only  that  he  was  registered
    with  the  authorities.  Yet  being  registered  with   the   Ethiopian
    authorities is not the same thing  as  being  a  citizen:  an  Eritrean
    national could be registered but not have  citizenship.  Therefore,  it
    appears to me as though the country  information  relied  on  does  not
    actually support the finding made. In addition, or alternatively, there
    has been  an  erroneous  conflation  of  registration  as  an  Eritrean
    national with Ethiopian nationality.

20. In turn, this leads to the undermining of the findings at paragraph  37
    that the Appellant was not an Eritrean national. This is because  there
    has been no adequate reasoning as to why the Appellant was not in  fact
    Eritrean at all. I note too that whilst not  expressly  raised  in  the
    grounds, the Judge's finding that the Appellant was not born in Eritrea
    is not supported by any reasons.

21. The further consequence of the above is that the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant is more likely to be Ethiopian is materially  undermined.  As
    registration is not the same as citizenship, there  is  no  independent
    reasoning as to why/how the Appellant obtained Ethiopian nationality in
    the past.

22. In respect of the 2003 Proclamation, this is only dealt with briefly as
    an alternative at the  end  of  paragraph  37.  It  is  said  that  the
    Appellant "appears" to meet the requirements. However, nothing is  said
    about the need to show current lawful income (as opposed  to  any  past
    savings), or the need to show domicile in Ethiopia for the  four  years
    preceding any application  to  the  authorities.  In  short,  there  is
    insufficiently detailed consideration of this issue.

23. As mentioned previously, I have viewed  the  Judge's  decision  in  the
    round. I have borne in mind that paragraphs 34-36 are  unchallenged  by
    the Appellant. They clearly do not assist his  cause.  However,  it  is
    right to note that Judge Bart-Stewart herself stated that the issues of
    the elderly woman and the embassy visit did not add to  the  claim,  as
    opposed to materially undermining it. The failure to claim on route  to
    the United Kingdom is relevant, but it does not  affect  my  conclusion
    that that errors of law identified already are material to the  outcome
    of the Judge's decision.

24. I set aside the decision of Judge Bart-Stewart.

Disposal

25. At the hearing I asked the representatives about the appropriate course
    to follow if I found there to be material  errors  of  law.  Mr  Melvin
    submitted that the matter should be kept  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Ms
    Smeaton sought a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

26. I conclude that a remittal is the right course of action in this  case.
    I have found that important aspects of  the  credibility  findings  are
    flawed, and that the important issue of nationality has  not  thus  far
    been adequately dealt with. The second issue is bound up in the overall
    assessment of credibility. Given this, the whole case should be  looked
    at afresh, with none of Judge Bart-Stewart's findings  preserved,  save
    for those relating exclusively to the Article 8 claim.



Anonymity

27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a  direction  and  none  has  been
    sought from me. I make no direction.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

      1. The appeal shall be reheard afresh, with no findings of Judge Bart-
         Stewart preserved, except for those  relating  exclusively  to  the
         Article 8 claim;

      2. Judge Bart-Stewart shall have no further involvement in the hearing
         of this appeal;

      3. The appeal shall be re-heard on the first available  date  after  6
         weeks of the promulgation of my decision;

      4. Any further evidence to be relied on by either party shall be filed
         and served with the First-tier Tribunal and other  party  no  later
         than 14 days prior to the next hearing;

      5. An Amharic interpreter is required for the next hearing.


Signed      Date: 1 September 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

