
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01646/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 9 March 2015               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                     Y S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born in 1979.  He appealed against
    a decision of the Secretary of State made on  11  March  2014  to  make
    removal directions.  The Appellant was refused asylum.

 2. The immigration history, which is not in dispute, is as follows:

    He arrived in the UK on 23 October  2010  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor (sportsman) valid until 13 April 2011.  He did not  compete  in
    the competition that his visa was issued for.  On 30  October  2012  he
    claimed asylum which was refused on 27 November 2012.

 3. On 10 January 2013 his appeal against this  refusal  was  dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-Tier Alakija.  Appeal rights  were  exhausted  on  6
    February 2013.

 4. On 18 November 2013 he made further submissions which were  refused  on
    21 January 2014.  On 11 March 2014 the Secretary of State  reconsidered
    the further submissions.  The renewed claim was  refused  on  11  March
    2014.

 5. He appealed again.  Following a hearing at Birmingham on 14 April  2014
    Judge of the First-tier Graham allowed the appeal on asylum  and  human
    rights grounds (Article 3).

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which  was  granted.
    Following an error of law hearing at Field House on 23 July 2014 before
    The Honourable Mr Justice Lewis and Upper Tribunal Judge Allen remitted
    the case for rehearing.

 7. It is relevant to set out at this stage the basis of the claim.  It  is
    contained in the refusal letter dated 27 November 2012:

         "8.  You had a Screening Interview on 30  October  2012  (hereafter
             referred to as SCR).  You submitted a witness statement  on  7
             November 2012 (hereafter  referred  to  as  WS).   You  had  a
             Substantive Asylum Interview on  9  November  2012  (hereafter
             referred to as AIR).  You claim that:

         9.   You were born on 15  April  1979  in  Kampala,  Uganda.   Your
             father was an employee of the Ugandan Muslim Supreme  Council.
             From 1988 - 1994 you attended Kasubi Islamic  Primary  School.
             From 1995 - 2000 you attended  Kawempe  Secondary  School  (WS
             para 2 - 5 & SCR 1.5 & AIR q4, q15 - q17).

         10.  You first realised you were gay when you were young.  In  1995
             you started a relationship with N S, a boy from school,  after
             you admitted to him that you loved him.  That same  night  you
             were  sexually  intimate  in  the  school  bathrooms  and  you
             continued to meet there whenever possible.   You  relationship
             did not cause any problems until  2000  because  you  kept  it
             secret (WS para 6 & AIR q60 - q70).

         11.  On Friday 1 December 2000 you were caught  by  other  students
             having sex in the school washrooms.  They beat  you  and  took
             you to the Headmaster, who hit you over the head with a bit of
             wood.  You sustained an injury and you head was bleeding.   He
             took you to Kawempe Police  Station.   The  police  rang  your
             parents but you were not released that day as the police  said
             they don't grant bail at night.  You were released on Monday 4
             December 2000.  There were  no  conditions  attached  to  your
             release and you were not charged with anything.   Your  mother
             treated your head wound upon your release (WS para 6 - 7 & AIR
             q18, q40, q79 - q88).

         12.  Rumours spread around the village, your  father  disowned  you
             and made you sleep in the servants' quarters.   You  were  fed
             once a day and called names like "demon"  and  "curse".   Your
             uncle H banned you from his mosque and local traders  wouldn't
             sell you goods.  Your father told  your  mother  to  take  you
             away.  In  February  2001  she  took  you  to  Buwekula,  your
             father's birth place.  Your uncles threatened to kill  you  so
             your mother stayed there with you for two weeks to ensure your
             safety.  In March 2001 she took you to Mabindi, her birthplace
             and your uncles there made similar threats.   You  stayed  for
             two days.  Alternatively,  you  stayed  for  one  week.   Your
             mother then took you to your grandfather's house  in  Bukeeka.
             He told you he would find you a wife but you said that you did
             not wish to marry.  Alternatively, you lied and told him  that
             you would marry.  Your mother went home and  you  stayed  with
             your grandfather.  You did not experience any problems  whilst
             living with him (WS para 8 - 10 & AIR q18, q23 - q47).

         13.  In April 2003 your mother came and took you to Bombo to  learn
             mechanics at a garage.  She also insisted that you marry.  The
             employer of the garage knew you were gay as your uncle  H  had
             told him.  You were offered the job on the condition that  you
             marry.  You were employed there until December 2004  (WS  para
             10 & AIR q18 - q19, q48 - q52).

         14.  You joined a Kick Boxing club in Bomba.  On 22nd November 2004
             you were promoted to General  Secretary  of  the  Uganda  Kick
             Boxing  Association.   This  job  was  also  offered  on   the
             condition that you marry (WS para 10 - 11 & AIR q18- q19,  q56
             - q57).

         15.  On 1 February 2005 you were offered a position in  'Action  to
             Positive Change' as a coach for people with disabilities.  You
             were doing this job until you came to the  UK.   The  director
             insisted that you marry or you would lose your position.  They
             bought you a woman, A N from Kikoni, whom you wed  on  11  May
             2005.  She never knew that you were gay although she had heard
             rumours (WS para 11 & AIR q19, q53 - q55).

         16.  On 14 March 2006  you  began  working  for  Lieutenant  K,  an
             officer in  charge  of  security  at  the  Presidential  Guard
             Brigade (PGB). You worked for him until you came  to  the  UK.
             Your duty was to train officers  on  kick  boxing  techniques.
             You were good at tackling people  so  Lieutenant  K  gave  you
             authorisation  to  make  arrests.    You   arrested   robbers,
             murderers and homosexuals.  If you  knew  you  were  going  to
             arrest a homosexual you would ring and give  them  a  warning.
             You helped  about  eight  people  to  escape.   You  took  the
             arrested people to a safe house where they would be  tortured.
             You were not allowed in the torture chamber (WS para 12 -  13,
             para 15 & SCR 5.7 & AIR q19 - q22, q89 - q102).

         17.  In 2007 you had a relationship  with  a  man  called  M  K  K.
             Alternatively, Mr M K K was just your friend. You met  at  the
             TeaCosy in Kampala Road, a place for  gay  people.   You  were
             only together for a short time as he had another partner.  You
             visited the TeaCosy about  four  times  during  2007,  on  one
             occasion for Mr M K K's birthday (WS para 17 & AIR p71 - q79).

         18.  You were arrested at your home on 10 September 2007, about one
             month after the birthday party.  You were  taken  to  Wandagea
             Police Station and put in a cell with M K K and three gay  men
             who had been here.  Later that night you were taken to another
             location where you were  tortured  and  questioned  about  the
             recruitment of gay people.  You were also given food that  had
             been poisoned.  You were kept  there  for  ten  days.   On  17
             September 2007 you were blindfolded and taken somewhere  in  a
             van.  You were then put  in  a  car  where  Lieutenant  K  was
             waiting.  You think he may have assisted in your release.   He
             took you to Mbuya hospital where your  injuries  were  treated
             and you were told you had been  poisoned.   Your  toe  is  now
             permanently dislocated and you still sometimes  feel  pain  in
             your private parts and stomach.  You left the hospital  on  27
             September 2007 and went home.  One month later you  went  back
             to your job working  for  the  PGB  and  continued  to  arrest
             people.  Lieutenant K told you to join the army  but  you  did
             not (WS para 17 - 25 & SCR 4.2 & AIR q103 -  q106,  q131  -  q
             136, q138).

         19.  On 26 September 2008, on your way to Busan  for  a  kickboxing
             competition, you met S N when you  boarded  the  same  flight.
             You exchanged telephone numbers and agreed to keep  in  touch.
             Upon your return to Uganda on 3 October  2008  you  discovered
             that the community knew you were gay.  Your landlord asked you
             to leave as people were threatening to burn  down  the  house.
             You moved to Makerere in  January  2009  with  your  wife  and
             children.  You started up a relationship with S  N  again  and
             would stay with him at his house in Jinja (WS para 26 -  31  &
             AIR q145, q149).

         20.  In 2010 you  were  invited  to  a  kickboxing  competition  in
             Edinburgh.  You went home one  day  and  found  your  passport
             burnt on the ground.  You went to the counsel who wrote you  a
             letter which you took to Wandegeya Police Station.  The police
             then  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Ministry  of  Affairs  for  a
             replacement  passport.   Alternatively,  you   obtained   your
             replacement passport through Lieutenant M K.  S N drove you to
             the airport and you travelled to Edinburgh, via Amsterdam,  on
             23 October 2010.  You did not participate in  the  competition
             that you had come here for.  Upon your arrival you called S  N
             and everything was fine.  You called again on 24 October  2010
             but his phone was off.  You called his shop and  his  employee
             told that he had been arrested for being  a  homosexual.   You
             called your wife and she said that security agents had been to
             your home and shown her pictures of you and S N.  They  kicked
             her in the stomach and her caesarean  scar  burst  open.   She
             died of her injuries in January 2011.   Before  she  died  she
             sent you two arrest warrants  that  the  security  agents  had
             accidently dropped in your house and  also  your  staff  pass,
             which you thought would help you get into the army in  the  UK
             (WS para 32 - 39 & SCR 2.1, 2.10, 4.1 & AIR q108 - q130,  q140
             - q149, q151 - q154).

         21.  You fear that if returned to Uganda you would be  at  risk  of
             being killed by the government and its security  organisation,
             religious people, the media, the community or your family (AIR
             q169 - q172)."

 8. The case was remitted by The Honourable  Mr  Justice  Lewis  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen as follows:

         "2.  Essentially this claim came down to the question of whether or
             not the appellant is homosexual, and there had been an earlier
             appeal before Judge Alakija in January 2013 and Judge  Alakija
             like Judge Graham accepted that if the appellant was found  to
             be a gay man then  his  appeal  must  be  allowed,  given  the
             voluminous background evidence on ill-treatment of gay  people
             in Uganda.  So there were no issues as to background evidence,
             the simple matter was a lack of credibility.


         3.   I think it is necessary to look first of all, not in  a  great
             detail  but  in  a   little   detail,   at   Judge   Alakija's
             determination since  it  was  very  close  in  time  to  Judge
             Graham's.  There were various matters that led  Judge  Alakija
             to doubt Mr S's credibility.  First, there was  the  delay  of
             two years between his entry into the United  Kingdom  and  the
             asylum claim, the second, not accepting his  account  that  in
             the year 2000 when he was aged 21 and at school he was  caught
             having sex with his partner in the school  bathroom.   He  was
             beaten at school and taken to the police station.   The  judge
             did not accept that he would still be at school at 21 nor that
             he had been indulging in gay sex in a  school  bathroom  where
             there were shower cubicles with no more than curtains to  hide
             the occupants.


         4.   He also found it lacking in credibility that,  having  married
             in May 2005 (he had been told he must get married or he  would
             lose his position  in  the  APCPD)  all  the  people  who  had
             insisted that he should marry in order to  become  respectable
             would have allowed him to continue  to  ignore  the  condition
             imposed on him (of getting married) and  did  not  accept  the
             explanation he had given for this.


         5.   He also did not accept that his landlord had told him to leave
             because the local community were threatening to burn his house
             down because the judge did not think he would have  been  able
             to stay in the house for two months if  the  problems  in  the
             school were true.


         6.   Then  there  was  reference  to  an  incident  in  2007.   The
             appellant had taken up work in  the  security  office  of  the
             President of Uganda in 2006  and  in  September  2007  he  was
             arrested and taken to the police station, he said, and  placed
             in a cell full of people some of whom he said he had met at  a
             gay club with a friend.  He said he was  beaten  and  tortured
             and asked where he recruited the gays from and held for a week
             and further ill-treated, then released into the custody of his
             boss.  Following a period in hospital he said that he returned
             to work in the security office of the President.


         7.   The judge said with reference to this:

                  'I find it so improbable as  to  beggar  belief  that  the
                  appellant having allegedly been arrested and tortured as a
                  homosexual then released into  the  custody  of  his  boss
                  would be allowed back to work at the  security  office  of
                  the President of Uganda.'


         8.   He also did not find it credible that  the  authorities  would
             have provided the appellant with a new  passport  and  allowed
             him to obtain a visa and allowed him to leave the  country  if
             it was the case that, as he maintained, he was as a matter  of
             fact under investigation  because  arrest  warrants  had  been
             issued as he left and served at his home in October 2010.


         9.   The judge was also concerned about a medical report  that  had
             been provided.  This was a report from Dr Roberts.  The  judge
             noted that the report did not mention the  Istanbul  Protocol,
             which was a weakness, but he said that he  had  been  able  to
             obtain a general idea from it and said it was regrettable that
             although the report suggested that many of the scars  reported
             were consistent with the appellant's claimed injuries  it  did
             not make any mention of  the  possible  causes,  and  in  this
             regard it was relevant to bear in mind that the appellant  had
             for a number of years been involved  in  kickboxing,  and  the
             judge thought that the very physical and rough nature  of  the
             combination of sports in which  he  had  taken  part  made  it
             particularly relevant to identify other possible causes of his
             injuries, and the judge said that some  of  the  injuries  may
             well have been caused in a similar way to that alleged by  the
             appellant for completely different reasons.  So the conclusion
             was that the report did not assist his claim.


         10.  Subsequently he made a fresh claim and the matter  came  again
             before Judge Graham in April 2014, and the judge set  out  the
             appellant's history and  the  relevant  legal  principles,  in
             particular concentrating on the determination of  the  IAT  in
             Devaseelan, which is first referred to in paragraph  23  where
             the effect of a first appeal determination on  any  subsequent
             appeal was  considered  and  it  was  stated  that  the  first
             Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the  starting
             point for and  should  be  taken  into  consideration  in  any
             further appeal.  The judge was clearly aware of the Devaseelan
             guidelines and came back to refer to  those  in  a  number  of
             different places.


         11.  There was further medical evidence  in  relation  to  specific
             health  problems  referred  to  in   paragraph   30   of   the
             determination.  There  was  a  supplementary  report  from  Dr
             Roberts and there was a report and oral evidence from Mr W and
             a report, and it will be necessary to return to those shortly.


         12.  The judge set out what had been decided by Judge  Alakija  and
             noted what was said in the Devaseelan guidance about the  need
             to refer to the determination being  the  starting  point  and
             went on to say at paragraph 38:

                  'In this case Immigration Judge Alakija dealt  fully  with
                  the issue of  the  appellant's  credibility  and  for  the
                  reasons set out in her determination she  found  that  the
                  appellant's account that he was a practising homosexual in
                  Uganda and in the UK was not credible.  Given  this  I  am
                  unable to  go  behind  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
                  without good reason to displace them.'

             That represents an accurate summary of the law.


         13.  The judge then noted the supplementary report of  Dr  Roberts,
             who did not accept that the  scars  on  the  appellant's  body
             could have been inflicted by his participation in sports  such
             as kickboxing and  gave  reasons  as  to  why  each  scar  was
             unlikely to have been caused accidentally and  splitting  that
             report between the injuries from the alleged assault in  2000,
             in particular the long scar on the vortex of  his  scalp,  and
             then in relation to a number  of  injuries  and  scars,  about
             eighteen scars, and other deformities and the loss of  a  nail
             of a toe and reduced movement of the  thumb  coming  from  the
             2007 incident and stating that the injury to the toe was fully
             consistent or highly consistent with the account he gave of an
             assault using pliers causing wrenching or crushing of the  toe
             and less consistent, it might be fair to summarise,  with  the
             kind of injury you might get from a blow where the skin is not
             broken and, as I say,  considered  the  possibility  that  the
             injuries could have been caused by kickboxing  but  considered
             that those kind of injuries would cause different  scars  from
             the type that he had sustained.


         14.  The judge was satisfied that this report was supportive of the
             appellant's account and also noted a letter referring  to  the
             practice of "bye-bye" which is claimed to take  place  at  the
             end of the  school  term  in  senior  schools  in  Uganda  and
             confirmed that that tradition occurred,  and  that  was  taken
             into account as being relevant to  credibility  and  confirmed
             the tradition of sexual freedom between students at the end of
             term in secondary schools in Uganda.


         15.  But there were particular matters in  relation  to  which  the
             judge felt unable to depart from  the  earlier  findings.   He
             noted what was said about  the  lack  of  credibility  of  the
             claimed incident at school aged 21 and also the claim that  he
             resumed his employment with the intelligence forces  following
             his arrest for homosexuality.  There was also  the  matter  of
             two arrest warrants dated 2010 which  he  said  were  left  by
             officials with his wife and sent on, and the first  judge  had
             not considered the account of how he came by  those  documents
             to be credible.


         16.  The judge adopted the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  the
             first judge in relation to the appellant remaining  in  school
             when 21 years old,  his  continued  employment  following  his
             arrest and the arrest warrants but,  he  said,  that  even  so
             there was medical evidence  which  supported  the  appellant's
             account that he was tortured following arrest  for  homosexual
             activities,  so  he  was  able  to  accept  the  core  of  the
             appellant's account, and in relation  to  this  he  took  into
             account evidence from Mr W, who had, as I say, given  oral  as
             well as written evidence.  The  appellant  had  joined  Oxford
             Friend, which provides  a  telephone  helpline  for  the  LGBT
             community in the Oxford area.   He  had  been  interviewed  by
             them, he had said what had happened to him in Uganda, and  had
             extensive training, which continues.


         17.  The witness said that whilst he had no positive proof that the
             appellant was a gay man he had no doubt that he was.  He  said
             he often sat in when he was manning the telephone lines,  that
             he also attended monthly debrief meetings and  throughout  his
             dealings  with  the  appellant  he  had  never  said  anything
             inappropriate to his claim to be a gay man.  He found Mr W  to
             be a most  impressive  witness  and  was  satisfied  that  the
             appellant would be unable to undertake the  work  with  Oxford
             Friend working closely with LGBT people if he was  not  a  gay
             man, and taking all this fresh evidence into account, he  said
             that he found on the lower burden of proof that the  appellant
             was a gay man.

         18.  So that was the decision  of  the  judge  with  which  we  are
             concerned today, and the Secretary of  State  sought  and  was
             granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis   largely   of
             inconsistencies as they were said to be between  the  adoption
             of the finding in respect of the rejection that he had been at
             school at the age of  21  and  the  rejection  of  the  arrest
             warrants and the continued employment  following  arrest,  and
             the earlier findings, and we have had helpful oral submissions
             today from both representatives, Mr  Jack  on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State and Mr Sills on behalf  of  the  appellant.
             We also have had  provided  to  us  by  Mr  Sills  a  Rule  24
             response.


         19.  The question then is whether there is any error of law in  the
             judge's  determination  or  whether   it   remains   a   sound
             determination, and we concentrate on two particular matters in
             addressing this point.  The first is the  issue  of  the  non-
             acceptance by the first judge, Judge Alakija, of  the  claimed
             age of the appellant being at school at  the  age  of  21  and
             indulging in gay sex in the school bathroom.  As I  say,  this
             adverse finding was adopted by Judge  Graham.   She  said  she
             adopted the adverse credibility findings of Judge  Alakija  in
             relation to the appellant remaining at school at 21 years old,
             and the difficulty, as we  see  it,  with  this  is  that  the
             medical evidence of Dr Roberts in relation to the scar on  the
             head was that this was a scar that had been  inflicted  as  it
             was claimed to be by the appellant at the  time  when  he  was
             held and beaten when he was at school in 2000 at  the  age  of
             21.  We do not consider that Judge Graham has  made  it  clear
             how it is that on the one hand she could endorse  the  earlier
             finding of the judge of not finding this claim to be  credible
             and yet  accept  in  effect  that  the  incident  nevertheless
             occurred.


         20.  We take of course Mr Sills' point  about  the  fact  that  not
             everything that the appellant says has to be believed for  him
             to be found to be at risk.  Some aspects of the claim  can  be
             believed and other aspects of the claim can be disbelieved but
             it seems to us  that  there  is  a  fundamental  inconsistency
             between the adoption of the earlier finding  and  nevertheless
             an acceptance of an account of having  suffered  the  injuries
             that he said he suffered on that occasion.


         21.  The second matter that we find of particular  concern  relates
             back to paragraph 37 of Judge Alakija's judgment which we  set
             out earlier,

                  'I find it so improbable as  to  beggar  belief  that  the
                  appellant having allegedly been arrested and tortured as a
                  homosexual then released into  the  custody  of  his  boss
                  would be allowed back to work at the  security  office  of
                  the President of Uganda',

             and it seems to us  that  this  is  a  wholesale  finding  not
             accepting any of these matters:  he  did  not  accept  he  was
             arrested, did not accept he was tortured and did not accept he
             was released into the custody of his boss.


         22.  Given the adoption by Judge Graham of the adverse  credibility
             findings in respect  of  the  appellant's  claimed  employment
             subsequent to the arrest, to reconcile  that  conclusion  with
             her acceptance of his claim to have been ill-treated following
             arrest required a clear analysis which we find to  be  lacking
             in the determination.


         23.  We do not think it can simply be said that  Judge  Graham  had
             made findings  that  the  appellant  is  gay  and  that  is  a
             sufficient finding.  It has to be  properly  reasoned  and  if
             there are matters that are accepted and  those  that  are  not
             accepted then there has to be a rational explanation given  as
             to  why  particular  matters  are  accepted  and  others   not
             accepted.  There is an issue here as to  the  quality  of  the
             reasoning of the judge in this regard which, in our view, goes
             beyond simple disagreement  but  shows  irrationality  in  the
             assessment of the evidence in  the  light  of  the  Devaseelan
             guidance and the earlier determination.


         24.  Those are the essential matters then that we see of  being  of
             particular concern in this case, and as a consequence we  find
             that there are material errors of law in the judge's  decision
             such that it falls to be set aside.   From  that  we  have  to
             decide whether we remake the decision in this  case  ourselves
             or whether it has to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
             Having heard submissions,  we  accept  that  it  will  not  be
             possible to  conclude  matters  today.   The  appeal  will  be
             reheard in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  if  possible  before  Judge
             Allen."

 9. For the rehearing before me I noted three statements by  the  Appellant
    (12 November  2013)  at  E12  Respondent's  bundle;  3  April  2014  in
    Appellant's bundle  (which  also  contained  a  medical  report  and  a
    supplementary medical report by Dr Roberts), also 22 October 2014 in  a
    supplementary bundle lodged for the hearing which included inter alia a
    statement of Oxford Friend (23 October 2014).  A skeleton argument  was
    also lodged for the hearing.

10. The Appellant gave oral evidence.  In examination-in-chief  he  adopted
    his  witness  statements  (12/11/13),  a  witness  statement   in   the
    Appellant's bundle (3/4/14), and his supplementary bundle (22/10/14).

11. He also made reference to a letter (undated, lodged for  this  hearing)
    purporting to be  from  his  school  in  Uganda  giving  his  dates  of
    attendance.  He had called his mother and asked her to go to the school
    and ask for it.

12. He said that after December 2007  he  went  back  to  the  Presidential
    Brigade (PGB).  Asked if on return  he  faced  any  issues  as  he  had
    previously been arrested, he said one group within the PGB said he  was
    gay, another group said he was fine  as  he  was  married.   His  boss,
    Lieutenant K, was with the latter group.

13. After his detention his landlord told  him  to  leave  giving  him  two
    months to do so.  He sent his wife away and went himself to  Jinja  and
    Makerere.

14. In cross-examination he agreed that he has been in the UK  since  2010.
    He said he had had four sexual relationships since then.  None of these
    former partners had come to give evidence.  He had asked one  of  them,
    P, with whom he still has contact to attend but he had declined because
    he is bisexual with a wife who does not know he is gay.  They also have
    a child.  He has no contact with the other three.  He had made  efforts
    to find them but with no success.

15. He said that a witness Mr W had come to give evidence  on  his  behalf.
    The Appellant said  that  from  about  April  2013  he  has  done  some
    volunteering for a counselling group in Oxford for which Mr  W  is  the
    coordinator.  He has discussed his problems with Mr W.  His involvement
    with Oxford Friend was his first involvement with an LGBT group.

16. He was asked about his role in the PGB.  He said he trained  colleagues
    in kickboxing and also took part in raids to arrest criminals.

17. I also heard oral evidence from Mr W.  He  adopted  his  statement  (23
    October 2014).  He was asked about his contact with the Appellant.   He
    said it is about two or three times a month.  Asked  if  he  had  given
    evidence on behalf of other asylum seekers he said he had not.

18. In cross-examination it was put to the witness that it was because  the
    Appellant had presented himself as gay and because he does some work at
    Oxford Friend, he accepted that the Appellant  was  gay.   The  witness
    said that eight or nine months before, he would have agreed.   However,
    the Appellant had now  been  with  Oxford  Friend  for  about  eighteen
    months.  He had been assiduous in his  training  and  his  duties.   It
    would be very difficult for  someone  showing  such  commitment  to  be
    pretending about his sexuality.

19. The witness could not say why the Appellant had  only  gone  to  Oxford
    Friend after losing his first appeal.  However, if he was lying he  had
    been an extremely good actor since 2013.  The witness said that he  and
    other members of the group did not doubt the Appellant's sexuality.

20. The witness was asked if he had ever seen the  Appellant  with  another
    man.  He said he had not.  The Appellant  had  said  he  had  had  such
    relations but such matters were not  discussed.   Indeed,  the  witness
    said, he would not talk about his own intimate experiences to others.

21. The witness thought that the Appellant had said that he  had  contacted
    someone in the hope of getting him to come to court to corroborate  his
    sexuality but that the person refused.

22.  In  re-examination  asked  again  how  he  could  be  sure  about  the
    Appellant's sexuality the witness again noted his commitment to  Oxford
    Friend.  That apart he said it was a difficult question to answer.   He
    nonetheless accepted that he was gay.

23. Asked further about the Appellant's  commitment  he  said  it  involved
    taking phone calls.  Such often come from people wishing  to  come  out
    but worried about family reaction.  Also from parents of  young  people
    who had come out and who wanted to know how they could support them.

24. The witness said he had sat in with the  Appellant  while  he  answered
    such calls.  He said the Appellant had also had involvement with emails
    drafting responses which would be checked by colleagues.  The witness's
    conclusion was that the Appellant's commitment speaks for  itself.   He
    could not have done what he had if he had not been gay.

25. In submissions Mr Duffy noted  that  in  the  first  determination  the
    Appellant's account had been disbelieved.  As such it was the  starting
    point.  The question was whether the new evidence shows good reason  to
    go behind the findings of the first judge.

26. Mr Duffy sought to rely on the findings of the first judge and  on  the
    refusal letter.  He submitted that the subsequent evidence had not been
    sufficient to displace the negative findings of the  first  judge.   In
    that regard he submitted that the supplementary report  by  Dr  Roberts
    did not greatly assist the Appellant's case.   It  indicated  that  the
    Appellant has various scars and that they were not likely to have  been
    the result of his kickboxing activities.  However,  Mr  Duffy,  queried
    whether the doctor was aware that as part  of  his  job  the  Appellant
    arrested people who might be violent.  Such a possible cause of  injury
    and scarring had not been considered.  Dr Roberts should have looked at
    other ways in which the scarring could have been  got  and  ruled  them
    out.

27. As for the arrest warrants and school letter the first judge had  noted
    the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 and found  that  he  could
    not rely on them.  Mr Duffy submitted that the new documentary material
    was of uncertain provenance and was not strong enough to  displace  the
    previous adverse finding.

28. Mr Duffy noted the support of  Oxford  Friend.   He  did  not  seek  to
    undermine Mr W who it was clear had given an honest view  but  who  had
    accepted that it was not for him to question someone who claimed to  be
    gay.  Indeed, why should he as most will be genuine.  However, here the
    Appellant had not become involved with the group until the  failure  of
    his first appeal.  Perhaps he was simply a good actor.

29. It was also significant that despite claiming  to  have  had  relations
    with several men none had attended.  He  would  surely  have  done  his
    utmost to get such particularly in view of his immigration history  and
    the earlier adverse findings.

30. It was Mr Duffy's conclusion that the Appellant had not moved his  case
    on and it fell to be dismissed.

31. Mr Sills in reply sought firstly to rely on  his  written  submissions.
    The only issue is whether or not the Appellant is gay.  If so  he  must
    succeed in his asylum  application.   Such  was  not  disputed  by  the
    Respondent.

32. Mr Sills agreed that the determination  of  the  first  judge  was  the
    starting point.  However,  in  his  submission,  there  were  now  good
    reasons to revisit it.

33. First, the medical reports are  significant.   The  criticisms  in  the
    first determination had been addressed by Dr Roberts who  had  properly
    sought to apply the guidance in  the  Istanbul  Protocol  referring  to
    scarring as being 'consistent' or 'highly consistent' with the  claimed
    causes.  Dr Roberts had adequately addressed the issue of  whether  the
    injuries could have been got in the Appellant's line of duty.

34. As for the further school letter it  had  been  got  in  light  of  the
    criticism made previously.  Such was  understandable  and  proper.   It
    provided further support for his account.

35. On the issue of the Appellant being able  to  go  back  to  work  after
    having been arrested as  a  homosexual  Mr  Sills  submitted  that  the
    background material gave support for the claim that problems  for  LGBT
    persons came less from the authorities directly  and  more  from  wider
    society.  His claim to have been given the  benefit  of  the  doubt  by
    those in authority, albeit that he  received  some  bullying  from  his
    group was plausible.

36. As for his ability to get a new passport, again the background material
    was relevant. It  indicated  that  registration  of  LGBT  persons  was
    ineffectual.  Thus, the authorities might simply not have  known  about
    him.

37. Making a number of references  to  the  background  material  Mr  Sills
    submitted that such,  when  considered  with  the  new  evidence  dealt
    adequately with the implausibility issues found by the first judge.

38. Turning to the Appellant's life in the  UK.   Mr  Sills  accepted  that
    apart from the Appellant's own evidence about his sexuality  there  was
    only the evidence of Mr W.  The Appellant had given good reason why  he
    had no further witnesses on the matter.  It was clear that he  had  not
    had any significant relationships since arriving here.  Mr W had  given
    his honest belief about the Appellant and his reasons for that  belief.
    It was not a blind acceptance.  In the context of the case his evidence
    was important.

39. In considering this matter I look first  at  the  contemporary  general
    background material in respect of LGBT persons.

40. The Country of Origin Information document (6 February 2009) sums it up
    thus:

         "The  USSD  Report  2007  stated  'Homosexuals   faced   widespread
         discrimination  and  legal  restrictions.   It   is   illegal   for
         homosexuals to engage in sexual acts, based on  a  legal  provision
         that criminalizes 'carnal acts against the order of nature' with  a
         penalty of life imprisonment'.

         Human Rights Watch summarised the relevant law in a  press  release
         dated 7 September 2006 as:

         'Same-sex relations are criminalised in Uganda under a  sodomy  law
         inherited from British colonial rule.  Section  140  of  the  Penal
         Code criminalizes 'carnal knowledge against the  order  of  nature'
         with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.  Section 141  punishes
         'attempts' at carnal knowledge  with  a  maximum  of  seven  years'
         imprisonment.  Section 143 punishes acts of 'gross indecency'  with
         up to five years in prison.  In  both  Britain  and  Uganda,  these
         terms  were  long  understood  to  describe  consensual  homosexual
         conduct between men.'

         In addition, the Constitution  has  been  amended  to  ensure  that
         marriage is defined as heterosexual union,  with  the  Sodomy  Laws
         website running an article from 365Gay.com news site, dated 7  July
         2005, 'Uganda to jail same-sex couples who marry', which stated:

         'Parliament has adopted a proposal to amend the Constitution so  as
         to criminalize same-sex marriages,' Bernard Eceru,  a  spokesperson
         for the government told the Ugandan Newspaper.  Eceru said that 111
         MPs voted  in  favour  of  the  amendment,  17  against  and  three
         abstained. ... Specific jail terms for offenders were not  included
         in the legislation but are to be  laid  out  in  revisions  to  the
         Ugandan penal code at a later date, Eceru told the paper.'

         An article dated 7 October 2008 on the website of Behind  the  Mask
         reported 'The Ugandan government said Saturday it would  strengthen
         anti-gay laws and step up  police  operations  against  homosexuals
         amid concern over the 'mushrooming' number of gays and lesbians  in
         the East African nation.'

         Government/societal attitudes

         The  USSD  Report  2007  noted  that  'Public  resentment   against
         homosexuality sparked demonstrations and significant public  debate
         during the year.  The government took a strong position against the
         practice.  A local NGO,  Sexual  Minorities  in  Uganda,  protested
         several members' alleged harassment by police for their vocal stand
         against sexual discrimination'.

         Behind The Mask in an article dated 18 September 2008 reported:

         'Turmoil has erupted once again in Uganda as police clamp  down  on
         homosexuals in that country, which started this Monday 15 September
         [2008].  Two men  have  already  been  arrested  and  charged  with
         'recruitment of homosexuals', something which  according  to  Human
         Rights Watch, is not even a legislation  in  Uganda's  laws.   Many
         members of the LGBTI community are in hiding avoiding detention  as
         it is believed police are in possession of a list  of  a  about  40
         people said to be homosexuals in that country'."

41. The preliminary observation can be made that the  Appellant's  account,
    if he has been truthful about his sexuality is broadly consistent  with
    the contemporary background material about what could happen to  people
    in the LGBT community at the time he was there.

42. The sole issue in this case is the Appellant's credibility. His claimed
    sexuality is disputed. Various credibility issues with  his  historical
    account were raised by the Respondent. It is agreed that  the  starting
    point in assessing the claim is the determination of Judge Alakija  who
    heard the first appeal (per Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702).

43. I noted my findings on credibility contemporaneously.

44. The adverse credibility findings made by Judge Alakija can be summed up
    as follows: the Appellant delayed in claiming asylum;  the  account  of
    his education and relationship at school was improbable; his  delay  in
    marrying until May 2005 was implausible; he only had problems with  the
    authorities twice; that having been  told  by  his  landlord  to  leave
    because of threats by the local community to burn the house down he was
    able to stay there for two months without problems; he was permitted to
    return to work at the security office of  the  President;  it  was  not
    credible that the Appellant could have obtained  a  new  passport;  the
    medical report did not refer to  the  Istanbul  Protocol  and  did  not
    consider whether the injuries could have been inflicted in other ways.

45. In considering the credibility issues taken against the  Appellant,  in
    my judgement there are  good  reasons  to  revisit  the  findings  made
    against him.

46. In that regard I look first at the supplementary  report  by  Professor
    Roberts (3 April 2014).  His original  report  was  criticised  by  the
    (First-tier) Tribunal for failing  to  make  mention  of  the  Istanbul
    Protocol and whether the injuries noted could have been the  result  of
    causes other than assaults he claimed to have suffered at the hands  of
    the headmaster and students at his school in  2000  and  the  sustained
    serious of assaults he alleged he suffered after his arrest in 2007.

47. The Protocol at [186] states that:

          "... for each lesion and for the overall pattern  of  lesions  the
         physician should indicate the degree of consistency between it  and
         the attribution:

               a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been  caused  by
                  the trauma described.

               b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by  the
                  trauma described, but it is not  specific  and  there  are
                  many other possible causes.

               c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have  been  caused  by
                  the trauma described, and there  are  few  other  possible
                  causes ..."

        187. ... Ultimately it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and
             not the consistency of each lesion with a particular  form  of
             torture that is important in assessing the torture story."

48. It was submitted by Mr Duffy that the  injuries  could  have  been  the
    result of the Appellant's kickboxing activities.  I note several of  Dr
    Roberts' conclusions.  In respect of the deformity and missing nail  of
    a toe which the Appellant said happened in 2007, the doctor states that
    such are "highly consistent" with the account he  gave  of  an  assault
    using pliers causing wrenching and crushing of  the  toe.   The  "gross
    destruction of the joints of the  toe  would  be  fully  consistent  or
    highly consistent with wrenching and crushing of the toe by pliers  and
    very unlikely to be caused by trauma".   He  continues:  "I  considered
    that a facture may have been caused by kickboxing  but  the  degree  of
    deformity of the joints of the toe and the degree of deformity  to  the
    nail are highly consistent with a crushing injury as would be  expected
    to be caused by pliers and not a simple closed  fracture  caused  by  a
    blow where the skin is not broken ...".

49. A further example: "The position and number of the eighteen  wounds  on
    his right and left leg are highly consistent with the account he  gives
    of an assault comprising a series  of  stabs  and  cuts  with  a  broad
    bladed, sharp pointed bayonet.  The number of separate  scars  is  high
    and their number and position make accidental trauma and self-inflicted
    trauma very unlikely.  The position of the scars on the shins and outer
    surface of the arms would be typical of  cuts  produced  while  he  was
    protecting his head and neck and torso with his arms  and  legs."   The
    doctor considered the possibility that such injuries  could  have  been
    caused by kickboxing, however "kicks would  not  cause  linear  fibrous
    scars which indicate open wounds caused with a  sharp  instrument  were
    present ...  Moreover  the  location  of  scars  is  not  typical  with
    injuries from kickboxing as most injuries in skilled kickboxers are  to
    the head, neck and chest as these are the target area  as described  in
    surveys of kickboxing injuries".

50. The doctor also found in connection with a long scar on his  head  that
    its position and irregular  outline  was  fully  consistent  or  highly
    consistent with the claimed assault in 2000. While he could not exclude
    the possibility that the scar was the result of an  accident  "this  is
    not a common place for an accidental injury."

51. The doctor concluded his detailed report thus: "[The Appellant] gave  a
    clear and detailed account of the alleged assaults.  I have  considered
    the history, evidence from the physical  examination  and  the  number,
    character and location of the multiple scars and therefore  am  of  the
    opinion that taken together, the deformity of his right toe  and  scars
    on his  left  arm,  legs  and  feet  are  fully  consistent  or  highly
    consistent with the wounds caused with a pair of  pliers  and  a  knife
    while he was restrained on his back and while protecting his  head  and
    face.  The history of the assaults,  his  injuries,  the  treatment  he
    reports he received and the time to recovery  are  fully  and  entirely
    internally consistent or highly consistent".

52. Mr Duffy submitted that Dr Roberts had not commented on the possibility
    of the injuries having been got as a result of  violent  resistance  by
    criminals who the Appellant in the course of his duties in  the  PGB  ,
    sometimes arrested. This seems to me a little unfair  as  it  does  not
    seem that the Appellant's duties in the PGB were raised other than in a
    general way by the Respondent or at the previous  hearings.  There  was
    thus no reason for the doctor to specifically  consider  such.  In  any
    event, it is difficult to see how an injury such as the one to his  toe
    ("the deformity of his right  toe...(is)  highly  consistent  with  the
    wounds caused by a pair of pliers...while  he  was  restrained  on  his
    back...") which he said were  got  during  torture  in  2007  could  be
    consistent with an injury caused by someone resisting arrest.

53. It is clear that the doctor is highly qualified. He has been trained by
    the  Medical  Foundation  in  the  assessment  of  injuries   and   has
    significant experience in doing so. I find the medical reports on which
    I  place  considerable  weight  to  give  support  to  the  Appellant's
    historical account of receiving the injuries in the way he  claimed  at
    the school in 2000 and while detained in 2007.

54. That ill treatment during detention happens to LGBT  persons  is  clear
    from  the  background  material  (Danish  Immigration  Service   Report
    (January 2014) (1.2.1.3).

55. A further concern was that the account of the Appellant's education and
    relationship at school was improbable.  It was  not  believed  that  he
    would still be at school aged 21  years  and  would  engage  in  sexual
    activity there. I note  the  letter  from  the  school  confirming  his
    attendance at that age.  I also note a letter (4 April  2014)  from  Dr
    Melissa Peters, Northwestern University, an academic, who  states  that
    she spent two years conducting research among LGBT people in Uganda.

56. She confirms the existence of the practice  know  as  "bye  bye".   She
    states "The tradition is commonly known as 'kiro more', the last  night
    ... It is in most cases a crazy night, characterised  with  booze,  sex
    and drugs ..."

57. I see no reason to disbelieve his evidence that he got the  letter  via
    his mother following the criticism by the previous First tier judge  as
    to a lack of documentary evidence about his school attendance. While it
    may seem somewhat unusual to western eyes that a person would still  be
    at school aged 21, the  letter  from  the  head  teacher  confirms  his
    attendance from 1995 to 2000. I see no reason why I cannot rely on  the
    contents of the letter from the school. As for the evidence about  "bye
    bye" the expertise of the academic was not challenged and I accept  it.
    I conclude that the account  of  the  Appellant's  sexual  activity  at
    school is credible.

58. Another significant issue  is  that  he  only  had  problems  with  the
    authorities twice and indeed was permitted to return  to  work  at  the
    security office (PGB) of the President.

59. His explanation is that he had been discrete about his sexuality indeed
    denying he was gay to others  including  his  employer.   As  a  result
    although there was some bullying from colleagues others did not believe
    he was gay particularly as he was married.

60. I find some support for that claim  in  the  background  material.  The
    Danish Immigration Service Report states (at 1.2.1):  "According  to  a
    Western embassy, the Inspector General of Police  has  publicly  stated
    that the UPF is not going to arrest homosexuals as  long  as  they  are
    consenting adults and that the police should not monitor what  goes  on
    in people's bedrooms.  The IGP has also provided the LGBT members  with
    a hotline contact in case they  are  arrested  arbitrarily.   The  same
    position has been repeated by the public prosecutions office  ...   The
    Minister of Justice, who according to a Western embassy is a  respected
    general in the army, has publicly stated that the Bahati Bill [i.e. the
    AHB] violates human rights."

61. In light of the background material I found credible his evidence  that
    he was effectively given the benefit of the doubt by those in authority
    in particular his employer.

62. A concern was how he was able, despite threats, to remain safely in his
    rented property for two months having been given  notice  of  eviction.
    The Danish report (1.4) gives some support for his claim to  have  been
    evicted: 'Evictions from rented housing could be initiated by concerned
    neighbours, who could try to round up support from the local  community
    and ultimately present this to the local  council.'  His  evidence  was
    that  he  could  not  go  at  once  because  he  needed  a  letter   of
    recommendation from the local council  in  order  to  move  to  another
    community. He got this again with the help of his employer.  That  such
    is indeed the practice is also confirmed by the  Danish  report  (1.4).
    His further evidence was that he  was  not  untroubled  in  the  period
    before he left but received threats. I find that evidence credible.

63. As for concern that those family members seeking to get him a  wife  so
    that he would become "respectable" would not have allowed  him  to  not
    marry for so long, I find plausible his evidence that rumours about his
    sexuality spread by an uncle might have discouraged potential partners.
    I note the Danish report which refers to some LGBT persons being  given
    the condition of either getting married or being disowned by the family
    (3.1).

64. A further concern was how the Appellant was able to get a new passport.

65. His evidence was that having received threats  from  the  community  he
    moved to Makerere and to Jinja.

66. Again I note the Danish Report: "An anonymous human rights organisation
    in Uganda explained that if a LGBG person who has been arrested on  the
    grounds of homosexuality and later released should decide  to  move  to
    another location, he or she would not face any problems with the police
    in the new setting.  The police do not have an electronic  registry  of
    arrests of LGBT persons and a  person  could  start  afresh  in  a  new
    district, where neither community  nor  police  would  know  about  the
    person's sexual orientation" (1.2.1).

67. I note the evidence that the arrest  warrants  were  not  issued  until
    after the Appellant left Uganda.  I again find credible his claim  that
    he had once more the help of his  employer  this  time  in  making  the
    application.  Also he was not in prison at that time, and there were no
    charges.  In light of that evidence and also the evidence as to limited
    record keeping, I find credible  he  would  have  been  issued  with  a
    passport and was able to leave Uganda untroubled.

68. Having arrived in the UK it was two years  before  he  claimed  asylum.
    His evidence is that having learned of the authorities' interest in him
    soon after his  arrival  in  the  UK  he  feared  return.   However  he
    overstayed before claiming asylum.  I do not find  credible  his  claim
    that he was scared that if he approached the UK authorities he would be
    sent back, a situation which later changed when he decided that he  did
    not want to continue indefinitely living here illegally.  Under  s8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  I
    take account as damaging his credibility his failure to take  advantage
    of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum  claim  when  in  a  safe
    country. However, I do not  see  that  to  distract  from  the  overall
    assessment of the evidence. It is a global  assessment  of  credibility
    that is required.

69. In that regard there was oral evidence not only from the Appellant  but
    also from a witness, Mr W.

70. I may say that I find Mr W to be a compelling and  impressive  witness.
    His evidence was that he has worked for the LGBT support  group  Oxford
    Friend for a considerable time.  He said that from observations of  the
    Appellant over many months at the group's  office  where  he  has  been
    working he was under no doubt that the Appellant is, indeed,  gay.   It
    was not suggested by Mr Duffy that Mr W was  being  untruthful  in  his
    evidence and I have no doubt whatsoever that  he  was  being  truthful.
    The suggestion was that the Appellant may  have  been  acting  a  part,
    pretending to be gay.

71. The witness, whose evidence was that he himself is  gay,  said  he  was
    sure that was not so.  It would have been  extremely  difficult  for  a
    person to have carried out such an act of pretence over such  a  period
    during  which  he  has  been  increasingly  involved  in  the   group's
    activities including dealing with phone calls and emails from concerned
    individuals and families.

72. I find that the witness was  not  only  truthful  but  correct  in  his
    assessment of the Appellant.

73. I do not find it an adverse factor against the Appellant that  he  only
    started his activities at the group after the dismissal of  his  appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

74. Nor do I find it significant that there was no evidence oral or written
    in support from any of the partners who the Appellant said he had  been
    involved with.  I found credible his evidence that  he  had  approached
    one previous partner but that being married with a child that  man  had
    refused to get involved.

75. I remind myself of the obligation  to  consider  the  Appellant's  case
    "with the most anxious scrutiny." Looking at the evidence in the  round
    and having sought to take account of  all  relevant  material  some  of
    which was not available at the time of  the  first  appeal  I  find  it
    appropriate to  revisit  the  earlier  credibility  findings.  For  the
    reasons stated I find to the lower standard that the  core  aspects  of
    his historical account are credible.  I accept his evidence that he  is
    gay and  for  that  reason  he  faced  the  difficulties  amounting  to
    persecution in Uganda.  Specifically  that  he  suffered  the  assaults
    claimed in 2000 and when detained in 2007 and that subsequently  arrest
    warrants were issued. I have  no  doubt  that  he  fears  the  possible
    consequences of return and of  living as a gay man in Uganda.

76. In HJ (Iran) and HT Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 it was  established
    that where a person would in future refrain from behaving in a way that
    would expose him to a danger because of the risk  of  persecution  that
    behaviour brings, that person is a refugee.  Would a gay man or lesbian
    woman have to conceal aspects of their  sexuality  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution.  A distinction is drawn between someone who may choose  to
    live discreetly due  to  simply  societal  pressures  for  example  not
    wishing to distress his parents or embarrass his friends and those  for
    whom a material reason for living discreetly on return would be a  fear
    of persecution which would follow if he were to live openly  as  a  gay
    man.

         'To reject his application on the ground that he  could  avoid  the
         persecution by living discreetly would be to defeat the very  right
         which the Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely
         and openly as a gay man without fear of persecution.  By  admitting
         him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a  gay
         man without fear of persecution, the receiving state  gives  effect
         to that right by  affording  the  applicant  a  surrogate  for  the
         protection from persecution which his country of nationality should
         have afforded him.'  (Lord Roger) [82].

77. I consider the situation for homosexuals in Uganda at present.

78. I can do so in brief because the Respondent  accepts  that  gay  people
    face persecution in Uganda.

79. Detail is given in the recent UK Home Office, Country  Information  and
    Guidance - Uganda: Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity  and  in  the
    Danish Fact Finding Mission of 2014.  Both  these  documents  show  the
    problems of societal discrimination and  state  persecution.   Pressure
    being brought on landlords to evict gay  tenants.   The  Danish  report
    refers to people living secret lives.   Evidence  of  gay  activity  at
    university.  Family problems faced by gay people.  The  evidence  shows
    varying levels of discrimination and hostility to gay people, and those
    suspected of being gay.

80. The following passages are pertinent:

         "2.1.1  The  Civil  Society   Coalition   on   Human   Rights   and
         Constitutional Law, in a submission on LGBTI issues to the UN Human
         Rights Council's Universal Periodic  Review  on  Uganda,  dated  11
         March 2011 (before the Anti Homosexuality Bill was passed), stated:

         '... The retention of laws and the threatened enactment of new ones
         that further  criminalize  sexual  relationships  between  same-sex
         consenting adults has a devastating impact on  same-sex  practicing
         people in Uganda.  They live in constant fear of  arbitrary  arrest
         and detention, discrimination in  education,  employment,  housing,
         and   access   to   services    (especially    health    services),
         excommunication  from  places  of  worship  and  extortion  -   all
         buttressed by the existence of laws that criminalize same  sex  and
         lack of specific legal protections for LGBT under  Ugandan  law  as
         they  are  not  even  recognised  as  minorities  under  the  Equal
         Opportunity Commission Act.'

         'According to  OHCHR  Uganda,  the  peaks  in  the  discrimination,
         harassment, arrests and violence against LGBT persons can be linked
         to specific periods of time when LGBT issues have  been  raised  by
         national public media.  For instance the introduction of the AHB in
         October 2009, the publication of the Rolling  Stone  article  "Hang
         them" in September 2010, the murder of David  Kato  on  26  January
         2011, the resolution to retable the AHB in October  2011,  the  re-
         introduction  of  the  AHB  in  Parliament,  the  widely  applauded
         statement of the Speaker of Parliament in her visit  to  Canada  in
         2012, the closure of work-shops by  the  Minister  of  Ethnics  and
         Integrity in February 2012, the article against  homosexuality  and
         the public attention on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, etc.  on  24
         February 2013.

         2.5.6  The  joint  Danish  FFM  Report  2014   provides   extensive
         information  on  arrest  and  prosecution  of  LBT  persons.    The
         following is an excerpt from this section of the report:

         'Co-coordinators Clare Byarugaba and Geoffrey Ogwaro of the CSCHRCL
         stated that the police  usually  do  not  proactively  pursue  LGBT
         persons  on  their  own  initiative.   It  is   family,   partners,
         employers, neighbours, etc., who inform the  police  or  the  local
         Church about suspected LGBT persons.  For example in Jinja a  local
         radio  station  aired  programmes  that  incited   hatred   against
         homosexuals and encouraged the local  people  to  be  vigilant  and
         report homosexuals to local authorities,  meaning  the  police  and
         LC's Local Councils.

         'Representatives of Icebreakers stated that the  main  concern  for
         LGBT persons is not the police or  the  Ugandan  authorities.   The
         fundamental concern is  that  LGBT  persons  are  denied  the  very
         backbone of society, i.e. family ties, education, work, housing and
         societal acceptance.

         'An anonymous human rights organization in Uganda stated  that  the
         main security issue and concern for the LGBT  community  stem  from
         Ugandan society.  The police are not the main security concern,  as
         they in reality would not proactively seek out and hunt  down  LGBT
         persons.  Rather, security issues of concern to LGBT persons  would
         relate to being disowned by the family, poverty, false  accusations
         resulting from private rivalries, fear of being outed by  neighbors
         or colleagues."

81. In assessing the situation for the  Appellant  he  is  a  gay  man.   I
    believe his evidence that he wishes to live openly in public as well as
    in private as a gay man but that he fears were he to do  so  in  Uganda
    that he would be at  risk  of  persecution  from  the  authorities  and
    individuals.  He cannot and must not be expected to conceal aspects  of
    his sexual orientation which he is  unwilling  to  conceal,  even  from
    those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.   From  my  reading  of  the
    background material, in Uganda gays or persons who are believed  to  be
    gay do face persecution and that  persecution  is  something  that  may
    reasonably be feared.  He has a  well-founded  fear  that  he  will  be
    persecuted.  Internal relocation is not an option.  I  see  nothing  in
    the evidence to suggest that there is any area of Uganda where gay  men
    could live openly without fear of persecution.  In no sense would he be
    returning to a part of the country where the state  would  protect  him
    from persecution.

82. The  Appellant  satisfies  me  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution (membership of a particular social group)  if  returned  to
    Uganda.  His appeal succeeds.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





