
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/01713/2013
                                                               AA/03451/2013
                                                               AA/03454/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Determination sent          |
|18 October 2013                            |28 October 2013             |
|                                           |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     MK
                                     AK
                                     PK
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Nathan, instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Error of Law


   1. I continue the anonymity direction made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Two of the appellants  are  minors  and  all  of  the  appellants  are
      potentially  vulnerable   persons.   It   is   appropriate   in   such
      circumstances that each appellant  be  granted  anonymity  unless  and
      until a relevant Court or Tribunal directs otherwise.   No  report  of
      these  proceedings  shall  directly   or   indirectly   identify   the
      appellants.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  a
      contempt of court.


   2. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria and are  siblings.  The  first
      appellant has recently turned 19 years old, the second appellant is 15
      years old and their sister, the third appellant, has  just  turned  13
      years old. The appellants' father was a  diplomat  with  the  Nigerian
      High Commission in  London  and  the  appellants,  and  their  mother,
      resided in the United Kingdom on diplomatic visas.  Unfortunately  the
      appellant's father passed away in July 2012 in Nigeria. The appellants
      returned to Nigeria at that time and attended their father's  funeral.
      It is said that they have not had contact with their mother since that
      time, she having abandoned them. It was further said that their family
      house has been burnt down.

   3. The appellants returned to the United Kingdom [the first appellant  in
      August 2012 and the second and third appellants in September 2012] and
      each claimed asylum in December 2012. These applications were  refused
      by the Secretary of State in a decision of 12 February 2013 and on the
      same date decisions were made to remove  the  appellants  from  United
      Kingdom.

   4. The appellants appealed these decisions to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      The appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian, and each
      was dismissed in a conjoined determination prepared on 27  July  2013.
      The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cheales   granted   the   appellants
      permission to appeal against this determination by way of  a  decision
      of the 29 August 2013. Thus the matter came before me.

   5. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Nath  made  an  application  for  an
      adjournment, such application being supported by  Mr  Nathan.  It  was
      said by Mr Nath that he had received an e-mail from the  British  High
      Commission in Nigeria on 15 October 2013, which enclosed  two  e-mails
      [dated in September and October 2013] written to the  High  Commission
      from friends of the appellants [and the appellants' family]  and  that
      such  e-mails  contained  information  demonstrating  that   important
      aspects of the evidence given by the appellants was  untrue.  Mr  Nath
      wished time to investigate the content  of  the  e-mails  further.  Mr
      Nathan required time to discuss the contents of the e-mails  with  his
      clients.

   6. I refused to adjourn the proceeding on the basis that it had not  been
      demonstrated that the e-mails were relevant  to  my  consideration  of
      whether the First-tier Tribunal's determination contained an error  of
      law and, consequently, whether such  determination  ought  to  be  set
      aside.

   7.  Turning  to  these  issues  of  whether  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
      determination contains an error of law, Mr Nath accepted that it  did,
      he said for the reasons identified  in  the  appellant's  grounds.  He
      further accepted that as a consequence the determination ought  to  be
      set aside.

   8. I agree with the parties, and  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination does contain an error of law such that it  ought  to  be
      set aside; although for very much more  restrictive  reasons  than  Mr
      Nath conceded to. The assertion in the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's failure to consider the trafficking  issue  amounted  to  a
      material error of law is hopeless. This ground is prefaced on the fact
      that the appellants would have  no  support  network  upon  return  to
      Nigeria; however, on the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  they  would
      have a significant support network there in the form of  their  mother
      and M T and her family. Further,  the  background  evidence  that  was
      before the First-tier Tribunal comes nowhere near  demonstrating  that
      children, in general, are at real risk of being trafficked in Nigeria,
      or indeed in any one part of Nigeria.

   9. As to the ground relating to internal relocation, any  error  made  by
      the First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  regard  could  not  possible  have
      affected the outcome of the appeal,  because  the  tribunal  concluded
      that the appellants would not be at risk of being persecuted in  their
      home area.

  10. I do  agree,  however,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility
      findings contain errors  of  law  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  the
      determination is unsustainable. The  Judge  refers,  on  a  number  of
      occasions,  to  the  appellants'  failure  to  produce   corroborative
      documentary evidence in support their assertions  [paragraphs  8,  12,
      13]. He  treats  such  matters  as  being  adverse  to  their  general
      credibility. The Judge did not, however, give any consideration to the
      issue of whether it was reasonable to expect the appellants to  obtain
      such evidence given their circumstances (two of them being minors, one
      being just into his majority and all of them living in the UK  without
      their parents to support them). If, which is not  made  clear  in  the
      determination, the Judge did consider such issue and found that it was
      reasonable to expect the appellants to obtain  the  type  of  evidence
      referred to in the determination, he fails give any reasons as to  why
      this is said to be so. In my conclusion, given the appellants ages and
      their circumstances in the United Kingdom, such reasons were required.

  11. Further, in relation to the issue of whether  the  appellant's  family
      house was burnt down as claimed, the appellants did, contrary  to  the
      judge's conclusion, produce at least some  corroborative  evidence  of
      this fact; evidence which the Judge did not refer to or  pass  comment
      upon in the determination.

  12. For these reasons I informed the parties at the hearing that I had set
      aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.


Re-making of decision

  13.  Given  the  potential  significance  of  the  aforementioned   e-mail
      evidence, and the lack of time thus far for the parties to digest  and
      decide how to appropriately act upon it, I indicated that  I  intended
      to adjourn the re-making  of  the  decision  to  allow  the  necessary
      actions to be taken.


  14. At this point Mr Nathan invited me to remit the  matter  back  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal; Mr Nath passed no comment on this matter.

  15. The Senior President of the  Tribunals'  Practice  Statement  of  25th
      September 2012 provides as follows:

                 "7.   "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


            [7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion  to  proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."


  16. Given the terms of my decision setting aside the determination of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, and given the new evidence (in the form of the e-
      mail from the British High Commission)  which  is  likely  to  require
      significant  additional  evidence  from  the  appellants  and  in  all
      likelihood lead to the Secretary of State calling the author of the e-
      mails to the BHC to give evidence, I agree with  Mr  Nathan  that  the
      requirements of paragraph 7.2 (b) of the Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement are fulfilled.


  17. In such circumstances, and given that the hearing of the appeal in the
      Upper Tribunal was, in any event,  to be adjourned, I conclude that it
      is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  it
      to be determined afresh and I direct that this be so.
   Decision


      The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  Upper
      Tribunal allows the appellant's appeal to the limited extent  that  it
      is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo.


      To this end, given the terms of the e-mail evidence  produced  by  the
      Secretary of State on 16 October, a Case Management Review Hearing has
      been fixed for Taylor House hearing centre on 9 December  2013.   Both
      parties must be in a position at the CMRH to identify which  witnesses
      they intend to call at the substantive hearing.


    Signed: M O'Connor
    [pic]
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal                          Dated: 24 October
    2013




















































