
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01350/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2014 & 2 September 2014             |On 11 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     s a
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Gayle, Solicitor, of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
(London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 11 September  1980,  is  a  national  of
    Iran.  She claims to have arrived in the UK on  or  about  18  November
    2013, having travelled via Turkey in a lorry, and she presented herself
    to the authorities claiming  asylum.   She  was  given  an  appointment
    letter to return on 2 December 2013 when she formally  claimed  asylum.
    Her screening interview was on  that  date  and  she  was  subsequently
    interviewed more fully on 22  January  2014,  by  which  time  she  was
    legally represented.

 2. Following consideration by the respondent, the  appellant's  claim  was
    refused on 12 February 2014.  The  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  the
    appellant asylum was made on that date, although the refusal letter  is
    dated two days earlier on 10 February 2014.

 3. The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge G A  Black,  in  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 31 March 2014, but in a  determination  prepared  on  2
    April 2014 and promulgated shortly thereafter (it was signed on 4 April
    2014) Judge Black dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant now appeals against this decision, pursuant to permission
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge French on 2  May  2014.
    Judge French set out his reasons for granting permission to  appeal  as
    follows:

    "1.  The appellant  applies  in  time  for  permission  to  appeal  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  G  A  Black  to  dismiss  on
         asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds her appeal
         against removal to Iran.  The appellant claimed  to  have  suffered
         domestic violence and, having left her husband, now to be  at  risk
         for 'honour' reasons.

    2.   It is alleged in the grounds  that  the  judge  erred  in  various
         respects in her assessment of the evidence and in the  adequacy  of
         reasons given.  Several examples were  given,  such  as  the  judge
         relying on a comment made at  the  screening  interview  which  was
         arguably   misinterpreted   in   dates   (which    bore    apparent
         inconsistencies) being recorded in the western calendar whereas the
         appellant had given them in the Iranian calendar and they  appeared
         to have been transposed by an  interpreter  from  Iraq,  unfamiliar
         with the Iranian system.  It is also said that the judge  erred  in
         referring on two occasions to the appellant being from Iraq,  which
         may be merely a typographical error.

    3.   The reasons challenged may not be easy to sustain  and  the  judge
         had the opportunity to hear and assess evidence from the appellant.
          However I am persuaded that for the reasons given there  may  have
         been arguable errors of law in  the  determination,  in  particular
         given the importance of giving clear reasons for not  believing  an
         appellant, as emphasised in MM  (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
         [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).  Permission is accordingly granted on  all
         grounds."

The Appellant's Case

 5. The appellant's case is set out in her witness statement dated 20 March
    2014,  which  was  prepared  for  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It can be summarised relatively  briefly.   She  arrived  in
    this country on 18 November 2013 (as set  out  above)  and  immediately
    claimed asylum.  She had some difficulties in both  her  screening  and
    asylum interviews because the interpreters provided were from Iraq  and
    not Iran and so they did not understand her entirely.  Also  a  lot  of
    the dates  were  wrongly  recorded.   It  is  claimed  in  the  witness
    statement that "the interpreters appeared to have guessed the number of
    months since events took place".

 6. The appellant was in an abusive marriage and was also raped during  her
    journey to the UK which led to her being traumatised.  For this  reason
    she found it difficult to  concentrate  when  she  was  asked  to  give
    details of her reasons why she had fled from Iran.  She was also  under
    emotional pressure because she had been separated from her daughter for
    almost a year.

 7. The appellant was now pregnant following her rape and  if  returned  to
    Iran would return as someone who had dishonoured her  family  by  being
    divorced  and  becoming  pregnant  out  of  wedlock.   She  is  from  a
    traditional Kurdish Sunni Muslim family in which women have always been
    treated badly.  One of her brothers had killed his wife and one of  her
    uncles had killed his daughter, "all in the name of 'honour'".

 8. Her parents are divorced and her father was abusive.   Her  mother  was
    only able to obtain a divorce because her father "was strong enough  to
    arrange a divorce in order to protect my mother".

 9. She had an arranged marriage in  2001,  and  did  not  have  any  major
    problems for the first couple of years until her daughter was born  but
    then her husband became very abusive and used to  beat  her,  sometimes
    very seriously.  She also suffered abuse  from  her  sister-in-law  and
    mother-in-law.

10. The appellant's husband's abusive behaviour continued when  they  moved
    out of the family home and  on  some  occasions  she  required  medical
    treatment for the injuries inflicted.  Her husband also  brought  other
    women into the home and had sex with them.

11. The appellant left the matrimonial home  and  fled  to  stay  with  her
    mother and remained in hiding there for a  few  months.   Although  her
    father was "furious that I had left my husband" he did not  know  where
    she was but was determined to punish her  for  dishonouring  him.   She
    managed to get a divorce from her husband while she was with her mother
    and her husband had not attended the court  hearings  although  he  had
    been summoned to appear.  Her father was so angry at what she had  done
    that it was obvious that her life would be in danger if she remained in
    Iran (given her family's history of killing women).

12. Accordingly she travelled elsewhere within Iran to stay with a  cousin,
    found an agent and arranged her escape.   She  was  smuggled  over  the
    border into Turkey in "late Shahrivar  1392"  which  is  mid  September
    2013.  She spent various periods in different locations  within  Turkey
    supposedly with other women in "safe" houses but the  houses  were  not
    safe and she was sexually abused by the agents.  Within  her  statement
    at paragraph 15, the appellant claims to have been raped "three times".
     (In answer to Q113 in her main asylum interview the appellant had said
    that "I have been raped 2-3 times on the way when I came").

13. At paragraph 17 of her statement the appellant stated that she did  not
    realise she was pregnant until she had been in  the  UK  "for  about  a
    month" and that she was "devastated".  I note that this would be around
    the middle of December, although again in answer to Q113  of  the  main
    asylum interview she had said that she had been taken to  a  doctor  by
    the man she was staying with because she became sensitive of the  smell
    and "after investigation I was told that I am twelve  weeks  pregnant".
    This would seem to tie up with when she went to Kings College  Hospital
    (said in the hospital record to be not because of  not  being  able  to
    stand the smell of cooking but because she had had a fall) which was on
    5 January 2014.

14. The appellant in her statement deals with  matters  raised  within  the
    refusal letter and at paragraph 23 she accepts that "some of what I  am
    alleged to have said [in her interviews] does  not  make  sense".   She
    says that this is because there were "problems with the interpretation"
    and that the interpreter "mistranslated a lot of what of what  I  said"
    although she also accepts that her traumatic condition "may have caused
    me to make some minor mistake".  However, at paragraph 24 she denies in
    terms stating that she had left her husband one year  and  four  months
    before coming to the UK and also claims that she did not state that she
    had seen her ex-husband and daughter "a month earlier  in  Iran".   Nor
    did she state that she had left Iran "one month prior to my arrival  in
    the UK" but had always stated that she  had  "left  in  Shahrivar  1392
    (Aug/Sept 2013)".  She claims at paragraph 26  that  "the  Home  Office
    interpreter could not compare dates, so simply guessed" and  complained
    that  she  "should  not  suffer  due   to   the   inadequacy   of   the
    interpretation".

15. At paragraph 27 of her witness statement the appellant  refers  to  her
    answers to Q117 and 118 of  her  asylum  interview  in  which  she  had
    explained the apparent discrepancy between saying that she had gone  to
    hospital because she could not stand  the  smell  of  cooking  and  the
    hospital recording that she had said she had fallen down the stairs  by
    saying that she had fallen down the stairs because she  could  not  eat
    anything.  She felt that the bleeding she had when she had fallen  down
    the stairs was because of her period which was why she had not realised
    she was pregnant.

16. At paragraph 28 she asserts that there is no support network  available
    to her in Iran that  could  protect  her  against  honour  killing  and
    because she was pregnant out of  wedlock  she  had  brought  even  more
    dishonour on her family and as  a  single  woman  she  would  be  found
    wherever she went.  The fact that  she  had  been  raped  would  be  no
    defence because women who are raped in Iran are accused of adultery.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

17. Essentially the judge did not accept the appellant's core account.   At
    paragraph 16 having heard evidence from the appellant  the  judge  "did
    not find her to be  a  credible  witness"  and  further  she  "was  not
    satisfied that the account given of her domestic abuse and pregnancy by
    rape and divorce from her husband were credible".  The  judge  referred
    to a number of  inconsistencies  (in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    relevant dates of events of significance as outlined in the reasons for
    refusal).  The judge did not accept the  appellant's  explanation  that
    the reason for these discrepancies was because of  interpreter  errors,
    in particular because she had "made no attempt to draw attention to any
    inaccuracies in the interview either  at  the  end  of  the  interview,
    during the interview or in the period after the interview".  The  judge
    noted that the first time this issue was raised was in the  appellant's
    witness statement.

18. The  judge  noted  that  appellant's  account  of  domestic  abuse  was
    "generalised" and also "there was no evidence of the medical  treatment
    that she claimed to have obtained in Iraq".  In this regard, the  judge
    accepted  that  corroborative  evidence  is  "not  a   necessity"   but
    nonetheless as the  appellant  had  indicated  that  she  had  received
    treatment "it would have been reasonable to expect  her  to  have  been
    able to produce some form of medical evidence in support".   The  judge
    also did not find her  evidence  that  she  had  been  raped  on  three
    occasions whilst in Turkey  en  route  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  be
    credible and also place weight on the letter  from  the  Kings  College
    Hospital dated 5 January 2014 in which it was stated that the appellant
    had presented at hospital "in fear of miscarriage".  The judge did  not
    accept that the appellant did not know she was pregnant  at  that  time
    and in this regard noted that there was no record of her informing  the
    hospital staff that she had been raped nor that she was unaware of  the
    pregnancy.  The judge also noted that although  the  appellant  claimed
    that she had obtained a divorce while living with her  mother  in  Iran
    the divorce certificate was dated August 2013.  Also, in light  of  the
    appellant's claim to have been present at court to obtain  the  divorce
    "it is reasonable therefore that she would have  travelled  to  the  UK
    with at least a copy of the divorce certificate  with  her"  as  it  is
    "clearly ....a significant piece of evidence  in  the  context  of  her
    claim".  Further, the judge notes the lack  of  any  reference  to  any
    allegation of rape in the appellant's screening interview and also that
    in that interview she states that "formally I have not  separated  from
    him" which was inconsistent with her account that she had obtained  her
    divorce before leaving Iran.

19. At paragraph  19  of  her  determination,  the  judge  notes  that  the
    appellant's evidence as to the date she left Iraq was inconsistent.  In
    evidence she had stated it was 8 August 2013 "whereas in her  screening
    interview she indicated it was in or about November  2013".   I  should
    note at this stage that I checked the Record  of  Proceedings  and  the
    judge did record the appellant's answer as being 8 August 2013 although
    Mr Gayle who appeared for the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal
    as well as before this Tribunal told me that in his  note  this  answer
    was recorded as being the end of August and it was clarified that  this
    was the equivalent of the date in the Persian calendar which  might  in
    fact have taken this into September.  Whether or not this  is  correct,
    Mr Gayle did concede that there was an  inconsistency  of  at  least  a
    month in the dates given.

20. The judge referred to other inconsistencies in the  evidence,  such  as
    regarding the dates when the appellant had left her  husband  and  when
    her problems with him had started.  She also  noted  the  lack  of  any
    independent evidence to support the appellant's claim there had been at
    least two honour killings conducted by family members towards women  in
    her family.

21. In light of the overall findings having considered the evidence in  the
    round, in accordance with the principles in Tanveer  Ahmed,  the  judge
    was unable to place much weight on the divorce  certificate  which  had
    been translated and submitted in support of the appellant's claim.

Grounds of Appeal

22. It is asserted first that "there are a variety of  material  flaws"  in
    the  judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence  when  making   the   adverse
    credibility findings.  In the first  place,  it  is  claimed  that  the
    appellant had indeed given a detailed account of some  of  the  attacks
    that took place, so that the judge's finding that she had only given  a
    "generalised" account of the abuse she had suffered (at paragraph 17 of
    the determination) was not  sustainable.   More  fundamentally,  it  is
    asserted that the judge had failed to take account of  the  effect  the
    abuse she had suffered had had on  the  appellant,  in  particular  her
    statement that she had been traumatised both by having  spent  most  of
    her adult life in an abusive marriage and also having been raped during
    her journey to the UK.

23. Complaint is made of the judge's  finding  that  corroborative  medical
    evidence should have been  provided,  in  particular  because  domestic
    abuse was considered a private issue in the Kurdish regions of Iran.

24. It is then said that the judge should not have  placed  weight  on  the
    appellant's failure to mention the rape previously  or  on  her  having
    previously been unaware that she was pregnant.  It is claimed that  the
    judge should have acknowledged that  the  appellant  had  attended  the
    hospital as an emergency and did  not  have  an  interpreter.   Also  a
    hospital examination summary "does not provide a full case history".

25. It is then claimed that in fact  there  was  not  an  inconsistency  in
    relation to the divorce document which had been provided, and that  the
    judge should not have considered it "reasonable" for the  appellant  to
    have brought at least a copy of that document with her to the UK.   The
    judge ought to have taken into consideration  that  the  appellant  had
    fled Iran in fear of her life, that this was not a planned journey  but
    was perilous and there had been no time for her to collect and pack all
    the evidence that might be helpful to her once she arrived  in  a  safe
    country.

26. It is also asserted that it was unreasonable to  place  weight  on  the
    appellant's failure to mention at her screening interview that she  had
    been raped by agents during her journey.  Claimants were  not  expected
    to provide full details of their reasons for claiming asylum  at  their
    screening interviews.  Also the appellant  was  unaware  that  she  was
    pregnant as a result of the rape at the time of that interview.

27. It is then asserted that the judge had based  her  adverse  credibility
    finding partly on an alleged discrepancy in  the  appellant's  evidence
    relating to whether she was divorced or separated, but this was  unfair
    because the word used to describe "separation"  and  "divorce"  is  the
    same in Kurdish Sorani (as clarified by the court interpreter).

28. The grounds then suggest that it is shown within the determination that
    the judge had not exercised "the most careful and anxious  scrutiny  in
    her consideration of this appeal" because she referred at paragraph  18
    to there being a sufficiency of protection within Iraq whereas in  fact
    the appellant is from Iran.  It is also submitted in this  regard  that
    there was a  wealth  of  countervailing  objective  evidence  that  the
    Iranian authorities in fact do not provide  sufficiency  of  protection
    for victims of domestic violence.

29. It is then  suggested  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's explanation for  the  inconsistencies,  which
    was that they were as a result of errors of interpretation, because the
    interpreters "appear to have guessed the number of months since  events
    took place".  Also, the judge should not have placed  "an  unreasonable
    evidential burden upon the appellant" by taking account of her  failure
    to provide independent evidence confirming two honour killings by close
    family members.

30. Also, as the adverse credibility findings which she made  were  flawed,
    the judge should not have rejected the divorce document relying on  the
    principles in Tanveer Ahmed.

The Hearing

31. On 4 July 2014, I heard submissions from Mr  Gayle  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, in which he expanded on the submissions contained within his
    skeleton argument which he had prepared for the hearing.  Due  to  lack
    of court time, it was not possible to  conclude  the  hearing  on  that
    date, but before the resumed hearing, on 2 September 2014, Ms Isherwood
    also prepared written submissions, and she addressed  the  Tribunal  on
    that date, when she expanded upon the  submissions  contained  in  that
    document.  Mr Gayle then replied, and addressed  some  of  the  matters
    contained within the respondent's submissions.  I should state at  this
    stage that I am grateful to both  representatives  for  the  clear  and
    precise manner in which their respective arguments  were  presented  to
    the Tribunal both in writing and orally.  They have  been  of  enormous
    assistance.

32. Because the written arguments are contained within  the  file  and  the
    oral submissions were recorded contemporaneously and are  contained  in
    the Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out below  everything  which
    was said to me during the course of the hearings, but shall refer  only
    to such of the arguments as are necessary  for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination.  However, I have taken full account of everything  which
    was said to me, as well as to all the documents  contained  within  the
    file,  before  reaching  my  decision,  whether  or  not  the  same  is
    specifically referred to below.

33. Although this was not his only point, Mr Gayle's  main  submission  was
    that the adverse credibility findings  are  unsafe  because  the  judge
    failed to give due regard  to  the  fact  that  this  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness.  On her own account,  she  had  suffered  years  of
    abuse at the hands of her husband and had also been raped  and  it  was
    clear that although there were inconsistencies within the  account  she
    had given, these could be explained by reason of the  traumatic  events
    she had suffered.  Mr Gayle began his submissions by  setting  out  the
    submission in the following terms:

         "Given the nature of the appellant's case, the judge ought to  have
         exercised extra special care when assessing the evidence  from  the
         appellant, given that she is a victim (or this  is  her  claim)  of
         domestic violence and sexual assault."

34. The judge had also placed too much weight on the inconsistencies as  to
    dates given the explanation which had been provided.  Although some  of
    her evidence had been generalised,  in  some  places,  for  example  in
    answer to Q63 of her asylum interview, her answers were  more  detailed
    and could not properly be categorised as generalised.  With  regard  to
    the answer given by the appellant at 2.1 of  her  screening  interview,
    which  took  place  on  2  December  2013  (that  she  had  left   Iran
    "approximately one month ago") it was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    "placed too much weight" on this answer.  It was  said  that  this  was
    because the appellant had made it clear that there were  problems  with
    the interpretation of the screening interview.

35. In answer to a  question  from  the  Tribunal  as  to  whether  if  the
    appellant's child with whom she was pregnant had not been conceived  in
    rape after she had left Iran her case would not be credible,  Mr  Gayle
    conceded that this was so, but it was her case that the child with whom
    she was pregnant had been conceived during a rape after  she  had  left
    Iran.

36. It is because the appellant's evidence before the First -tier  Tribunal
    was that she had had no contact with her husband for some months before
    she had left Iran (and it is not suggested that in this period she  had
    any sexual contact with  anyone  else),  that  if  the  child  was  not
    conceived in rape after the appellant had left Iran, her case  was  not
    credible.  Mr Gayle accepted that the  medical  evidence  is  that  the
    child which the appellant was expecting, and which she claimed to  have
    been conceived in Turkey as result of rape,  was  conceived  around  12
    October 2013.  In answer to a question  from  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Gayle
    suggested that the answer said to have  been  given  in  the  screening
    interview, that the appellant had left Iran around a month  before  the
    interview, which would be 2 November 2014  had  been  wrongly  recorded
    because the interpreter was from Iraq rather than  Iran  and  therefore
    made a number of mistakes as to dates.  This is a matter which will  be
    discussed below.

37. Mr Gayle argued that it was not reasonable for the judge to have relied
    on the summary in the medical report in support of her finding that the
    appellant had not been raped.

38. There was some discussion as  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant  had
    claimed to have been "divorced" rather than "separated" and also as  to
    whether or not there was sufficiency of protection within Pakistan  for
    those at risk of honour killings.  The point which Mr  Gayle  submitted
    was his strongest was that the judge's view of what the  appellant  had
    said in her screening interview had tainted her  consideration  of  the
    rest of the evidence, and that she should have accepted that there  had
    been problems relating to the interpreter.  The appellant had given  an
    explanation for what was in the screening interview, which was that the
    interpreter got the dates wrong and had made them up because  he  could
    not accurately translate or convert the dates she gave.

39. The respondent's response to the appellant's arguments is  set  out  in
    some detail in the respondent's  written  submissions  which  had  been
    settled with great care by Ms Isherwood.  It is not  necessary  to  set
    out these submissions in detail.  What Ms Isherwood has  been  able  to
    show, with forensic attention to detail, is the very  large  number  of
    inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  given  by  and  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, some of which will be  discussed  below.   Essentially,  the
    respondent's case is that in light of the inconsistencies, to which the
    judge had regard, she was entitled to  reach  the  adverse  credibility
    findings she did.

Discussion

40. I am entirely satisfied that that the judge was entitled to conclude on
    the evidence before her that the appellant's claim was  indeed  riddled
    with inconsistencies.  Some of these inconsistencies are relied upon by
    the judge in her determination, particularly at paragraphs 16  and  19.
    For example, she gave inconsistent evidence as to when she  left  Iran.
    In evidence she claimed it was 8 August  2013,  but  in  her  screening
    interview (at 2.1) she said it had been a month before  the  interview,
    which would place the date at the  beginning  of  November  2013.   The
    dates on which she claimed to have left her husband and the dates  when
    she left Iran were not consistent, and nor were the accounts  she  gave
    of when problems had first begun with her husband.  As the judge noted,
    she gave contradictory evidence at one time stating that  the  problems
    started with her husband soon after her daughter had been born  but  on
    another occasion that the first few years of her marriage had been "ok"
    and the abuse had started two or three years after  the  birth  of  her
    daughter.

41. Although, as I pointed out during the hearing,  it  might  be  arguable
    that the judge's finding at paragraph 17 that the  appellant's  account
    as to the domestic abuse she had suffered was "generalised" could  have
    been better phrased, because although her original answer to  questions
    concerning this abuse were generalised, she did give  some  details  in
    answer to questions 63 and 64 of her main asylum interview,  the  judge
    was entitled  to  consider  whether  or  not  the  answers  given  were
    sufficiently detailed to be credible, and the challenge to this  aspect
    of the determination is effectively a challenge to findings which  were
    open to the judge.

42. Although a court or Tribunal must always be aware that the evidence  of
    witnesses who claim to have suffered the traumatic ordeal of rape  must
    be treated with sensitivity, as must be the evidence of  witnesses  who
    claim to have  suffered  abuse,  nonetheless  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence generally in this case, when considering all the  evidence  in
    the round in light of the other  inconsistencies  referred  to  in  the
    determination, the judge was entitled to take account of  the  apparent
    inconsistency between the record made by Kings College Hospital and the
    case which the appellant was now presenting.  She claimed that she  had
    not known that she was pregnant at the time she visited  the  hospital,
    but the hospital had recorded  that  she  had  presented  "in  fear  of
    miscarriage".  While that apparent inconsistency could possibly on  its
    own be capable of explanation (the explanation  tendered  is  that  the
    report from the hospital could be understood as meaning  this  was  the
    symptom which was shown rather than that this had  been  given  as  the
    reason for her attending), this evidence cannot be seen  in  isolation.
    Viewed with the other inconsistencies, it is yet a further  example  of
    what appears to be inconsistency between the  case  the  appellant  was
    putting before the Tribunal and what she had told others, in this  case
    the hospital, earlier.  Although individual pieces of evidence which on
    first examination appear to damage an applicant's credibility might  be
    capable of explanation, where there are a number of pieces of  evidence
    which all require explanation,  an  applicant's  task  becomes  harder.
    That is why Tribunals consider  evidence  in  the  round.   It  is  the
    function of a judge  to  assess  all  the  evidence  in  light  of  the
    explanations offered, and that is what the judge did in this case.  The
    judge was also entitled to take account of the fact (albeit again  that
    on  its  own  this  would  not  necessarily  be  conclusive)  that  the
    appellant's claim that she was raped in Turkey after leaving  Iran  was
    not made until a very late stage in  these  proceedings  and  that  her
    accounts have not been consistent.  Nothing was apparently said to  the
    hospital or staff working there to indicate that she  had  been  raped,
    and nor was any record made that she had said she had been  unaware  of
    the pregnancy, as she now claims.

43. With regard to the explanation offered by the appellant as to why there
    were so many inconsistencies within her evidence regarding dates, which
    is that these were all as a result of interpreter error,  Ms  Isherwood
    has highlighted within her written submissions the number of  occasions
    within her statement the appellant has claimed that the inconsistencies
    arose because of mistakes made by the interpreter (including using  the
    wrong  calendar)  (see  paragraph  8  of   the   respondent's   written
    submissions).

44. The judge was aware of  this  explanation  but  was  entitled  to  take
    account of the fact (again, considering the evidence in the round) that
    the concerns with regard to possible interpreter errors were also  only
    raised very late in these  proceedings.   Complaints  were  not  raised
    during the screening interview and the appellant  signed  a  record  of
    this interview in which it was stated among other matters that she  was
    fit and  well,  that  she  understood  the  interpreter  and  that  she
    understood all the questions and had received a copy of the  interview.



45. By the time the substantive asylum interview  took  place  (22  January
    2014) the  appellant  was  legally  represented  by  a  solicitor,  and
    following that interview (which was again signed  throughout  declaring
    that the information was correct and  complete)  the  appellant  had  a
    further opportunity to provide any comments relating to that interview.
     Accordingly, at this time, she  could,  with  the  assistance  of  her
    solicitor who was on the record, have queried the translation if  there
    was anything wrong with it.  In the event, it was not until the hearing
    that complaints were made as to the interpretation of her answers,  and
    this was a matter which the judge was entitled to take into account.

46. Even if there might have been some errors regarding the translation  of
    dates from one calendar to another, this  cannot  explain  what  in  my
    judgment are the key discrepancies in the appellant's accounts.   These
    relate to the discrepancies between her accounts of when she was  raped
    (which has to be read in the context of her accounts of  how  she  left
    Iran and when) and the medical  evidence  as  to  when  her  child  was
    conceived.  According to the report from Kings College  Hospital,  this
    was twelve weeks and one day prior to the examination, which took place
    on 5 January 2014.  Twelve weeks and one day before this  date  was  12
    October 2013; this has not been challenged  and  is  indeed  consistent
    with the subsequent history of the pregnancy, including further medical
    examinations and the eventual birth.

47. As already noted, at 2.1 of her screening interview, the  appellant  is
    recorded as having said that "I left Iran approximately one month ago".
     As this interview was on 2 December 2013, that  would  have  been  the
    beginning of November.  Similarly, in her screening interview  at  6.3,
    the appellant is recorded as having answered the question "when did you
    last see your spouse/partner?", "1 month ago in Iran" and at  6.5  when
    asked when she had last seen her children, again "1 month ago in Iran".
     These answers cannot be said to have been recorded as a result  of  an
    interpreter misunderstanding the dates in a calendar, because there  is
    no reference here to dates.  The only explanation apparently offered is
    that the interpreters (in respect of both interviews) "appear  to  have
    guessed the number of months since events took place" (see paragraph  2
    of her statement) but no credible reason is suggested as  to  why  they
    should have done so, other than a failure  to  understand  the  correct
    correspondence with each other of dates in different  calendars,  which
    cannot apply in respect of these answers.  What has been recorded  here
    is the appellant stating on each occasion that she  had  been  in  Iran
    until one month before the interview, without any reference to specific
    dates in any calendar.

48. It is the appellant's case that she left her husband  and  stayed  with
    her mother for a  few  months  before  leaving  Iran.   She  has  never
    suggested that she had had  intercourse  with  either  her  husband  or
    anyone else in Iran in the few  months  before  leaving  that  country.
    Accordingly, as accepted on the appellant's behalf by Mr  Gayle  during
    the hearing, this was "a difficulty".  Unless one of  the  rapes  which
    the appellant claims she suffered can be dated  at  around  12  October
    2013, her account is incapable of belief.  On her account, there  could
    be no other explanation for her pregnancy.

49. It is within this context that it is necessary also  to  consider  both
    the more detailed account as to the timing of her journey contained  at
    2.1 of her screening interview and also the chronology which  she  gave
    at Q113 of her substantive asylum interview.  At 2.1 of  the  screening
    interview she set out the chronology as follows:

         "I travelled to Turkey travelling by lorry.  I  arrived  in  Turkey
         after about a two week journey.  At first when I arrived at  Turkey
         I was taken to a small remote village where I stayed for 3-4  days,
         then I was taken to a lorry again and travelled  to  Istanbul.   It
         took about 18 hours to get there.  I did not see the city  at  all.
         I stayed in a home provided by an agent.

         I stayed in Istanbul for two days, then one day they came for us (4-
         5 ladies).  They provided food and drinks for us and then  we  were
         taken to the lorry again.

         I took one lorry to the UK, I couldn't differentiate if  it  was  a
         train or a boat that brought me to the UK as it was my  first  time
         and I was so frightened.

         I arrived in the UK and presented to the police and they sent me to
         this office (18/11/2013)."

50. On this timing, she would have gone on to her final journey  to  London
    from Istanbul (on one lorry) no later than three  weeks  after  leaving
    Iran.  What is also relevant is that she claimed not to have arrived in
    Turkey until about two weeks after she had left Iran.   When  one  then
    considers the answer given at Q113 of the  substantive  interview,  she
    says there in answer to the question as to how she got to the  UK  that
    although the other women who had been with her in Turkey agreed to have
    sex with the agents she did not, and when  describing  the  first  rape
    said that it happened "on the way" in what appears to be a reference to
    the journey from Turkey to London.  She claimed then to have been raped
    2-3 times on the way.

51. The descriptions she has given of the rapes are vague and inconsistent,
    but even making every possible allowance for her reluctance to  recount
    traumatic events and her difficulty in doing so, and allowing also that
    the answers recorded as being given by the  appellant  at  least  three
    times in her screening interview (to the effect that she had  not  left
    Iran until one month before the interview) might have  been  an  error,
    even if her journey had taken a month in total (as she appears to  have
    claimed when setting out the  chronology  of  her  journey  within  her
    screening interview) given that she arrived in the UK  on  18  November
    2013, she still would not have left Iran before the middle  of  October
    at the earliest and the rapes on her own account did  not  occur  until
    some time later.  So even on the most generous realistic interpretation
    of the appellant's various accounts, as given in  her  interviews,  the
    discrepancy remains.  On the basis of when the appellant has claimed in
    her interviews she left Iran, the time her journey  took  and  when  on
    that journey she claimed to have been raped, her child could  not  have
    been conceived by rape  as  early  as  according  to  the  unchallenged
    medical evidence it was.

52. In light of this discrepancy, which goes to the core of the  appellants
    claim, but also having regard to all the inconsistencies relied upon by
    the judge when reaching her findings, I cannot find that there was  any
    material error of law in her determination.  The judge's findings  were
    open to her on the evidence and are adequately  reasoned.   It  follows
    that this appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.




Signed:                             Date:   5 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

