

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 14 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                             Ghulam Haydar Nuri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G. Brown, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs P. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 2  January
       1946. He is 68 years old. He appeals against  the  determination  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips QC promulgated after a hearing on
       5 June 2014 dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
       of the respondent dated 7 March 2014 refusing his asylum  claim  and
       issuing directions for his removal.


    2. The basis of the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  outlined  by  the
       appellant in the answers he provided in interview. The claim  arises
       in the context of the successful claim of his cousin, Mr Amiri,  who
       it is accepted  was  kidnapped  in  Afghanistan  in  late  2012  and
       released, after spending 19 days in captivity,  upon  payment  of  a
       ransom. Mr Amiri successfully sought asylum in the United Kingdom as
       a result of the risk he faced from  kidnappers.  The  appellant  was
       involved in the payment of a ransom on  behalf  of  his  cousin,  Mr
       Amiri.



    3. The appellant's son is settled in the United Kingdom and  on  8  May
       2013 the appellant visited the United Kingdom on a family visit.  He
       returned to Afghanistan. He re-entered the United Kingdom on 1  July
       2013 on the strength of a family visit  visa  permitting  entry  for
       himself and their son Noorlah Nuri born on 1 April 2004.  The  claim
       was made on 8 July 2013. In his interview  the  appellant  described
       how, on the way to his shop in Kandahar, he was approached by  three
       individuals who abducted him.


    4. The events surrounding his cousin's kidnap are an  integral  element
       of the appellant's claim.  The appellant told his  interviewer  that
       he had no idea of the identity of those who kidnapped his cousin. He
       described how some people were saying  that  he  was  taken  by  the
       Taliban  whilst  others  that  it  was  kidnappers.  He   said,   'I
       investigated, I found out that he was taken by the  kidnappers.'  He
       then described how money was taken to them in order  to  secure  his
       cousin's release. In answer to question [45] he told the interviewer
       that he had been informed there were no  Taliban  in  the  area.  He
       repeated that it was kidnappers who are  responsible,  and  not  the
       Taliban [46].

    5. Then, dealing with his own kidnap, he described how he was held  for
       several hours until a person came and told him that he knew him.

         "... A person came and told me that he knew me. He  said  that  you
         are innocent, we talked later. I open your handcuffs  and  I  won't
         open your blindfold. You just go straight ahead, there is  a  road.
         When I walked I open my eye cover, it was a night time when I  took
         myself to the road. I sat there for one or two hours and I realised
         that it was getting light. ..


    6. Upon  arrival  home  in  Kandahar,  the  appellant  and  his  family
       immediately left for Kabul where they stayed for two or  three  days
       [83], [85]. Whilst in Kabul they stayed with  family  members  [87].
       He explained that he could not return to Kabul because he  had  been
       under so much  pressure  and,  even  recollecting  the  events,  was
       upsetting to him. Since arriving in the United Kingdom he  had  sold
       his shop in Kandahar.


    7. There are obvious question marks over the appellant's  account.  The
       identity of  his  kidnappers  was  not  provided  at  interview.  In
       particular, the identity of the man who entered the room, apparently
       stating that he knew the appellant (although the appellant  did  not
       know him) and then making arrangements for his release. The  curious
       comment of this individual that the appellant was 'innocent'  as  if
       questions  of  innocence  and  guilt  have  much  bearing  upon  the
       activities of kidnappers. The intervention of this deus  ex  machina
       able  to  effect  his  release  without  payment  or   any   adverse
       consequences to the appellant obviously affects  the  assessment  of
       risk and whether that such an incident would re-occur or, if it did,
       whether it would have the same outcome.

    8. In support of his claim, the appellant provided statements from  his
       wife and son in the United Kingdom and from Mr Amiri. His wife  said
       in paragraph 4 that she did not know for certain  that  it  was  the
       Taliban who kidnapped her husband or Mr Amiri. The appellant himself
       disclaimed a suggestion that  the  Taliban  had  been  involved  or,
       indeed, even had a presence in the area, Kandahar,  a  matter  about
       which the appellant was likely to have some knowledge  as  he  lived
       and traded there.


    9. During the period of the appellant's absence, his wife  carried  out
       checks to ascertain her husband's whereabouts. She  described  that,
       on return, he was dirty and dishevelled and said  the  family  could
       not stay at home anymore and would have to leave because he had been
       kidnapped and his kidnappers may come back. On the  basis  of  this,
       the family immediately packed their bags and left.  The  appellant's
       son in the United Kingdom is only able to state that, on arrival  in
       the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  told  him  that  he  had  been
       kidnapped.  He stated that his father still had nightmares and 'is a
       changed person'. Mr Amiri gave evidence as to the  circumstances  of
       his own kidnap and describes how, when the  family  arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom, they were tired and  the  appellant  was  upset  and
       'looked like he had been through a lot'

   10. These witnesses gave evidence to the Judge.  In  his  determination,
       the Judge considered the appellant's claim that, after his visit  to
       the United Kingdom in June 2013, the appellant had been kidnapped on
       his return to Afghanistan for  a  day  and  released  and  this  had
       prompted him to make to take immediate - and life-changing  -  steps
       to leave for good. Whilst it was not in dispute that  Mr  Amiri  had
       been kidnapped (and this formed the basis for his  successful  claim
       to remain in the United Kingdom)  the  Judge  pointed  out  that  Mr
       Amiri's account of his own kidnap did not prove that  the  appellant
       himself had  been  kidnapped,  [31].  The  Judge  set  out  what  he
       described as a number  of  inconsistencies.  Although  he  does  not
       identify these inconsistencies in the same sentence, he  noted  that
       the appellant attributed these two  problems  with  the  interpreter
       although this had not previously been raised.  This  was  clearly  a
       matter the Judge was entitled to put in the balance as  he  assessed
       the evidence.

   11. He expressly stated that his kidnappers were the same kidnappers  as
       those who kidnapped his cousin. He sought to make good this point by
       asserting that his cousin knew one of the group, although he was not
       able to say what group these people belonged  to.  There  was  clear
       evidence from Mr Amiri that the persons involved in  his  kidnapping
       were extortionists intent upon making a financial gain but who  were
       not associated with the Taliban and  whose  purpose  was  simply  to
       extract a ransom. Later, however, the appellant changed his  account
       to the extent that he identified his kidnappers as  members  of  the
       Taliban. Clearly this is of some significance in an asylum claim  in
       that  it  might  suggest  that  his  kidnappers   have   a   greater
       geographical  influence  than  merely  a  criminal  group  of  three
       responsible for his - and his cousin's - abduction. At least in  the
       popular imagination, the  Taliban  have  organisational  skills  and
       power which exceeds those of individual extortionists.  In advancing
       a claim that the Taliban were responsible, it must be  obvious  that
       the threat they pose might extend beyond the  appellant's  locality,
       hence significantly increasing the risk.  The change  from  criminal
       kidnappers  to  Taliban,  if  accepted,  enhanced  the   appellant's
       prospects  of  a  successful  asylum  claim.   The  change  was  not
       therefore a change in detail that had no, or no material, impact  on
       the assessment.  It was an inconsistency, at least in the sense that
       it  amounted  to  an  alteration  in  what  had  been  a  clear  and
       intelligible identification of his abductors.


   12. The Judge was naturally concerned to see how  this  alteration  came
       about.  The appellant himself  described  it  as  the  result  of  a
       conversation he had with a contact in Afghanistan mentioned  by  the
       Judge in paragraph 31 of the determination and clearly  a  reference
       to paragraph 19 on his statement of 10 April 2014:

         "At the time of the interview  I  said  I  did  not  know  who  the
         kidnappers were. However, I  confirmed  that  since  the  interview
         Habibullah was kidnapped and  his  son  has  confirmed  it  is  the
         Taliban. I can only assume the gang that kidnapped me  and  [Amiri]
         was also Taliban. They operate in gangs. Some Taliban have guns and
         some operate collecting information. Taliban live amongst us and in
         hiding."

   13. This material poses as many problems as it purports to answer. It is
       to be recalled that in his interview, the  following  exchange  took
       place:


         Q: You said that you investigated and found out  that  your  cousin
         had been taken by kidnappers and not the Taliban and, what  do  you
         mean when you say that you investigated?
         A: They told me that there were no Talibans in that area.


       The identity of the kidnappers was a central plank of the claim.  Mr
       Amiri's claim was advanced on the basis that the  Taliban  were  not
       involved. Indeed, there were no members of the Taliban in the  area.
       The passage I have extracted from the  appellant's  April  statement
       and quoted in  paragraph  12  above  paints  a  radically  different
       picture, suggesting that the Taliban lived as part of the  community
       and went about in gangs. If this later account is correct, Mr  Amari
       was clearly mistaken in what he had to say.


   14.  The evidence of the appellant's witnesses may have  overcome  these
       uncertainties about the appellant's evidence.   There  is  no  doubt
       that the appellant took the evidence of the witnesses into  account.
       They were not, of course, impartial  in  the  sense  that  all  were
       probably  keenly  interested  in  securing  the   success   of   the
       appellant's asylum claim: the appellant's son settled in the  United
       Kingdom because, no doubt, he was interested in  having  his  father
       and mother join him in the United Kingdom;  Mr  Amiri,  his  cousin,
       because he might be able to secure for the  appellant  what  he  had
       legitimately secured for himself and his wife for even more  obvious
       reasons.  Moreover, their evidence was very limited.  In the  course
       of argument it was  described  as  being  evidence  of  'demeanour';
       impossible to dismiss as implausible or obviously incredible but, in
       substance, adding little to substantiate the appellant's claim.

   15. This does not mean that their evidence should be  dismissed  out  of
       hand and it was certainly capable  of  allaying  the  anxieties  the
       Judge felt about some elements of the claim.  However,  that  was  a
       matter for the Judge to assess in the overall consideration  of  the
       claim.  No single piece of evidence  had  the  right  to  be  called
       determinative.  Nor was the  assessment  a  numerical  one  -  three
       witnesses giving oral evidence  equates  with  -  or  trumps  -  one
       inconsistency in the appellant's account.  The most that  the  Judge
       could reasonably do was to satisfy the reader that he had taken into
       account the various sources of evidence and that the entire body  of
       material had played its part in the assessment.


   16.  This  is  what  the  appellant  said  in  paragraph   31   of   the
       determination:

         "The validity of the witness Mr Amiri's account of his  own  kidnap
         does not connote that the appellant must also have been  kidnapped.
         The appellant previously associated himself closely with Mr Amiri's
         kidnap, in the sense that he said that their  kidnappers  were  the
         same individuals or group. In oral evidence, however, the appellant
         stated that he did not know  who  kidnapped  him.  The  appellant's
         account contains a number of  inconsistencies.  The  appellant  has
         sought to attribute these to problems with  interpretation  in  the
         screening and asylum interviews. This interpretation issue has  not
         previously been raised. The appellant has expressly stated that his
         kidnappers were the same kidnappers as his cousin's kidnappers.  He
         claims that he learnt this because one of them knew him. He was not
         able to say what group these people belong to. He  claims  that  he
         has since learned via a contact in  Afghanistan  that  it  was  the
         Taliban who kidnapped him. It is not credible  that  the  appellant
         should have obtained such information, whilst his  cousin  who  was
         subjected to a verified kidnap, and who states that he  knows  that
         two of his kidnappers have been  arrested  and  released,  and  who
         communicates with others in Afghanistan, remains in ignorance as to
         the nature of the persons who  kidnapped  him.  The  appellant  has
         produced no evidence that might substantiate this claim, other than
         the fact of having told the story to his family  members  and  when
         claiming asylum, and I note that his wife  had  no  information  to
         offer as to who might have been involved in the alleged  kidnap  of
         her  husband.  The  appellant's  witnesses   were   not   able   to
         substantiate a basis for their support of the appellant in relation
         to his claim to have been kidnapped.  The  inconsistencies  in  the
         appellant's account regarding his alleged one-day kidnap  are  such
         that I have come to the conclusion that there is no basis of  truth
         in this claim."


   17. Approaching this crucial passage  stage  by  stage,  the  Judge  was
       clearly correct in stating the fact that Mr Amiri had been kidnapped
       did not establish that the appellant's account  of  being  kidnapped
       was also true. The Judge  was  also  correct  in  stating  that  the
       appellant identified  his  own  kidnappers  as  being  the  same  as
       kidnapped Mr Amiri.  He claimed that he knew this to be  so  because
       one of them knew him. He originally disclaimed any  suggestion  that
       he was aware of their identity  as  a  group.   The  Judge  properly
       contrasted this with  his  later  claim  that  his  kidnappers  were
       members of the Taliban.  The appellant had sought  to  explain  this
       change in stance by reference to  his  having  obtained  information
       which I have set out in paragraph 12 above. It is also  in  contrast
       with Mr Amiri's state of knowledge that he  knew  that  two  of  his
       kidnappers had been arrested and released.  Notwithstanding the fact
       that Mr Amiri is in contact with  those  in  Afghanistan,  Mr  Amiri
       remained in ignorance as to the nature of the persons who  kidnapped
       him.

   18. I am entirely satisfied that there were significant  inconsistencies
       both as between the appellant's earlier and later  accounts  and  as
       between the accounts of Mr Amiri and  the  appellant.  Although  the
       Judge had to be satisfied only to the  lower  standard,  he  had  to
       satisfy himself as to which of these various accounts was likely  to
       be true. In particular, he had to be satisfied as to the identity of
       the kidnappers.  It  is  little  wonder,  given  the  state  of  the
       evidence, that he was not satisfied.  Furthermore,  as  the  passage
       makes clear, the inconsistencies  were  put  to  the  appellant  who
       sought  to  explain  them  by  reference   to   difficulties   being
       experienced with the interpretation  of  the  screening  and  asylum
       interviews. It was, of course, a matter for the Judge  to  determine
       whether he accepted that explanation. For my part, the discrepancies
       that have been identified do not lie comfortably with  a  difficulty
       in interpretation. It is plain, however,  that  the  Judge  did  not
       accept that as an  explanation  and,  in  rejecting  it,  inevitably
       treated that as an example of how the appellant  was  attempting  to
       explain away a discrepancy that could not otherwise be explained.


   19. It is apparent that the Judge had well in mind the evidence  of  the
       appellant's witnesses which, as we have seen, amounted to a  re-hash
       of what the appellant had told them as well  as  some  insubstantial
       material about the demeanour to which  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
       place such weight as he saw fit and which he understandably  treated
       as being unpersuasive.  In  particular,  the  Judge  refers  to  the
       evidence of the appellant's wife who was unable to advance the claim
       to any significant degree, if at all.

   20. This consideration of the appellant's case was, of course,  made  in
       relation to the very singular features of  the  appellant's  account
       which I have already identified in paragraph 7 above:  his  original
       failure to identify the kidnappers, the mystery  of  the  individual
       who claimed to know the appellant  and  knew  enough  about  him  to
       describe him as innocent, the machinations  to  effect  his  release
       without payment and free of any adverse consequences by a group  who
       were then thought to be kidnappers whose sole purpose was to extract
       a ransom. It is quite impossible to make out a claim that the  Judge
       was, as a matter  of  law,  required  to  accept  this  account  was
       credible or  that  he  was  acting  perversely  or  irrationally  in
       concluding that it was incredible. A challenge on the basis that the
       Judge has failed to give adequate reasons is manifestly misconceived
       for the reasons that I have given. Similarly, a claim that the Judge
       failed to take into account the material evidence of the appellant's
       witnesses is also wide of the mark. The evidence of the witnesses is
       referred to in the passage and  commented  upon.  The  comments  are
       accurate and made good sense. An  examination  of  the  evidence  by
       reference to their statements indicates the little they were able to
       add to the appellant's claim. It was for the Judge to assess whether
       they were able to materially advance the claim and, given the nature
       of their evidence about demeanour, about their  reliance  upon  what
       they  had  been  told  by  the  appellant   himself,   about   their
       relationship with him and the likelihood that  they  could  not  put
       themselves forward as entirely independent and  objective  witnesses
       of the relevant events combined together to provide little that  was
       capable  of  shoring  up  the  weaknesses  in  the  appellant's  own
       evidence. There is no viable challenge that he  failed  properly  to
       assess the evidence of these witnesses.


   21. Given the appellant's inability to advance a credible  account,  his
       claim to be at risk in his home area failed. However, even if he had
       succeeded in establishing that he had been kidnapped, he  failed  to
       adduce credible evidence as to the identity  of  his  kidnappers  or
       that they had any reach beyond the locality in which  he  lived.  In
       particular, he failed to establish that they  were  members  of  the
       Taliban or, indeed, if they were, that they had a  reach  that  went
       beyond Kandahar so that they were able  to  communicate  with  their
       brethren in Kabul in identifying the appellant, identifying him as a
       target (a matter not established by the appellant's account of a one-
       day kidnap) such as to place him at risk even  if  he  relocated  in
       Kabul. Accordingly, even if the appellant had been able to establish
       shortcomings in the Judge's treatment of  the  events  in  Kandahar,
       there was no viable  case  advanced  by  the  appellant  capable  of
       undermining  the  Judge's  conclusion  in  paragraph   32   of   the
       determination that the appellant had failed to supply 'any  evidence
       that would support a conclusion that he is unable to relocate if  he
       so wished.'

DECISION

         The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original
         determination of the appeal shall stand.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            12 November 2014

