
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01164/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2014                      |  On 12th January 2015         |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                     TBA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a female citizen of Nigeria,  born  15  August  1979.
      The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  the  year  2000.   She
      said she had been trafficked into the United Kingdom along  with  four
      other girls by "a couple" who she had met in Lagos.   She  was  forced
      into prostitution and she then  said  that  in  2007  she  managed  to
      escape.  In 2010 she came into possession of a false EEA  Registration
      Certificate.   She  was  arrested  in  possession  of  that  document,
      prosecuted and sentenced to 8 months in prison.  At  the  end  of  her
      sentence in May 2011 she applied for asylum.  The  respondent  refused
      that application for reasons given in a refusal letter  dated  January
      2013.

Appeal History

   2. The appellant appealed that decision and in March 2013 her appeal came
      before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Page, who allowed  her  appeal
      on the basis that those who trafficked her were part of a gang and  as
      a result of the tribunal's determination in  PO  (Nigeria  CG)  [2009]
      UKAIT 00046 she would be at risk from that gang  upon  her  return  to
      Nigeria.

   3. The respondent sought leave to appeal that decision.  Leave to  appeal
      was granted and the matter then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb
      sitting at Newport on 4 July 2013.  In his determination  Judge  Grubb
      found a material error of law, remitted the appeal back to the  First-
      Tier Tribunal (other than Judge Page) to be considered again.

   4. In his determination Judge Grubb referred not  only  to  the  tribunal
      decision in PO (above),  but  also  the  subsequent  Court  of  Appeal
      decision referred to as PO (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  132.
      Judge Grubb noted that the Court of Appeal in PO preserved a number of
      the findings of the tribunal in PO as set out in  paragraphs  191  and
      192 of the country guidance case of PO (Nigeria).  In paragraphs 12 to
      16 of his decision Judge Grubb said this:

         "12. In allowing PO's appeal, the Court of Appeal simply set  aside
      the  AIT's  conclusions  in   relation   to   the   availability   and
      effectiveness of shelters provided to traffic victims by  NAPTIP.   In
      PO that was particularly important in relation to an appellant who had
      a young child, where  the  evidence  concerning  the  availability  of
      shelters to women with young children was in dispute.  That is not  an
      issue in this appeal as the appellant does not have a young child.

     13. Paragraph 191 of the AIT's decision sets out the  country  guidance
      and its conclusion that "in general the government of Nigeria is  both
      able and willing to discharge its own duty to protect its own national
      from people traffickers".  That finding survived the Court of Appeal's
      remittal of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Likewise, paragraph 192
      of the preserved  country  guidance  indentifies  that,  despite  that
      "general" sufficiency of protection,  a  claimant  may  have  a  well-
      founded fear  of  persecution  if  she  can  show  that  the  Nigerian
      authorities "know or ought to know of circumstances particular to  her
      case giving rise to fear", but "are unlikely to provide the additional
      protection" those particular circumstances reasonably require.  As the
      sub-paragraphs  of  paragraph  192  make  plain,   a   "very   careful
      examination" is required of the circumstances in  which  the  claimant
      was first trafficked, including whether she was  required  to  earn  a
      particular sum for the trafficker or gang and whether she has achieved
      her "target earnings".  The point being made is that the risk of being
      re-trafficked is likely to depend upon those circumstances.  Likewise,
      the AIT accepted  that  there  was  an  enhanced  risk  of  being  re-
      trafficked if the original trafficking  had  been  carried  out  by  a
      "collection of individuals".   The  guidance  concludes  that  in  the
      absence of evidence that a person has been trafficked by an individual
      it is "likely" that the trafficking was carried out by  a  "collection
      of individuals".

  14. In my judgment, Judge Page failed in paragraph 21 of his determination
      to give a "very careful  examination"  to  the  circumstances  of  the
      appellant.


      15. First, the Court of Appeal's decision  in  PO  (Nigeria)  did  not
      determine the outcome on  the  facts  of  this  appeal  without  more.
      Secondly, it was accepted that the appellant had been  trafficked  and
      it was also accepted that a "couple" had brought her to the  UK.   The
      judge made no further findings in  respect  of  the  circumstances  in
      which she was trafficked.  He made no finding for example whether  she
      was required to earn a particular sum of money and whether or not  she
      had met that target.  That, as the country guidance makes  plain,  was
      relevant to any risk of being re-trafficked on return.  Thirdly, it is
      not clear whether Judge Page found that the "couple"  were,  in  fact,
      part of a gang or "collection of individuals" that put  the  appellant
      in an enhanced risk category.  He merely stated that  they  "may  have
      been part of a gang".  Finally, Judge Page failed to give any  reasons
      or engage with the background evidence concerning the availability  of
      shelters  and  the  "sufficiency  of  protection"  that  the  Nigerian
      government would be able and willing to provide her  and  whether,  in
      light of any particular risk to her, it  would  provide  a  reasonable
      level of protection.  The AIT's finding in relation to  the  "general"
      level of protection that the state is both able and willing to provide
      set out in paragraph 191 was not referred to by the judge, perhaps  on
      the erroneous assumption that it had not survived the  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal which, of course, it had.


      16. In short, despite the Court of Appeal's decision in PO, the  judge
      was still required to consider  and  apply  the  country  guidance  in
      paragraphs 191 and 192 and to do so in the  light  of  the  background
      evidence submitted in the appeal.  In this appeal, unfortunately,  the
      judge did neither and as  a  result  his  finding  in  favour  of  the
      appellant is flawed in law and cannot stand".

  15. As result of Judge Grubb's decision the appeal then came before  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Troup,  again  sitting  at  Newport  on  20
      August  2013.   An  oral  hearing  was  held  and  both  parties  were
      represented.  For reasons set out in a decision dated 26 August  2013,
      Judge Troup dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   Judge
      Troup noted the decision of Judge Grubb and proceeded to consider  the
      appellant's appeal by reference to  the  case  of  PO  (Nigeria)  both
      before the tribunal and before the Court of Appeal.  In summary, Judge
      Troup found that the appellant had not been trafficked by a  gang  and
      that references to "the couple" could not be  regarded  as  autonomous
      with the existence of a gang.  Judge Troup noted the situation  in  PO
      (Nigeria) was not perfect, but  that  he  did  not  have  to  apply  a
      standard of "perfection".

  16. The appellant then sought leave to appeal Judge Troup's decision.  The
      matter came before a Designated Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  who,
      in summary, decided that Judge Troup had properly considered the  case
      and although there may well have been misleading references  to  "PO",
      there was no arguable error of law.  The appellant's  application  was
      renewed before the Upper Tribunal.  On 22 October 2013 Judge  Chalkley
      dismissed the application supporting the Designated Judge in  refusing
      permission.

  17. The appellant then challenged the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  the
      High Court by way of judicial review.  By an order dated 8  May  2014,
      Foskett J allowed the matter to be adjourned  for  oral  hearing.   In
      making the order Foskett J made certain observations  suggesting  that
      the judge who heard the  adjourned  application  for  judicial  review
      should  be  addressed  on  "the  current  state  of  the  authorities"
      concerning the risk of re-trafficking in Nigeria and  suggesting  that
      the country guidance case of PO was some years out of date.

  18. However despite these observations  the  judicial  review  proceedings
      were settled by "consent order" and  although  the  observations  were
      "noted" the disposal was merely a way of remittal back  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal for reconsideration.

  19. Thus the matter was listed before me to consider whether or not  Judge
      Troup made a material error of law in his determination of  26  August
      2013.

  20. Ms Fenney appeared for the appellant  (as  she  did  on  all  previous
      hearings).  Mr Irwin Richards appeared for the respondent.

  21. Ms Fenney was able to let me have sight of  the  order  of  Foskett  J
      which unfortunately had not reached my file.

  22. In her submission Ms Fenney argued that  Judge  Troup  had  failed  to
      properly take into account the country guidance case of PO, bearing in
      mind the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  PO  (Nigeria).   He  had
      misdirected himself with regard to the existence of "gangs".   In  the
      absence of evidence to the contrary a collection of people rather than
      individuals must be a gang.  The appellant had been found to have been
      trafficked by a couple.  They were not individuals they were  a  gang.
      The next issue was the availability in Nigeria of shelters for  people
      such as the  appellant.   The  Court  of  Appeal  had  considered  the
      question of "the gang point" in paragraphs 30 to 32 of their decision.
       Conclusions are reached at paragraphs  45  and  46.   Ms  Fenney  has
      submitted that Judge Troup had made a material error of law.

  23. Mr Richards in his submission said that it was wrong to  suggest  that
      Judge Troup had relied on  the  2009  case  rather  than  taking  into
      account the Court of Appeal case in 2011.   Paragraphs  16  to  21  of
      Judge Troup's  determination  sets  out  at  considerable  length  the
      judge's findings on protection upon return.  He has not  gone  against
      the country guidance case and there is no misdirection.  The level  of
      protection is still "Tier 2".  The judge had found that the  level  of
      protection had increased.

  24. Mr Richards went on to submit that the judge had  properly  considered
      whether or not there was a gang involved and had reached a  conclusion
      to which he was entitled.  The appellant had been held prisoner for  7
      years and the only people she came into contact with were  the  couple
      and her co-workers (paragraph 15).  The judge was wholly  entitled  to
      find no gang was involved.  There  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      available and the judge was entitled to that conclusion.

  25. In response Ms Fenney emphasised that there evidence of  deterioration
      of the protection in Nigeria.  It had gone from Tier 1 to Tier 2.

  26. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination which I now give
      with reasons.

  27. I have noted that the observations made by Foskett  J  have  not  been
      tested at any hearing before the High Court (or elsewhere).  They were
      merely noted in the consent  order.   There  is  suggestion  in  those
      observations that country guidance in this particular case could  well
      be out of date.  However no submissions have been to me to that effect
      and it is inappropriate for me to comment further.

  28. The issues before me are limited.  They are two in number, namely  the
      existence or otherwise of a gang  and  secondly  with  regard  to  the
      question of sufficiency of protection.

  29. Did Judge Troup make an error in his determination which was  material
      to the outcome of the appellant's appeal before  him.   A  reading  of
      Judge Troup's determination shows the possibility of some error in the
      references to the two cases bearing the title "PO (Nigeria)".  However
      such a reading of the determination shows that any mistake could  well
      be purely typographic.  Judge Troup clearly had in mind the difference
      between the tribunal's country guidance case and the subsequent  Court
      of Appeal  case.   He  clearly  understood  the  distinction  and  any
      typographic error certainly would not be material to  the  outcome  of
      his decision.

  30. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb has fully explained the findings of the two
      cases.  How they interrelate and the clear findings of  the  Court  of
      Appeal, especially with regard to the preserved paragraphs 191 and 192
      of the tribunal country guidance case.  It is neither appropriate  nor
      necessary for me to make further comment  as  Judge  Grubb's  comments
      have never been in issue.

  31. The two matters that  are  at  issue  are  in  respect  of  gangs  and
      sufficiency of protection.

  32. With regard to the existence or otherwise of a gang, Judge Troup  came
      to the firm conclusion that references to the "couple" did  not  infer
      the existence of a gang.  He concluded that they were two  individuals
      acting as a couple, which in the circumstances of  the  case  did  not
      amount to membership of a gang.  Judge Troup at paragraphs  13  to  15
      explains fully why he reached that conclusion.   That  conclusion  was
      based not only on the numbers included, but because throughout  the  7
      years of captivity the appellant saw  only  the  couple  and  her  co-
      workers.  The judge also noted the absence of target earnings  or  the
      absence of expectations of earnings.  For  the  reasons  given,  Judge
      Troup concluded that the appellant had not been trafficked by  a  gang
      and in doing so fully took into account the country guidance  case  as
      perfected by the Court of  Appeal  in  PO.   There  was  certainly  no
      evidence before the judge to  require  him  to  deviate  from  country
      guidance principles.

  33. Again, Judge Troup at paragraphs 16 onwards then turns his mind to the
      ability  and  willingness  of  the  Nigerian  authorities   to   offer
      protection to the  appellant.   For  the  reasons  set  out  in  those
      paragraphs, Judge  Troup  concludes  that  there  is  an  ability  and
      willingness to offer protection.   Ms  Fenney  argues  that  there  is
      evidence of a declining situation.  Nigeria having fallen from a  Tier
      1 to a Tier 2 position.  Mr Richards quite properly  points  out  that
      even at Tier 2 level there is sufficiency.  Judge Troup  at  paragraph
      22 finds:

         "The reception arrangements for victims of trafficking returning to
      Nigeria are not perfect but "perfection" is not the  standard  that  I
      have to apply".

  34. I conclude that that is a perfectly proper view  for  Judge  Troup  to
      take on the objective information that was before him.

  35. For these reasons I find that no material error of  law  is  contained
      within Judge Troup's  determination  and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
      dismissed.

  36. An anonymity direction has previously been made and no application has
      been made before me to vary that direction.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


