
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/01161/2011
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Manchester                      |Notice sent                  |
|On:  23rd September 2013                      |On: 23rd September 2013      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                MR O O B A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT
Representation:   Mr G Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
                    Mr G Brown (instructed by Greater Manchester Immigration
                    Aid Unit)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born 25th July 2006.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    to refuse him asylum.  Although he and his mother had  applied  together
    their appeals were separated and hers finally dealt with  and  dismissed
    before his.

 2. The Appellant lost his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  and  again
    on a rehearing before the Upper Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal sealed an
    Order by Consent on 17th July 2013 setting aside  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and remitting it to the Upper Tribunal to  be  redecided.
    Thus it came before me.







 3. While this case has been pursuing its course the Immigration Rules  have
    changed such that the Appellant would succeed on the basis that  he  was
    born in the UK more than 7 years  ago  and  his  mother  would  also  be
    entitled to remain as his carer.

 4. With this clearly in mind the Secretary of State has granted both  leave
    to remain.

 5. On that basis the  Appellant's  representative  requests  permission  to
    withdraw the Appellant's appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a whole, I
    give consent to the Appellant to withdraw his case.

 7. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 8. The effect of the  Appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

Date:   23rd September 2013













