

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01444/2012
                                                               AA/01623/2012
                                                               AA/01622/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Date Sent                    |
|on 10 January 2014                            |On 7 February 2014           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     J S
                                     HA
                                     MD

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Vokes, instructed by Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   The Appeal
     1. The appellants are citizens of Syria and are of Kurdish  ethnicity.
        The  first  appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  second  and  third
        appellants who are her 16 year old daughter and  her  15  year  old
        son, respectively.


     2. The appellants maintain that their rights under Article  8  of  the
        ECHR would be breached if they were removed to Norway  following  a
        decision of the respondent to that effect dated  30  January  2012.
        The respondent proposes to remove the family to  Norway  under  the
        Dublin II regulation as that is the country in  which  they   first
        claimed asylum.


     3. The matter comes before me to be re-made as  a  decision  of  Judge
        Aitken dated 26 December 2012 found that the determination of First-
        tier Tribunal Sacks disclosed an error on a point of law such  that
        it should be set aside and re-made.

   Background


     4. The appellants left Syria and  entered  Norway  in  June  2009  and
        claimed  asylum.  At  that  time  the  family  included  two  older
        children. Whilst the asylum applications were being  considered  HA
        was hit by a lorry in September 2010 and suffered serious head  and
        neck injuries.


     5. When the asylum claims of the family were refused  later  in  2010,
        immigration authorities went to the family home in  December  2010.
        The appellants maintain that  they  managed  to  escape  through  a
        window but that the two older children were removed  to  Syria  and
        have not been heard of since. The appellants then made arrangements
        to travel to the UK.

     6. The first and second appellants claimed asylum in the UK on 1 March
        2011. The third appellant, separated from  the  others  during  the
        journey from Norway, arrived in the UK in approximately  July  2011
        and also claimed asylum. When it became apparent  that  the  family
        had already claimed asylum in Norway, the respondent put  in  place
        the procedures to remove them to that country under the  Dublin  II
        regulation.

     7. The appellants maintained that they could not be removed to  Norway
        as the first appellant had formed a relationship in the UK  with  a
        British man of Iraqi Kurdish origin. The appellants  also  objected
        to removal to Norway as they maintained that HA had  suffered  from
        physical and psychiatric  problems  after  her  accident,  had  not
        received adequate treatment, and was traumatised by the raid on the
        family home in December 2010 and forced separation from  her  older
        siblings.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  those  arguments  but
        recognised that they were not wholly without merit and afforded the
        appellants an in-country right of appeal on  human  rights  grounds
        under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     8. In the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sacks, heard  on  13
        March 2012, the main argument for the appellants that JS was  in  a
        genuine relationship with her British partner and that  the  family
        could not be separated from him by being returned to Norway.  Judge
        Sacks did not accept that the relationship was genuine. Judge Sacks
        also did not accept that the second  appellant's  medical  problems
        amounted   to   circumstances   that   made   removal   to   Norway
        disproportionate.

     9. The first appellant subsequently married her British partner and it
        was evidence of that, amongst other matters, that led Judge  Aitken
        in December 2012 to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.

    10. A year has passed since then and circumstances have moved  on.  The
        first appellant does not dispute that her  husband  was  living  in
        Iraqi Kurdistan for most of 2013 and there is no  prospect  of  his
        return to the UK. The reasons for his absence were stated to be the
        health of his mother and threats from the first appellant's  family
        in Syria who objected to the  marriage.  Mr  Vokes  accepted  that,
        whatever the reason for the husband  now  living  abroad,  it  left
        little or no merit in the claim that the family should be  able  to
        remain in the UK on the basis of the relationship  with  the  first
        appellant's husband. As he put it, the case really centred  on  the
        health of the daughter, HA,  and  her  circumstances  if  she  were
        returned to Norway.

   My Findings

    11. Before proceeding to an Article 8 assessment it is expedient to set
        out and explain my reasons  for  finding  that  there  are  serious
        credibility problems with much of the evidence  in  this  case  and
        indicate my view of the medical evidence concerning HA.

    12. On arrival in the UK in March  2011  the  first  appellant  avoided
        speaking of asylum claim in Norway and maintained that she had only
        recently left Syria. She  stated  that  she  had  met  her  British
        partner in Iraq in 2007. She later changed this, stating  that  she
        had met him in Syria in 2004 and that he had visited her there on a
        number of occasions thereafter. This was then contradicted  by  her
        partner who stated that he only saw her in Syria in 2004  and  then
        again in Norway in 2009.

    13. Once  the  asylum  claims  in  Norway  came  to  light  by  way  of
        fingerprint checks, it also became apparent  that  the  family  had
        lived there and claimed asylum in false names. No  explanation  for
        that has been provided at any time.


    14. Further, on arrival in the UK the first appellant  maintained  that
        her first husband, the father of the children, had  died  in  2006.
        She later changed this to his  having  died  in  2002.  However,  a
        medical report from 2010 from Norway referred to  "Dad"  living  in
        another apartment, to one of the older siblings  having  "moved  to
        her father's" and to the parents "have separated  since  coming  to
        Norway". The first appellant also told the First-tier Tribunal that
        her husband had not travelled to Norway with her but had gone there
        "after me".  These references to her first husband and  the  father
        of the children  being  in  Norway  as  of  2010  have  never  been
        addressed or in any way explained by any of the appellants in their
        evidence.

    15. The appellants maintain that when the  immigration  authorities  in
        Norway came to detain them, the older siblings were taken away  and
        removed to Syria but they managed to escape through  a  window.  As
        above, the medical report suggests  that  one  sibling  was  living
        elsewhere, with the father. If the older siblings were separated at
        that point, the appellants cannot know  if  they  were  removed  to
        Syria or not, so that is merely speculation. In the context of  the
        other unreliable evidence before me, particularly  that  concerning
        the father, I did not find that I could accept that there has  been
        no contact with the older siblings since then  or  that  they  were
        removed to Syria.

    16. The first appellant maintains in  her  witness  statement  dated  3
        October 2010 that in 2012 one of her sisters in Syria obtained  the
        death certificate of  her  first  husband  and  she  used  this  to
        demonstrate that she was free to marry her  British  partner.  That
        death certificate has never been shown to  the  Tribunal,  however,
        the first appellant maintaining that it was kept  by  the  registry
        office. Where her marital history was clearly in dispute  in  these
        proceedings and she was legally represented, I found  it  adversely
        affected her credibility that she would not have kept even  a  copy
        of that document. It is merely her assertion that it  was  a  death
        certificate that was taken by the UK authorities as  evidence  that
        she was free to marry her British partner. As above, the  Norwegian
        medical report suggests that her first husband was alive in  Norway
        as of 2010, seriously undermining  the  reliability  of  the  death
        certificate the first appellant claims she obtained.

    17. There is also the evidence that JS's British husband chose to leave
        her shortly after the marriage and go to live in  Iraqi  Kurdistan.
        It is her evidence (and it was his before the First-tier  Tribunal)
        that they had wanted to be together for many years  and  that  this
        was why the family had travelled from Norway to the UK. I  did  not
        find that to be at all compatible with his decision to live  in  an
        entirely different country from shortly after  the  marriage  until
        now, not even returning to support the family in this appeal.

    18. I also find it  entirely  incredible  that  the  first  appellant's
        British husband would have gone to live in Iraq  on  the  basis  of
        threats from the  appellant's  family  in  Syria.  It  is  entirely
        unclear how such threats could be carried out where the family  are
        in Syria, a country currently in desperate  circumstances,  and  JS
        and her husband were in Coventry. There is no suggestion  that  the
        alleged threats were reported to the police or that protection  and
        assistance would not have been provided here  had  there  been  any
        substance to the threats.

    19.  The  first  appellant  relied  on  a  transcript  of  a  telephone
        conversation with her husband in which he told her of  the  threats
        from her family.  I did not find I could place any weight  on  that
        document. The first appellant has shown herself, as above, to be  a
        seriously unreliable witness. She could have taped  a  conversation
        with anyone along the lines of  that  evidenced  in  the  telephone
        transcript. Nothing before me indicates even to the lower  standard
        that the person speaking to the first appellant was located in Iraq
        at the time of the call or was her husband. I did not  find  it  at
        all credible that the husband would leave JS alone in the UK for an
        extended period  without  telling  her  the  real  reason  for  his
        departure, doing so only later in 2013 as a further appeal  hearing
        approached. I found the appellant's claim that her British  husband
        is in Iraq because of  threats  from  her  family  to  be  entirely
        unreliable, indeed, to be a fabrication.


    20. I set out these findings because it appeared to me that they showed
        that sufficiently unreliable evidence has been adduced  as  regards
        significant parts of  the  claim  that  any  evidence  put  forward
        concerning  HA's  medical  condition  and  the  claims  as  to  the
        circumstances of the family on return to  Norway  also  had  to  be
        approached with caution.

    21. It remains the case that there is some independent evidence of HA's
        medical problems. A Norwegian medical report from 2010 confirms her
        road traffic accident which caused head and neck injuries. However,
        the appellants maintain that HA did not receive adequate  treatment
        in Norway and that everything had  to  be  paid  for.  The  medical
        report from Norway indicates this not to be so, with  HA  receiving
        ongoing outpatient treatment and investigation of her problems, the
        intention being for her to be assessed for  special  needs,  to  be
        observed by nurses and have regular blood tests  and  liaison  with
        school over her fainting episodes. The appellants'  claim  that  HA
        was not given painkillers is countered by  the  indication  in  the
        medical report that it  was  considered  that  HA  was  using  them
        inappropriately and should discontinue them rather than there being
        a failure to provide her with necessary medication.

    22. The level of treatment shown in the medical  report  is  consistent
        with the country evidence on healthcare in Norway,  a  report  from
        the Norwegian Knowledge Centre for Health Services dated 2012. This
        indicates  that  undocumented  immigrants  are  only  entitled   to
        emergency acute care but these appellants have not shown that  they
        would be treated  as  undocumented  immigrants,  however.   The  UK
        authorities know of the asylum claims in Norway because the  family
        were registered  there.  They  were  given  accommodation  and  the
        Norwegian medical report indicates  that  HA  did  receive  ongoing
        outpatient care. The country evidence also shows  that  someone  of
        HA's age would receive free psychological care, the only  treatment
        that she is currently accessing in the UK.



    23. I accept that there is also  evidence  that  HA  has  continued  to
        experience difficulties since coming to the  UK,  albeit  it  is  a
        variable and sporadic picture. A GP in Stockton-on-Tees stated in a
        letter dated 21 February  2012  that  HA  experienced  anxiety  and
        headaches. She had not reported threats of suicide or self harm but
        considered that she might act impulsively if steps  were  taken  to
        remove her to Norway.

    24. There is an A & E letter dated 22 February 2012 stating that HA was
        admitted at that time but nothing to indicate what that was for.  A
        letter dated 13 March 2012 from as Consultant Clinical Psychologist
        at the Child  and  Adolescent  Mental  Health  Service  (CAMHS)  in
        Stockton-on-Tees refers to HA experiencing anxiety and having ideas
        that police  might  come  to  deport  her  but  that  she  was  not
        "struggling with any mental  health  difficulties  other  than  the
        anxiety described above" which related to her uncertain future. She
        was discharged from the service because of a lack of engagement.


    25. There is then a medical report at page 32 of the appellant's bundle
        confirming that HA was admitted to A & E after an overdose of pills
        in October 2012. I have no information as to any follow-up to  that
        admission.


    26. The next evidence is in a letter  dated  9  October  2013  from  Ms
        Turner, a counsellor and nurse, who states that she had seen HA  on
        four occasions. Her letter suggests that HA  attempted  suicide  in
        Norway but this is not confirmed in the evidence  from  HA  or  her
        mother or any information from Norway. Ms Turner reports  that  the
        appellant continued to suffer from her experiences in Norway,  both
        the accident and the removal of her  siblings,  and  feared  return
        there. Mr Turner considered that the appellant's  threats  to  kill
        herself if returned to Norway should be taken seriously as she  had
        already attempted suicide and appeared genuine.

    27. It was not my conclusion that this letter could  be  taken  at  its
        highest, however. Ms Turner is  not  a  qualified  psychiatrist  or
        psychologist. She had only seen  HA  four  times  at  the  time  of
        writing. The letter is relatively brief and does not  set  out  any
        objective medical or other criteria against which  the  seriousness
        of any threat of suicide or self-harm was assessed. It is therefore
        somewhat subjective and I did not find  that  I  could  place  full
        weight on it.


    28. An email from HA's school indicates  that  she  became  anxious  in
        October 2013 as an appeal hearing approached.  She  behaved  in  an
        inappropriate manner and out of character, stating an intention  to
        self-harm if she were returned to Norway.

    29. In November 2013 HA saw an independent psychiatrist who prepared  a
        report for these proceedings.  HA told the psychiatrist  of  having
        nightmares of being chased by people with knives and  being  afraid
        of a police raid and of experiencing low mood.  She  was  diagnosed
        with PTSD and a depressive disorder. The  psychiatrist  recommended
        an antidepressant and trauma-focussed Cognitive Behaviour  Therapy.
        At  the  hearing,  the  first  appellant  stated  that  the  latter
        treatment had commenced but that HA was not on medication.

    30. The psychiatrist was asked to state whether  HA's  suicide  threats
        were genuine but states only that "[t]hese thoughts should be taken
        seriously and should be treated on an urgent basis." He went on  to
        state that "removal to Norway at this stage would  have  a  massive
        negative impact on her mental health and behavioural adjustment. It
        is likely that it will trigger significant suicidal  behaviour  and
        personal pain."

    31. I had some difficulty with this conclusion. The psychiatrist had  a
        limited knowledge of and contact with HA.  Nothing  in  the  report
        indicates that  self-harm or suicidal ideation was  discussed  with
        her at all  so  it  was  not  clear  to  me  how  a  conclusion  of
        "significant suicidal behaviour" could have been reached merely  on
        the basis of information from other reports. That  is  additionally
        so where some of the other medical evidence  that  was  before  the
        psychiatrist, particularly that of a CAMHS consultant who had  seen
        HA more than once, stated that  she  did  not  have  mental  health
        problems. The GP in Stockton also stated that there were  no  ideas
        of suicide or self-harm. The information in those documents is  not
        evaluated in the psychiatrist's report. Nor is  HA's  disengagement
        and discharge from CAMHS in 2012 and the absence of any actual self-
        harm since October 2012 despite the reported increase in anxiety in
        the  autumn  of  2013  as  return  to  Norway  became  more  of   a
        possibility.

    32. Further, no assessment is made of how HA would present if she  were
        properly supported during her return to Norway or of how she  could
        be assisted to deal with her problems once in  Norway.  It  is  not
        disputed that proper procedures to assist her  during  her  removal
        from the UK would be put in place. The conclusion as to the risk of
        suicide was prepared without the  information  as  to  HA's  father
        being in Norway as recently as 2010. The report is also based on an
        acceptance  of  the  older  siblings  being  forcibly  removed  and
        disappearing, something which is not  accepted  by  me.  Also,  the
        report is very brief. There is almost no information as to what  HA
        actually said to  the  psychiatrist.  If  it  was  merely  what  is
        recorded at paragraph 4 of the report, that cannot be sufficient to
        underpin the conclusions. There is no indication of  how  long  the
        examination lasted or whether an interpreter was used.


    33. In summary, I did not accept the  evidence  that  HA  would  become
        suicidal or self-harm on return to Norway. I accept that  she  took
        an overdose of pills in October 2012 but that was well over a  year
        ago and there is nothing to indicate any other actual self-harm  at
        any other time, even though she has had very  little  treatment  in
        the UK. It  is  entirely  understandably  has  some  mental  health
        problems  following  her  difficult  life  experiences,   certainly
        anxiety and a subjective fear of return to  Norway  where  she  was
        seriously injured and does not feel she was adequately  treated.  I
        did not find that it had been shown that  she  is  currently  at  a
        serious risk of self-harm either in the UK or on removal to Norway,
        however.

   Article 8 ECHR

    34.  The  parties  were  in  agreement  that  the  provisions  of   the
        Immigration Rules in force from 9 July 2012 onwards did  not  apply
        to this appeal. I referred to the questions identified as  relevant
        in Article 8 cases which were set out by Lord Bingham in  paragraph
        17 of the judgement in the  case  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  as
        follows:


           (1) Will the proposed removal be an  interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


           (2) If so, will such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


           (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


           (4) If so,  is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well- being of the country, for the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


           (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?

    35. The issue of family  life  is  not  greatly  engaged  here  as  the
        appellants will be removed together. There was no dispute that  the
        appellants have a private life in the UK as they have been here for
        nearly 3 years. The children are in  school  and  HA  has  received
        treatment set out above.


    36. No dispute arose as  to  the  next  three  Razgar  questions  being
        answered in the  appellant's  favour  and  the  advocates  properly
        focussed the remainder of their submissions on proportionality  and
        the important part played by the best interests of the children  in
        this matter.

    37. I first considered the best  interests  of  the  second  and  third
        appellants. I referred to the guidance provided in ZH (Tanzania)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  4.  I  also
        referred to MK (best interests of child) India  [2011]  UKUT  00475
        (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal held that:


          (i)     The best interests of the child is a broad notion and  its
   assessment requires              the taking into account and weighing  up
   of diverse factors, although in  the            immigration  context  the
   most important of these have been identified by              the  Supreme
   Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Court of  Appeal             in
   AJ (India) [2011] EWCA  Civ  1191  and  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  E-A
   (Article 8 -best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC);


          (ii)    Whilst an important part of ascertaining what are the best
   interests of the             child is to seek to discover the child's own
   wishes and views (these being             given due weight in  accordance
   with the age and maturity of the child) the            notion  is  not  a
   purely subjective one and requires an objective assessment;


          (iii)   Whilst consideration of the best interests of the child is
   an integral part of              the Article 8  balancing  exercise  (and
   not something apart from it), ZH              (Tanzania) makes clear that
   it is a matter which has to be addressed first              as a distinct
   inquiry.   Factors   relating   to   the   public   interest    in    the
   maintenance of effective immigration control must not form  part  of  the
     best interests of the child consideration;


          (iv)    What is required by consideration of the best interests of
   the child is an              "overall assessment" and it follows that its
   nature and outcome must be            reflected in the wider Article 8(2)
   proportionality assessment.                   Consideration of  the  best
   interests of the child cannot be reduced to a mere              yes or no
   answer  to  the  question  of  whether  removal  of  the   child   and/or
   relevant parent is or is not  in  the  child's  best  interests.  Factors
   pointing for            and against the best interests of the child being
   to stay or go must not be             overlooked; and


          (v)     It is important when considering a  child's  education  to
   have regard not              just to the evidence relating to any  short-
   term disruption of current                schooling that will  be  caused
   by any removal but also to that relating to            the  impact  on  a
   child's        educational        development,        progress        and
   opportunities in the broader sense.


    38. The appellants maintain that it is in the  best  interests  of  the
        children to remain in the UK rather than going to Norway. It was my
        conclusion that the evidence on this question did give a definitive
        answer. As above, the evidence as to HA becoming suicidal or  self-
        harming if returned to Norway  was  not  particularly  strong.  The
        suggestion  that  she  would  not  receive  treatment  or  adequate
        treatment is not supported by the evidence before me.  The  country
        evidence suggests that HA would be able to  received  free  CBT,  a
        treatment similar to the only treatment she is currently  receiving
        in the UK. I have set out the evidence above  suggesting  that  her
        father may be in Norway, a presumably positive factor. She  and  MD
        will be returning with the current family unit intact.  HA  and  MD
        refer to more limited educational facilities for asylum seekers  in
        Norway and to experiencing  racism  there.  I  had  no  independent
        evidence  of  limited  or  inadequate  education   facilities   for
        immigrants in Norway or of the number of  racist  incidents  there.
        Without such evidence I did not find that these could be  taken  to
        be significant factors as regards whether the children were in  the
        UK or Norway.


    39. I accept that the appellants all  have  a  subjective  belief  that
        their lives are better in the UK, however. The children have stated
        clearly that they do not want to go there and I  accept  that  they
        will have bad memories of HA's accident  and  experienced  life  as
        being more difficult for them  in  Norway.   I  accept  that  their
        reluctance, whether well-founded or not, tips the balance minimally
        in favour of the children's best interests being  in  remaining  in
        the UK.


    40. I must therefore weigh  this  assessment  of  the  children's  best
        interests as a primary factor when assessing whether  the  decision
        to return the  family  to  Norway  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
        interference to their private lives. I have found that it  is  only
        by a small margin that children's best interests lie  in  remaining
        in the UK. That must be weighed  against  the  public  interest  in
        maintaining an effective  immigration  system  which  requires  the
        family to pursue their asylum claims in  the  European  country  in
        which they first arrived and made those claims.  Where  Norway  has
        accepted responsibility for  the  family,  it  must  weigh  heavily
        against the public interest for the UK to continue to maintain  and
        accommodate them and educate the children. They have not claimed to
        have any particularly strong links to the UK  now  that  the  first
        appellant's husband is in Iraq. Norway is a developed country  with
        adequate healthcare, asylum, education and other systems in  place.
        The family are familiar with the country  to  some  extent,  having
        spent over a year there even if they  have  spent  approximately  3
        years since then in the UK. There is no suggestion that the  family
        would be refouled from Norway to a country where  they  would  face
        serious harm.

    41. It was therefore not my conclusion that the decision to remove  the
        family to Norway amounted to a disproportionate  interference  with
        their private lives.


Decision

    42. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Dated: 28 January 2014
