
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA018182015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd August 2017                        |On 10 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     rr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis of Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  I  Ross  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 25th April 2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a male Sri Lankan citizen born 3rd December 1985.   His
    asylum and human rights claim was refused on 19th January 2015.

 4. The appeal was considered by the FtT on 8th March 2017 and  allowed  on
    asylum grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   In  summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  given
    inadequate reasons for finding the claimant would be at risk.   It  was
    contended that the FtT, with reference to GJ Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 (IAC) had not adequately explained which risk category the claimant
    fell into.

 6. It was  submitted  that  the  FtT  finding  that  the  claimant  had  a
    significant role in post-Tamil separatism seemed  wholly  unsustainable
    in view of the fact that the  FtT  found  that  the  claimant  had  not
    undertaken any LTTE activities in the UK, and had only participated  in
    a few protests and remembrances.

 7. It was pointed out that GJ makes it clear that  attendance  at  one  or
    more demonstrations is insufficient to place an individual at risk, and
    the Sri Lankan authorities use sophisticated  intelligence  to  monitor
    activities in the diaspora.

 8. The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal,  Judge  Foudy
    finding the grounds arguable.

 9. Following the grant of permission the claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Directions were issued  making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mrs Aboni relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal, submitting that the FtT  had  misdirected  itself
    when considering  risk  categories,  and  had  not  explained  how  the
    claimant fell into any of the risk  categories  outlined  in  GJ.   Mrs
    Aboni submitted that the FtT had failed to give  adequate  reasons,  at
    paragraph 24, for concluding that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    retain an interest in him, and had failed to explain why  he  would  be
    perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities to have a significant  role  in
    Tamil separatism.

11. Mr Lewis argued that the FtT had not materially erred in  law.   I  was
    asked to note that the Secretary of State had not  challenged  the  FtT
    finding that the claimant had  been  arrested  in  Sri  Lanka  on  23rd
    September 2013, and had been ill-treated while in detention.  Mr  Lewis
    pointed out that this arrest took place after the Sri  Lankan  conflict
    ended.

12. Mr Lewis submitted that the claimant  fell  within  the  risk  category
    outlined at paragraph (7)(a) of the head note to GJ.  The  reason  that
    the claimant  had  been  arrested  was  because  he  was  suspected  of
    belonging to the LTTE international network.

13. I was reminded that it was  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of  State  at
    paragraph 168 of GJ that individuals in custody in Sri Lanka  continued
    to be at risk of physical abuse, and that such risk is persecutory.

14. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The Secretary of State has not challenged  the  FtT  finding  that  the
    claimant was arrested in September 2013 and subsequently  detained  and
    tortured.  The claimant's account was that  he  was  detained  for  six
    days, and tortured, before being released after payment of a bribe.

16. The claimant's case was that he was arrested  because  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities suspected  him  of  belonging  to  the  LTTE  international
    network.  This was accepted by the FtT as the reason  for  his  arrest,
    the FtT finding at paragraph 21 that the claimant had given a  credible
    account of his arrest and detention in September 2013.

17. As pointed out by Mr Lewis, the claimant was therefore  arrested  after
    the civil war in Sri Lanka ended in May 2009.

18. As the arrest and detention has not been the subject of  any  challenge
    from  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  finding  by  the  FtT   stands.
    Therefore, in my view,  the  FtT  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  in
    September 2013, the Sri Lankan authorities had an adverse  interest  in
    the claimant.  That was because he was suspected of being  involved  in
    the LTTE  international  network.   The  FtT,  having  found  that  the
    claimant had been tortured, was entitled at paragraph 22 to have regard
    to paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules, which states that the  fact
    that a person has already been subject to persecution or serious  harm,
    will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's  well-founded
    fear of persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

19. I find that the  FtT  was  therefore  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    claimant would be at real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm,  with
    reference to paragraph (7)(a) of the head note to GJ, because there was
    a risk that he would be perceived to be a threat to  the  integrity  of
    Sri Lanka as a single state, and that he would be perceived to  have  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism.   The
    FtT did not find that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  having  arrested,
    detained and ill-treated the claimant, were satisfied that  he  had  no
    involvement in post-conflict Tamil separatism.

20. I find that the challenge raised by the Secretary of State, displays  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached by  the  FtT,  but  does  not
    disclose a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The FtT did not materially err in law.  The decision of the FtT  stands  and
the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the claimant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  claimant  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the  claimant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made because the  claimant
has made a claim for international protection, and is made pursuant to  rule
14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date         7th August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands, so  does  the  decision  to  make  a  fee
award.






Signed                              Date         7th August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

