
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01177/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2015                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Vatish of Counsel instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal involves  the  interests  of  a  minor  I  continue  the
    anonymity direction which I made when this matter first came before  me
    in the Upper Tribunal on 26th October 2015.

 2. In my decision sent out on 5th November 2015 I reached  the  conclusion
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  this  case  showed  an
    error on a point of law in relation to human rights issues  only.   The
    judge's decision to  refuse  the  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    claims was not affected by the error and could stand.

 3. The judge who granted permission to appeal on 31st July 2015 thought it
    arguable that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the  application  of
    section EX.1. of Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules  because  of  an
    erroneous conclusion (paragraph 93 of the First-tier decision) that the
    appellant did not fulfil the eligibility requirement as a partner under
    paragraph E-LTRP.2.2.2. at sub-section (b) as  he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration laws.  It was  thought  arguable  that
    the provisions of EX.1. should, in fact, have been considered.

 4. At the initial hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal I indicated that
    I was satisfied that the decision showed an error on  a  point  of  law
    because of the First-tier Judge's failure to consider the provisions of
    paragraph EX.1.  In reaching that conclusion I  pointed  out  that  the
    First-tier Judge had been wrong to find  that  the  appellant  did  not
    fulfil the eligibility requirements  set  out  in  E-LTRP.2.1.  and  E-
    LTRP.2.2., particularly sub-section (b). That was because  the  correct
    reading of  sub-paragraph  (b)  did  not  exclude  the  application  of
    paragraph EX.1. where an applicant is in breach of immigration laws.

 5. My conclusion was also reached on the basis  that  the  respondent  had
    been wrong to assert, because of Home Office "guidance", that paragraph
    EX.1. could not apply to him because his relationship with his  partner
    had  not  existed  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
    application.  In reaching conclusions about that matter it  is  evident
    that both I and representatives failed to take into  consideration  the
    provisions of paragraph GEN.1.2. in Appendix FM which defines "partner"
    as a person who has been  living  together  with  the  applicant  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership  for  at  least  two
    years prior to the date of application.  Although,  in  the  First-tier
    decision, the judge was satisfied that the parties were  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship which had lasted for over  two  years  from
    October 2012 the appellant's application to the respondent was on  16th
    July 2012 and so his partnership still fell outside the  definition  in
    GEN.1.2. so he could not benefit from the provisions of paragraph EX.1.



 6. This matter therefore proceeds on the basis that the  First-tier  Judge
    was in error on a  point  of  law  in  failing  to  consider  that  the
    provisions of paragraph EX.1. might apply in respect of the appellant's
    relationship with his  partner  and  partner's  child  although,  as  I
    indicate in my decision, below, full consideration of the matter  leads
    me to conclude that the applicant  cannot  benefit  from  the  specific
    provisions of paragraph EX.1. in respect of either category.

The Hearing and the Appellant's Case

 7. The appellant gave evidence adopting, as evidence-in-chief, the content
    of his statement which  appears  on  pages  15  to  23  of  his  bundle
    submitted by representatives  on  27th  November  2015.   In  this,  he
    confirms that his partner, Dr K, has settled status and her  son,  born
    on 4th May 2005, is a British citizen.  He claims to  have  been  in  a
    durable relationship with his partner  from  the  time  they  moved  in
    together as a couple in October 2012.  He explains that he is unable to
    produce any utility bills, bank statements or  letters  confirming  his
    residence with his partner because his lack of status does  not  enable
    him to open accounts or take employment.  He concedes that he does  not
    contribute financially towards his family.  His partner  is  a  medical
    doctor with a "substantive" salary and she is the breadwinner  for  the
    family whilst he is the homemaker.

 8. The appellant claims that his relationship with his partner's  son,  H,
    is "very strong".  He is known as "uncle".  They spend a  lot  of  time
    together whilst his partner is at work.  In particular he cares  for  H
    whilst his partner does nightshifts. He prepares meals for H, picks him
    up from school, takes him to extracurricular activities and assists him
    with his school work.  He claims to have been able to provide a  family
    life that was missing before.  He hopes that, if allowed  to  stay,  he
    will be able to marry his partner.

 9. The appellant concedes that his partner has not told her parents  about
    the relationship because of his  lack  of  immigration  status  in  the
    United Kingdom although their plans for the future would enable them to
    enjoy a normal family life.  He  claims  that  considerable  disruption
    will be caused to his partner and her child if his appeal fails.

10. During cross-examination  the  appellant  indicated  that  H's  natural
    father has a court order enabling him to  see  his  son  during  school
    holidays.  He visits his father for periods of up  to  two  weeks.   He
    said that his partner had been separated for two years from her  former
    husband before meeting him.  When his partner lived on her own she  had
    an au pair to look after H whilst she was at work.  He  explained  that
    his partner is an anaesthetist at [ - ] Hospital.

11. Dr K then gave evidence.  She adopted her statement which commences  on
    page 19 of the bundle.  In this she states that she obtained indefinite
    leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  1st  December  2014  and
    describes herself as a "single mother".  Her son's father is Dr M  from
    whom she was divorced in 2009.  She has an order giving her custody  of
    her son which was made on 15th April 2013 in the [ -  ]  County  Court.
    Her ex-husband has regular  contact  with  his  son,  nevertheless,  in
    accordance with the terms of the custody order.  (Pages 151 to  153  of
    the bundle).

12. Dr K states that she became romantically involved with the appellant in
    2011 before he moved in in October 2012.  When she  met  him  it  never
    occurred to her to enquire into his  immigration  status.   She  claims
    that the presence of the appellant in her family has created  the  best
    years of their  lives.   H  has  benefited  from  the  care  which  the
    appellant  provides  particularly  when  Dr  K  works  at  night.   The
    appellant makes sure that H goes to school on time, is picked up,  eats
    well and is well dressed and presented.  He also makes  sure  that  his
    homework is done.  They all go out together as a family.  Dr K believes
    she would never have been able to continue her professional commitments
    had the appellant not entered her life.  She and the appellant wish  to
    get married but plans for this  cannot  proceed  until  he  is  granted
    status.  She states  that,  from  the  moment  she  learned  about  his
    immigration status, she has supported his claim.

13. At the hearing Dr K asserted that her son is physically and emotionally
    dependent upon her and her partner and could not say how it would be if
    he was forced to leave.  She believes that her son is more attached  to
    the appellant than his natural father.

14. During cross-examination Dr K said that her son speaks to his father on
    the phone and gets presents from him.  She agreed that her son  was  of
    dual nationality and had visited Sri Lanka  to  see  his  grandparents.
    This had happened at least every two years.  She also agreed  that  her
    former husband was from Sri Lanka.  She contacts her father in Ipnapura
    once a week.  She hopes to obtain a British passport shortly.  She said
    that her son calls his natural father "daddy".

Submissions

15. Mr McVeety made  submissions  on  the  basis  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph EX.1. might apply.  This was therefore on the basis  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect  Dr  K's  son  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and that there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life
    between the appellant and his partner continuing outside UK.

16. Mr McVeety submitted that, although H is close to  the  appellant,  his
    relationship with him is not akin to a parent.  It was clear  that  the
    child knew who his father is and sees him regularly.  On this basis  it
    could not be said that there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with that child.   As  to  the  existence  of  significant
    obstacles to family life continuing in Sri Lanka, Mr McVeety  submitted
    that there were clearly significant connections with Sri Lanka for  the
    appellant and his partner.   Further,  both  grandparents  were  living
    there and H had visited the country to see them.  There was  no  reason
    why all parties could not go to Sri Lanka to continue their family life
    bearing in mind that H has  dual  nationality.   He  thought  that,  in
    respect of the court order relating to contact, it was clear  that  the
    child's natural father could visit Sri Lanka also.  The order could  be
    varied.

17. Mr McVeety also made reference to the Court of Appeal  decision  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 on the basis  that  Article  8  imposed  no
    general obligation on a state to facilitate a couple's choice to reside
    here.  Human rights issues outside the Immigration Rules could only  be
    considered where  compelling  circumstances  existed  not  sufficiently
    recognised under  those  Rules.   In  this  case  there  were  no  such
    compelling circumstances.  In relation to the prospect of the appellant
    returning to Sri Lanka to reapply to join his partner this  was  not  a
    case where there would be any financial problems.  He believed it would
    not be disproportionate for the appellant to be returned on that basis.
     Under the provisions of Section 117B the appellant had not  shown  the
    English language ability required and little weight should be given  to
    a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  particularly  in
    relation to private life, at a  time  when  that  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  He also reminded me that the respondent did  not
    accept that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the appellant's partner's child.

18. Finally, Mr McVeety submitted that, even  if  the  matter  were  to  be
    considered outside the Rules there  were  no  compelling  circumstances
    which could lead to the conclusion  that  Article  8  rights  had  been
    breached.

19. Ms Vatish relied upon her skeleton argument.  This concentrates on  the
    application of the Immigration Rules  particularly  the  provisions  of
    paragraph EX.1. on the basis that this  can  be  applied  both  to  the
    partnership claim and the child's interests.  As  to  the  court  order
    granting specific rights of access to [H]'s natural father she asserted
    that any alteration to that order in relation to a move  to  Sri  Lanka
    was speculative.  She reminded me  that  the  appellant's  partner  has
    settled status in the United Kingdom and  is  now  able  to  apply  for
    British nationality to make UK  her  home.   She  emphasised  that  the
    evidence should lead to the conclusion that the appellant is part of  a
    closely-knit family unit involving his partner and  her  child.   There
    would therefore be significant  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside the United Kingdom.  She also reminded me that [H]  is  now  10
    and is a British citizen and it would not be reasonable to expect  that
    child to leave [the] UK, particularly bearing in mind his mother's work
    in UK and her intention to continue life here.

20. In conclusion Ms  Vatish  drew  my  attention  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Hayat [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC)  about  the  significance  of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 which was to make it  plain  that,  where  the
    only  matter  weighing  on  the  respondent's  side  of  an  Article  8
    proportionality  balance  is  the  public  policy   of   requiring   an
    application to be made under the Immigration Rules  from  abroad,  that
    objective can be outweighed by factors resting on the appellant's  side
    of the balance which is  not  confined  to  cases  where  children  are
    involved.

21. Ms Vatish urged me to allow the appeal.

Decision and Reasons

22. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the
    standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.

23. My approach to this appeal is guided by the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.   I  have  first  considered
    whether, in relation to the Article 8 issues  raised,  the  Immigration
    Rules, particularly those set out in Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE,
    can benefit the appellant and then, if not, I have  considered  whether
    there are any  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules which require a grant of leave.

24. I have already indicated that the partnership rules under  Appendix  FM
    cannot benefit the appellant.  Although it would  appear,  particularly
    from the analysis set out in Ms Vatish's skeleton  argument,  that  the
    appellant  can  meet   the   general,   suitability   and   eligibility
    requirements set out in Appendix FM to enable paragraph EX.1 to  apply,
    those assertions do not  take  into  consideration  the  definition  of
    partner set out in GEN.1.2.  That is, a person who has been living with
    the applicant in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership
    for at least two years prior to the date of application (my  emphasis).
    Whilst the First-tier Judge originally hearing  this  appeal  concluded
    that the parties were in a relationship akin to marriage for  at  least
    two years, that did not take account of the fact that  the  application
    which forms the basis of this appeal, was made on 16th July 2012  at  a
    screening interview when the parties  did  not  start  living  together
    until October 2012.  Although section R-LTRP  applies  paragraph  EX.1,
    the eligibility provisions in E-LTRP.1.2 - 1.12. are also to be met. In
    each case reference is made to a partnership within the limited meaning
    set out in GEN.1.2.  Thus, the Rules cannot benefit  the  appellant  in
    relation to the claimed partnership.

25. As to the appellant's claimed relationship with his partner's child the
    eligibility requirements set out in E-LTRPT.2.3 require  the  applicant
    to have sole parental responsibility  for  the  child  or  (under  sub-
    paragraph (b)) the parent or carer with whom the child  normally  lives
    must be not only a person settled in the United Kingdom  or  a  British
    citizen but not the partner of the applicant (which includes  a  person
    who has been in a relationship with the applicant  for  less  than  two
    years prior to the date of application).

26.  I  am  unable  to  conclude  that  the  applicant  has  sole  parental
    responsibility for his  partner's  child  as  clearly  there  is  joint
    responsibility with additional responsibility resting with the  child's
    natural father who has the  benefit  of  a  custody/family  arrangement
    order.  The appellant  clearly  cannot  benefit  from  the  alternative
    requirements set out in sub-paragraph (b) as he is the partner  of  the
    applicant and a  person  who  had  been  in  a  relationship  with  the
    applicant for less than two years prior to  the  date  of  application.
    Thus, paragraph EX.1. is excluded from consideration in relation to the
    appellant's partner's child.

27. As to the application of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,  it
    is necessary for me to consider whether or  not  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into Sri Lanka  if
    required to leave UK.  The evidence put before me does  not  show  that
    there would be such obstacles.  The appellant is of Sri Lankan  origin,
    it has been decided that he is not a refugee from that country, and has
    relatives there.  Although the appellant has been in the United Kingdom
    since 2004 he spent his youth and formative years in Sri Lanka.  He can
    re-integrate into Sri Lankan society with little difficulty.

28. As I  have  concluded  that  the  appellant  cannot  benefit  from  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules in relation to his claim to  remain
    in UK on human rights grounds, I have considered whether there are  any
    compelling circumstances which would enable me to consider  his  claims
    outside the Immigration Rules having  regard  to  the  public  interest
    consideration found in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 in relation to the proportionality of the  respondent's
    decision. My conclusions on that matter follow.

29. The appellant has failed to benefit from the Immigration Rules for  the
    principle reason that  he  has  not  been  in  a  partnership  for  the
    requisite two year period before his application.  Nevertheless,  as  I
    am able to conclude, as the First-tier Judge did, that the appellant is
    in a genuine and subsisting partnership akin to marriage with  Dr  K  I
    consider this is a circumstance not sufficiently recognised  under  the
    Rules in relation to an Article 8 claim which requires consideration at
    the date of hearing.  I have therefore gone on to consider whether  the
    circumstances of the appellant's relationship with his partner and  her
    child point to a breach of Article 8 family and private life rights  if
    the parties are returned.  In doing so I have applied  the  five  stage
    Razgar tests.

30. In reaching my conclusion  that  the  parties  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  akin  to  marriage,   I   have   taken   into
    consideration the consistent evidence  which  both  appellant  and  his
    partner have given about his involvement in family  life  incorporating
    the significant assistance which he gives to the appellant's  child,  a
    British citizen.  The appellant has, I accept, shown that he  has  been
    in this relationship since  he  started  living  with  his  partner  in
    October 2012, over three years ago.

31. As far as the appellant's relationship  with  his  partner's  child  is
    concerned, I am not able  to  conclude  that  this  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.   The  child  clearly  continues  his
    relationship with  his  natural  father  whom  he  sees  during  school
    holidays as permitted by the custody order.  [H] still calls his father
    "daddy" and the appellant is referred to as  "uncle".   In  R  (On  the
    application of RK) (s.117B(6); parental relationship") IJR [2016]  UKUT
    31 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal concluded that, whether a  person  who  is
    not a biological parent is in a "parental relationship"  with  a  child
    for the purposes of Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act,  depends  on  the
    individual circumstances and whether the  role  that  individual  plays
    establishes he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a  parent.   That
    is not the case here.  Whilst it is clear that the appellant cares  for
    his partner's child and has established a good relationship  with  that
    child, there is no doubt that the  child's  natural  father  retains  a
    strong paternal interest by exercising his  access  rights.   Whilst  I
    accept that it is not beyond the bounds of possibility for there to  be
    two individuals having a parental relationship with a  child  with  the
    existence of a de facto step-parent, I do  not  conclude  that  such  a
    situation exists here for the reasons I have given and because  of  the
    relatively short relationship of about three  years  between  appellant
    and partner.  In reaching these conclusions I have considered the three
    questions raised in paragraph 35 of R about the existence  of  parental
    relationship.  Whilst I acknowledge that the appellant is  willing  and
    able to look after the child and is physically able to do so I have  to
    bear in mind that the child's other biological parent plays an integral
    part in the child's life.

32. I should indicate that, in reaching my conclusions,  I  have  made  the
    best  interests  of  the  appellant's   partner's   child   a   primary
    consideration and having regard to the respondent's  obligations  under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   The
    best interests of the child in this appeal are to be  with  his  mother
    with access to his father with whom he still, evidently, has a parental
    relationship albeit defined by a  court  order.   Although  this  means
    that, in the present circumstances and without a variation to the court
    order, I do not regard it as reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom with its mother but that  does  not  mean  that  the
    respondent's decision should be regarded as disproportionate.  That  is
    because, as Mr McVeety asserted, it would not be  disproportionate  for
    the appellant to return to Sri Lanka and then apply for entry clearance
    as a partner or, if circumstances allow,  a  spouse.   Certainly  there
    would appear to be no financial difficulties with such  an  application
    and, since it has already been established that the appellant's partner
    and her child have visited their country  of  origin  on  a  relatively
    regular basis, there would be relatively little  disruption  to  family
    life.  Whilst it is not beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility  that  all
    parties could maintain their family life  by  returning  to  Sri  Lanka
    together (if there is a suitable variation to the court order  relating
    to the child) I do not put this forward as a main reason for dismissing
    the  human  rights  claim.   It  is,  however,  for  me  to  take  into
    consideration that separation of the parties  will  not  give  rise  to
    compelling circumstances warranting the grant of leave to remain.  That
    conclusion  is  reached  having  regard  to  Hayat  and  the  Chikwamba
    principles but taking account of the proportionality  of  the  decision
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act.

33. In considering the application of Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  in
    relation to the public interest, the reasons I have already given  show
    that little weight should be given to a private life established whilst
    the appellant's immigration status was precarious and  I  have  already
    concluded that the appellant is not in a parental relationship with his
    partner's child.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed an error on a  point  of  law
such that it should be re-made on human rights issues only.

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  asylum   and
humanitarian protection claims stands.

I re-make the decision in relation to the human rights claim  by  dismissing
it.

Anonymity

I renew the anonymity direction already made in the Upper  Tribunal  in  the
following terms:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fees were payable and because I have dismissed the  appeal  there  can
be no fees award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

