








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01236/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Sent           |
|On: 10 January 2014,  23 April 2014 and 19    |On: 16 July 2014             |
|June 2014                                     |                             |
|Prepared: 2 July 2014                         |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER
                                   Between

                                     n M
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, (instructed by M Montaque Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Iran,  born  on  29th  April  1987.  He
      appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 8th May  2013,  refusing
      his appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  remove  him,
      having refused his application for asylum.


   2. At a hearing on 2nd July 2013, the Upper Tribunal found that there had
      been errors made on a point of law. The Judge had  failed  to  make  a
      clear and consistent finding relating to demonstrations in Iran and in
      the UK. Nor had there been a proper analysis of  the  implications  of
      the  appellant's  involvement  in  demonstrations  in   the   UK.   In
      particular, no analysis had been undertaken regarding the  nature  and
      content of the demonstrations the appellant attended in  the  UK.  Nor
      was it clear that the appellant's participation amounted  to  anything
      other than a low level protester. Finally, the potential  availability
      to the Iranian authorities  of  information  showing  the  appellant's
      involvement with the Green Movement was not considered.


   3. In the circumstances, both parties agreed that the decision should  be
      set aside and that a fresh decision would have to be made.


   4. The appeal could not be heard on  19th  November  2013  as  there  was
      insufficient time available. In the  circumstances,  the  hearing  was
      adjourned until 10th January 2014.


         Resumed Hearing on 10th January 2014


   5. The appellant's solicitors produced an appellant's bundle and  I  have
      also had regard to  the  respondent's  bundle.  At  the  hearing,  the
      appellant produced 19 colour photographs which were said  to  evidence
      the appellant's participation in various protest  activities  in  both
      Iran and the UK. In addition, the appellant produced a CD relating  to
      several occasions when protests took place in the  UK.  Excerpts  from
      the CD were "played" during the course of the hearing.


   6. The appellant attended the hearing and gave evidence. He identified at
      pages 12-45 of the bundle his asylum interview, dated 15th April 2012.
      He  confirmed   the   contents   of   that   interview,   subject   to
      "clarification" as set out in his witness statement  at  pages  60-66,
      dated 11th March 2013 and signed that statement at the hearing on 10th
      January 2014.


   7. At his interview, he identified various photographs  claimed  to  have
      been taken by his friend of demonstrations in Iran. Those  photographs
      were taken on a mobile phone. He believes that the photos relate to  a
      demonstration on 9th July in a place called Lehiaban  Enghlab.  Whilst
      he was in Iran, his friend transferred  the  photos  via  "bluetooth".
      This was then transferred onto his PC as well as onto his handset.


   8. The appellant said that he was a 25 year old student from Iran when he
      came to the UK. His parents and sister remain in Iran. He used to be a
      supporter of the Green Movement. In the 2009  presidential  elections,
      he voted for Mr Mousavi. He attended the demonstrations following  the
      election as he believed that they had been "rigged."


   9. The demonstrations he attended in Iran took place  on  the  15th  June
      2009, 4th July 2009 and 9th July 2009. At  the  demonstration  on  9th
      July, he witnessed police clashing with demonstrators. A plain clothes
      policeman tried to stop him in a side street, but he was able  to  run
      away.


  10. He joined the  Green  Movement  in  Iran  prior  to  the  presidential
      elections  in  2009.  He  was  involved  in  the  Green  Movement   in
      campaigning and advertising for Mr Mousavi. He explained that  he  did
      not do any other forms of protest whilst in Iran. Other  people  there
      also did graffiti. He attended four demonstrations before  18th  April
      2009.


  11. Photographs  had  been  taken  by  a  friend,  showing  the  appellant
      participating in demonstrations there. They were taken "incidentally".
      The word "accidentally" as recorded in the asylum  interview  was  not
      correct.


  12. On 9th July, he witnessed police clashing with  demonstrators  and  he
      was able to run away through a side street. He assumed he was  running
      away from a plain clothes police officer as that person  had  a  radio
      and it appeared to him obvious that this officer was trying to  arrest
      him. (A61).


  13. He attended a final demonstration in Iran on  11th  February  2010  in
      Enghlab Street. That was a demonstration organised by the  government,
      which he attended in order to oppose the government. On that occasion,
      there were numerous plain clothes police officers  in  attendance.  He
      and other such protesters were beaten by the authorities.  His  friend
      took photographs with his mobile phone. He  was  photographed  walking
      with fellow demonstrators in Tehran.


  14. He said that since coming to the UK, he has continued such activities,
      claiming to be a member of the Green Movement.


  15. On 19th January 2010, he applied for a Tier  4  student  visa  at  the
      British Embassy in Abu Dhabi. This was issued on  8th  February  2010,
      valid until 21st March 2011. He arrived in the  UK  on  21st  February
      2010. He applied for  an  extension  of  his  student  leave  on  10th
      February 2011, which was granted, valid until 16th February 2012.


  16. On 4th November 2011, he  contacted  the  asylum  screening  unit  and
      lodged an asylum claim on 12th December 2011.


         The respondent's case


  17. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a national of Iran.  His
      explanation given for believing that a policeman had tried to stop and
      arrest him at the demonstration, amounted to a speculative claim which
      could not be relied upon. It was also speculative to suggest  that  he
      had been photographed by police at another demonstration.  He  claimed
      that there had been plain clothes police, and assumed that  they  were
      police, as ordinary people in those circumstances do not have a camera
      or film in their hands. He  was  in  any  event  contradicted  by  his
      assertion that his friend took photographs of him at demonstrations.


  18.  As  to  the  copies  of  photographs  submitted   relating   to   his
      participation in a demonstration at Tehran,  only  a  faxed  copy  was
      submitted, and it was difficult to determine that it was the appellant
      pictured in the photograph, albeit that there is a resemblance.


  19. It was accepted that he  attended  a  demonstration  on  one  occasion
      (paragraph 20). Photographs alone however do not  show  his  political
      allegiance. His claim that he supported the Green Movement in Iran was
      rejected as he was unable to provide details of their activities.


  20. Insofar as  the  UK  activity  is  concerned,  he  failed  to  give  a
      consistent  account  of  attending  demonstrations.  It  was   however
      accepted on the basis of the photographs that he submitted that he had
      demonstrated in the UK.


  21. In his screening interview, the appellant  claimed  that  the  Iranian
      authorities  attended  his  home   as   he   had   been   photographed
      demonstrating  outside  the  Iranian  embassy  in  the  UK.   In   his
      substantive interview, he said they went to his home because they  had
      taken photographs of him helping demonstrators at the demonstration on
      11th February 2010 in Tehran.  That  constituted  a  discrepancy.  Nor
      could he accurately recall when  he  found  out  about  this.  It  was
      accordingly not accepted  that  his  house  had  been  raided  by  the
      authorities in Iran. Even if he had attended demonstrations in  Tehran
      and London, he has not consistently or credibly established that  this
      has come to the attention of the Iranian authorities or that he is now
      wanted by them.


  22. Consideration was given to his claim of having demonstrated in the  UK
      and whether he would be at risk on return on that  basis.  Regard  was
      had to the decision in BA (Demonstrations in Britain - Risk on Return)
      Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).


  23. The respondent noted that the photographs that he produced showed that
      demonstrations in the UK were calling for  an  end  to  executions  in
      Iran. He found out  about  demonstrations  taking  place  through  his
      friends and was not himself a leader or an organiser. He attended  1-2
      or 4-5 demonstrations in the UK and was  not  involved  in  any  other
      political activity.


  24. Based on the description he gave as to his political activity  in  the
      UK, he was considered to be a "low level protester." He has not  shown
      that he was anything other than a member of a crowd at demonstrations.
      He appeared in photographs, but had not shown that these are  publicly
      available in the UK, Iran or elsewhere. Having  viewed  the  video  on
      YouTube, it is not possible to corroborate that it  is  the  appellant
      amongst the crowds demonstrating. Accordingly, it was  not  considered
      that he had a political profile.


  25. His participation in political activity was of the lowest level and it
      is not reasonably likely to have brought him to the attention  of  the
      Iranian authorities. There was furthermore no evidence  to  show  that
      the later demonstrations in the UK were recorded  or  photographed  by
      the Iranian authorities. It is noted that he left Iran  legally  using
      his own passport and was not known to  the  authorities  before  then.
      Accordingly, though he might be questioned on return to  Iran,  it  is
      not accepted that he is at real risk of being  excessively  questioned
      or ill treated (paragraph 36).


  26. In his witness statement, he explained that his  father  told  him  in
      October 2011 that the authorities came to his home in April/May  2010.
      That was because he had been  identified  from  photographs  taken  in
      Iran. His father did not tell him at the time as he thought  that  the
      matter would be resolved. He only told him about this in October  2011
      after his home had been visited by the authorities,  as  he  had  been
      identified attending demonstrations in the UK.  His  father  told  him
      what had happened when he called the appellant from a phone that could
      not be traced. That was in November 2011.


  27. In his statement, he stated that before the Iranian embassy in the  UK
      was closed, they were still monitoring people protesting  against  the
      government. Even later, at demonstrations outside the  Islamic  Centre
      in Kilburn, people who were supporters of the regime filmed  and  took
      photographs. Iranians do have "spies" in the  UK  monitoring  what  is
      happening. He claims therefore that he does have a political  profile.
      He has demonstrated in Iran and is known to the authorities there.  He
      is consequently at risk of being detained and tortured.


         Photographs produced


  28. The appellant was shown the 17 photographs which were produced.  These
      are at Exhibit F1-19. The first six  photographs  show  the  appellant
      appearing  at  a  demonstration  in  Iran.  He  was  taking  part   in
      demonstrations against the government because  it  was  "a  fabricated
      election." These six photographs were taken on one occasion and relate
      to one demonstration which occurred on 9th July 2009 in Tehran, Englab
      Street.


  29. The photograph at F7 relates to the second demonstration,  which  took
      place in front of the Iranian embassy in London on 9th October 2010.


  30. The photograph at F8 relates to the  third  demonstration  in  London,
      also  before  the  Iranian  embassy,  dated  4th  November  2011.  The
      photograph at F9 also relates to  the  same  demonstration,  i.e.  the
      third demonstration on 4th November 2011. In  these  photographs,  the
      appellant is shown to be  participating  in  a  demonstration  of  the
      London Green Movement (LGM) in which various placards  that  are  held
      and displayed.


  31. At F8, the appellant is  holding  a  large  placard  containing  small
      photographs of 20 people. The protest is against executions  in  Iran,
      as well as protests calling for democracy in Iran. The  photograph  at
      F10 relates to a demonstration which he  referred  to  as  the  second
      demonstration on 9th October 2011, where the appellant  is  holding  a
      placard stating  that  injustice  anywhere  is  a  threat  to  justice
      everywhere. F 11 and F12 show the appellant participating in the  same
      demonstration on 9th December 2011. They are all standing in  one  row
      on the pavement. They were all in the  front  row.  The  appellant  is
      clearly visible and the photograph contains a placard associating  the
      Ayatollah with the Nazi swastika.  At  F12,  the  appellant  is  shown
      holding a placard of the London Green Movement. The placard calls  for
      the stop of executions in Iran. F13 is a  further  photograph  showing
      the appellant at the front  of  a  demonstration,  protesting  against
      executions in Iran and calling for democracy.


  32. The demonstration at F14 is the third demonstration  on  4th  November
      2011 that he attended. This is also  in  front  of  the  embassy.  The
      appellant is shown holding hands with others in the protest  organised
      under the auspices of the London Green Movement.


  33. The appellant stated that the first demonstration that he participated
      in occurred on 6th December 2010.


  34. Photograph F14 clearly shows  the  appellant  in  a  T  shirt  stating
      "Iranian Green Movement" both in English and Farsi. The  London  Green
      Movement logo is contained at  the  foot  of  the  page.  This  was  a
      demonstration where the appellant  held  up  different  placards.  The
      demonstration took place outside the embassy in London and  was  about
      one and a half hours in duration.


  35. F15 relates to the second  demonstration  on  9th  October  2011.  The
      appellant is shown holding a placard, protesting against injustice  as
      well as calling for executions to be  stopped  in  Iran.  There  is  a
      photograph displayed of a woman who has a noose around  her  neck  and
      who  was  executed.  He  claims  that  she  had  been  executed  as  a
      demonstrator.


  36. F16 refers to the second demonstration on 8th October 2011  where  the
      appellant is seen  at  the  front  of  a  group  together  with  other
      demonstrators. He also referred to a demonstration outside the Islamic
      Centre which does not  have  photographs  but  has  a  video  of  that
      demonstration. This relates to an incident at Ashora  in  2009.  There
      was an uprising where people were killed. The 2011  demonstration  was
      in memory of that event. Over 100 have been arrested  since  2009  and
      more than 10 were killed. The appellant himself did not take part.  He
      learned this from the reports on the news as well as YouTube.  He  was
      aware of this in 2009 and was in Iran at the time.


  37. The 2011 commemoration that took place in front of the Islamic Centre,
      in Kilburn, was arranged in advance. That centre was  chosen  for  the
      demonstration because  the  Islamic  centre  is  run  by  the  Iranian
      government. There are links to the Iranian government.


  38. The final three photographs, 17-19, relate to the same  demonstration,
      again in front of the Iranian embassy in London, held on 7th  December
      2013. This was also organised by the Green Movement. The appellant  is
      shown  holding  different  placards  during   the   course   of   that
      demonstration.


  39. The demonstration took place in December 2013 and  is  online  and  on
      YouTube. All that is required is Internet access. It  is  not  however
      possible for the appellant to download this  onto  his  computer  from
      YouTube. It can however be seen on his smartphone.


  40. The appellant displayed a video on a computer relating to  the  second
      demonstration which was displayed to the tribunal.


  41. The appellant is shown at the front of the demonstration.  Others  who
      are present are screaming slogans such as "Political Prisoners  Should
      be Freed." He obtained this from the Green Wave Voice  site.  This  is
      accessible by the public.


  42. There is also a clip relating to the third  demonstration,  where  the
      appellant is shown to be wearing a Green Movement  sweatshirt.  Again,
      the demonstrators are shouting "This is Our Last Announcement to  You,
      Dictator," "You Invade Peoples' Democracy and Freedom." The embassy is
      shown to be situated across the road. The demonstrators also call  for
      the  release  of  political  prisoners  in  accordance  with  "Iranian
      Constitutional  Law."  It  is  also  indicated  that  there  will   be
      demonstrations "the next week," namely 13th November 2013, in front of
      the Chinese embassy. That is because the Chinese government  continues
      to support the  Iranians.  The  demonstrators  are  opposed  to  their
      support.


  43. He has shown a video as well of the occurrence at the Chinese embassy.
      No photographs were taken outside that embassy. The  demonstration  in
      front of the Chinese embassy was in support of political prisoners  in
      Iran. The slogans displayed are "We do  not  Want  Dictators  to  Join
      Hands." There are also slogans and placards calling for executions  to
      be stopped in Iran. The  demonstrators  call  "Shame  on  You  Chinese
      Government". That is because they support Iran,  a  dictatorship.  The
      slogans  refer  to  "The  Same  Values  as  the  Iranian  Government,"
      "Violators of Human Rights." The appellant is  shown  to  be  standing
      outside the embassy holding one of the placards.


  44. The next clip shown on the computer relates to a demonstration in 2011
      before the mosque. The appellant is at the front  holding  a  placard.
      Next to him there is a man who is in possession of a  loudhailer.  The
      placard calls  for  "Democracy  for  Iran  -  Free  Iran."  These  are
      available on YouTube or from Green Movement sites.


  45. A series of photographs was also shown on the computer.  These  relate
      to the third demonstration and include photographs taken  of  "Martyrs
      Killed in 2009."


  46. There is a photograph of the second  demonstration,  calling  for  the
      stopping  of  executions.  The  appellant  is  at  the  front  of  the
      demonstration. There are several photos of him holding  a  placard  of
      those who were executed in 2009.


  47. There is a photograph produced of security guards  beating  people  in
      Iran. The appellant held different placards  as  well  as  photographs
      during the course of the same demonstration. This pattern occurred  on
      each separate occasion.


  48. The final demonstration occurred on 7th December 2013.  This  resulted
      in a photograph on a mobile telephone. It shows a woman  supporter  of
      the Green Movement  addressing  the  demonstrators  near  the  Iranian
      embassy. She is speaking about nuclear weapons. The  appellant  is  at
      the front of the demonstration, surrounded by placards.


  49. The photographs at F17-19 show the appellant wearing the same  clothes
      and standing in the front. There was a period where no  demonstrations
      had in fact occurred in front of the Iranian embassy as  it  was  shut
      following the attack by Iranian agents on the British embassy in  Iran
      as well as a result of sanctions against Iran. The UK  government  had
      expelled the Iranian diplomats. This has reopened recently but just to
      deal with correspondence and letters. Some diplomats have returned.


  50. It was after 4pm when the evidence in chief was concluded.  Ms  Holmes
      informed me that she was not feeling well and that she would not be in
      a position to either cross examine or  complete  her  submissions.  In
      those circumstances, (and with Mr Collins' agreement), the hearing was
      adjourned to a date to be arranged in March 2014.


         Resumed Hearing on 23 April 2014


  51.  Mr.  Collins  sought  to  adduce  further  footage  relating   to   a
      demonstration shown on the Voice of America TV.


  52. The appellant continued his evidence and  stated  that  he  discovered
      this particular  footage  on  a  YouTube  website.  The  date  of  the
      demonstration was 14th June 2013. This took  place  in  front  of  the
      Iranian embassy in London. It was organised by Green Wave Voice.


  53. The footage, when paused at a certain place, showed that the appellant
      was present and was holding a  placard.  There  were  also  photos  of
      "martyrs"  shown  on  the   demonstration.   This   related   to   the
      demonstration in Iran in 2009 where several protesters were killed.


  54. The appellant also stated that he attended a demonstration on  Tuesday
      22nd April 2014 in front of  the  Iranian  Consulate  in  London.  The
      Consulate was open and he saw people who attended with  passports.  He
      did not have any video footage of this demonstration. He said it takes
      at least one or two days for the footage to reach the Internet.


  55. The people who organised the demonstration were also  from  the  Green
      Wave movement.


  56. The appellant also produced photographs taken at the demonstration  on
      22nd April 2014.


  57. The appellant's cross examination then commenced. Ms Holmes asked  him
      whether the Voice of America footage, which gives  the  date  as  14th
      June 2013, relates to the demonstration that took place on that  date.
      He said that it was. He attended that demonstration.


  58. Ms Holmes put it to him  that  he  had  given  evidence  that  he  had
      attended about six demonstrations in the UK. He agreed.


  59. She asked him what he had been doing "in between." He went to college.
      He is involved in a political organisation relating to Iran. He  is  a
      member  of  Green  Wave  Voice.  That  involves  trying  to   organise
      demonstrations based on events in Iran, such as 22nd Bahman celebrated
      in Iran in February. This is the day of the Iranian revolution.  Other
      events organised related to women's rights in Iran, 'because they  are
      discriminated against there'. There are no human  rights  or  equality
      between men and women in Iran.


  60. Ms Holmes asked what the appellant meant by the statement that  he  is
      "a member" of Green Wave. He said "we do it voluntarily." There is  no
      card.  He  can  show  that  he  is  a  supporter  from  Facebook.   He
      participates in demonstrations and helps  in  the  arranging  of  such
      protests. This includes the making of placards such  as  occurred  the
      day before, namely on 22nd February 2014. There  is  also  a  Facebook
      page and messages are sent by text to mobile telephones.


  61. He was asked to explain what he meant by  "helping  to  organise".  He
      said he was involved in the preparation of placards and the assembling
      of speakers and  microphones.  He  also  is  involved  in  marshalling
      people, by "advising them" where to  stand.  In  most  demonstrations,
      they stand in front of  the  embassy.  The  demonstration  has  to  be
      organised carefully so as to prevent obstruction  to  pedestrians  who
      wish to pass by.  He is told what to do. He also shares text  messages
      with other supporters and makes actual telephone calls to others.


  62. He  was  asked  what  else  Green  Wave  does  apart  from  organising
      demonstrations. Their aim is to have accurate news about Iran, as well
      as events. This is set out  on  the  website  which  'shows'  what  is
      happening there. The aim is to promote democracy and freedom of speech
      in Iran. It is also to  support  those  political  prisoners  who  are
      jailed in Iran.


  63. He was asked how they assist those who are jailed. He  said  that  the
      Green Wave is the voice of Iranian opposition. They speak on behalf of
      prisoners who cannot speak up themselves.  Green  Wave  is  banned  in
      Iran.


  64. He claimed that Green Wave promotes freedom of  speech  by  conducting
      demonstrations based on events which occur in Iran. This is to  assure
      people in Iran that Green Wave exists to speak on their behalf.


  65. He cannot recall the surname of the leader in the UK. His  first  name
      is Akbar. He is friendly with him. He speaks to him on  the  phone  as
      well as by way of text messages.


  66. He was asked why, if he is friendly and in contact with others, he  is
      not a member of Green Wave. He said he came to the  UK  to  study.  He
      spent his spare time with Green Wave Voice. Most  members  participate
      on  a  voluntary  basis.  They  support  the  organisation  by   their
      participation.


  67. He was asked whether there were other  demonstrations  that  he  could
      have participated in apart from the six he claims to have attended  in
      the UK. He said that there were. There were some in which he  did  not
      participate. There were also conducted by Green Wave organisations. He
      was not aware that there were any  other  organisations  operating  to
      support Iranian democracy by way of demonstration in  the  UK.  He  is
      only aware of Green Wave Voice.


  68. He repeated that he is not aware of any other organisations 'who  also
      organise'.


  69. He was questioned  on  the  six  occasions  that  he  participated  in
      demonstrations. Ms Holmes put it to him that there  was  a  large  gap
      between such demonstrations. The first he attended was on 5th December
      2010 and the next was on 9th October 2011. He was asked why  there  is
      such a large gap. He said it depends  on  the  occasion  but  it  does
      happen that he is unable to attend because of studies.  Most  of  them
      occur on Sundays and he was working, and unable to attend.  He  worked
      in a shop belonging to his cousin.


  70. He said that photos numbered 1-6  that  he  produced  all  related  to
      demonstrations in Iran.   His friends  took  the  photographs  on  his
      mobile. He then transferred them to a laptop at his house in Iran.  He
      did not want to save them on his mobile phone.


  71. He was asked how it comes about that there are copies available of the
      photographs F1-6 in the UK.  He  was  also  asked  how  the  CDs  were
      prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


  72. He said that he copied all the photographs on a USB as well as onto  a
      CD. The CD shows various demonstrations and  clips  relating  to  both
      Iran and Britain.  In the UK, he downloaded  these  onto  a  USB.  The
      laptop on which he transferred them from his mobile was in  his  house
      in Iran. He had another computer at the time, onto which he loaded the
      footage.  He  transferred  them  from  one  laptop  to  another.   The
      photographs will still be available. He stored all the pictures  on  a
      USB.


  73. At the time that he took the laptop from Iran containing this footage,
      he did not think that there would be a risk.


  74. Ms Holmes pressed him as  to  why  he  felt  comfortable  and  why  he
      regarded it as safe to take them through Iran. He said the photographs
      were amongst other photos of his family and he was not aware of  them.
      It was a hidden file. He had forgotten that he had a hidden  file.  He
      thought he only had family photos on the computer he brought through.


  75. He was asked when he found out  that  the  authorities  in  Iran  were
      "interested in him." He contacted his father in late October 2011.  He
      told him that he wanted to visit. It was then that he found  out  that
      the authorities were interested in him. He discovered this  from  what
      his father told him.


  76. His father tried initially to speak to him  "cryptically"  as  he  was
      afraid that the telephone he was using at the time might be tapped. He
      said that he would phone the appellant from another landline. He  then
      phoned him about 2-3 days after that and told him that the authorities
      were interested in him.


  77. His father went to a special communications centre which is  available
      in Iran, where it is possible to make calls to  foreign  destinations.
      This is a public place. His father thought that their  landline  would
      not be safe and that it would be safer from "this other place."


  78. He was asked whether his parents used mobile phones or  computers.  He
      said that they did. His father occasionally uses it but his mother and
      sister often did.


  79. He was asked why his father could not have tried to use  the  internet
      or a mobile telephone if he  was  worried  about  the  landline  being
      tapped. He said his father had been retired from the military  and  he
      preferred to use the centre. He believes that he would have considered
      that it would not be monitored as well.


  80. He was asked whether, assuming that nothing had  happened  to  him  in
      Iran, but that all that he had done was to demonstrate in the  UK,  he
      would fear returning home. The appellant initially had  difficulty  in
      understanding this question and it had to be repeated  several  times.
      He stated in due course that he would be.


  81. He was again asked whether he feared  returning  to  Iran  because  he
      demonstrated in the UK. He said he  did.  When  asked  why,  he  again
      asserted that the authorities raided his house in Iran  and  would  be
      after him in Iran.


  82. The question  was  again  repeated.  He  was  asked  whether,  if  the
      authorities had not raided his house  in  Iran  and  he  had  not  had
      anything on him there, he would still be afraid of returning. He  said
      he would not then have a problem.


  83. He was asked what he feared in returning  to  Iran.  He  feared  being
      detained, tortured and kept in prison. When  asked  why  he  has  that
      fear, he said that he participated in  demonstrations  in  London  and
      footage would be available to the authorities.


  84. He was asked whether that was the only reason he feared returning.  He
      said it was, "because of the demonstration in London."  He  was  asked
      why he thought they would pick him out. That  is  because  they  found
      pictures and footage on the internet as well as  having  raided  their
      house. He referred to the two sets of photographs available, those  in
      respect of the London demonstrations and those that were found on  his
      laptop in Iran.


  85. The appellant stated that he was finding it difficult  to  concentrate
      and was tired. In those circumstances, the representatives agreed that
      the appeal should be adjourned part heard. Ms  Holmes  indicated  that
      she still had quite a bit of cross examination and that in any  event,
      even if completed on 23rd April, the submissions were also  likely  to
      take some time.


  86.  As  it  was  evident  that  the  appellant  was  becoming  tired  and
      distracted, the hearing was adjourned at 4.20pm to resume on the  17th
      June 2014, at 2pm. I also gave directions that the  parties  file  and
      serve  detailed  skeleton  arguments  setting  out  their   respective
      submissions and authorities that they propose relying on.


  87. I also informed  the  appellant  that  his  counsel  could  prepare  a
      transcript of his cross examination from 23rd April 2014  which  could
      be placed before the appellant prior to the  resumption  in  order  to
      enable him to refresh his memory with regard to his evidence.


         Resumed hearing on 17 June 2014


  88. At the hearing, the appellant produced a second supplementary  bundle,
      "C"; this contained a further statement from the appellant as well  as
      a witness, Mr S. Ms Holmes agreed to allow  the  appellant  to  adduce
      this further evidence before resuming cross examination.


  89. The appellant  gave  further  evidence,  adopting  his  short  witness
      statement dated 10 June 2014. In that statement, he  referred  to  the
      evidence that he had previously given, namely that on 23  April  2014.
      There he had stated that on 22 April he had attended an  anti  Iranian
      regime demonstration organised by Green Wave Voice outside the Iranian
      consulate. At the date of the hearing, however,  photographs  relating
      to that demonstration had not been uploaded onto the Green Wave  Voice
      website. Since then this has been uploaded and the appellant  has  now
      appended   five   photographs   showing   his   attendance   at   that
      demonstration. He also stated  that  his  friend,  M  S  was  at  that
      demonstration and has attended similar demonstrations in the past.


  90. The next demonstration was  on  15  June  2014.  He  appended  various
      invitations that he received to attend that demonstration. At page  24
      there is an invitation from Green Wave in relation to the  hosting  of
      such demonstration at Parliament Square on 15 June 2014. A  text  from
      Green Wave has been produced at page 25. A text message  dated  6  May
      2014 was sent to the appellant (page 28). A further message  was  sent
      on 3 June (page 30).


  91. Various photos were produced which match the copies contained at pages
      21 and following.


  92. The appellant referred to the Green Wave Voice Facebook group page  as
      well as photographs uploaded to that group. These show photographs  of
      the  appellant  attending  anti-Iranian  regime  demonstrations.   The
      Facebook copies of an invitation sent to him have also been produced.


  93. The appellant was further cross examined. Ms Holmes  referred  to  the
      appellant's chronology at A57 produced before the First-tier Tribunal.
      There he stated that he had attended about six demonstrations in Iran.
      He confirmed that. It was put to him that the one demonstration  where
      a picture of him was taken at page 74 shows that he had a mask on  his
      face. He accepted that.


  94. He said that he did not wear such a mask at smaller demonstrations  he
      attended. He had happened to have a mask on him at the time but not in
      respect of all the others as well.


  95. At A79, there is a photograph showing the appellant's face without the
      mask. He attended a counter demonstration  in  Eghelab  Street  on  11
      February 2010. He  wore  a  mask  at  that  demonstration.  It  was  a
      demonstration where he claimed to have been photographed.


  96. He was asked what caused his parents' home to be raided.  He  said  it
      was on account of his political activities that he  was  involved  in,
      namely those in Iran and  the  UK.  Their  house  was  raided  at  the
      beginning of 1389, i.e. April or May 2010. That was after he  came  to
      the UK but not before then.


  97. He was asked how he thinks the Iranian authorities linked him  to  his
      family's address. That is because they searched for him. That  is  why
      they raided the house. He is not sure  whether  this  was  only  as  a
      result of the photographs taken of him in  Iran,  maybe  it  was  also
      because of the demonstrations in the UK as well.


  98. He was asked how they linked him to his parents' home  in  respect  of
      the day that he protested with a mask  in  Iran.  He  said  that  they
      probably "might have had a photograph of me" which did not have a mask
      from other demonstrations which had occurred earlier on in Iran.


  99. It was put to him that he had claimed that he was only photographed at
      the one demonstration; why had he not stated that he was  photographed
      at other demonstrations in Iran? That was because the question was not
      put to him. At that time  the  authorities  did  take  photographs  of
      participants.


 100. It was put to him that his house  had  not  been  visited  on  another
      occasion. His father told him that they raided the house on  only  one
      occasion. He said that he did not speak to his  parents  for  quite  a
      while. They usually contacted him. They have not contacted him because
      they think that the phone will be monitored and  they  prefer  not  to
      contact him.


 101. He has sometimes tried to contact them via  his  cousin.  His  parents
      usually call him from outside the house at the Iranian telecom.


 102. He was taken to the photograph at page 79. There his 'mask' was  down.
      He said that he was resting at the time and was trying to  adjust  the
      scarf. His hands are shown behind his  neck,  tying  the  scarf.  That
      photograph was taken by a friend who took the other pictures  seen  on
      that page.


 103. He was asked why he only wore a mask at some demonstrations. That  was
      because sometimes they had a mask with them. When they  did  not  have
      it, sometimes they got them from other  people.  He  was  referred  to
      pages 82-83 where he is shown wearing a mask. In that photograph it is
      evident that some of the participants in Iran have masks whilst others
      do not.


 104. He was asked again why he did not always have a mask on demonstrations
      in Iran. That was because he would not always have access to  a  mask,
      for  example,  if  you  are  invited  at  short  notice  to  be  at  a
      demonstration whilst you are at work. Sometimes the shops  are  closed
      after work and "we couldn't obtain one."


 105. He said that on the occasion when most of the people are not shown  to
      be wearing masks, he had managed to get one for himself.


 106. He explained that he sometimes learn about a  demonstration  at  work.
      The demonstrations occurred after the election. Sometimes  notice  was
      given by a text message and sometimes notice was only given on the day
      whilst he was at work.


 107. There was no re examination.


 108. M S attended the hearing and gave evidence.  He  adopted  his  witness
      statement at page 4 of bundle C, signed on 10 June 2014. He  has  also
      produced the determination  relating  to  his  successful  appeal.  He
      received five years' leave to remain in the UK (page 19).


 109. He came to the UK in 2011 as a  student.  He  attended  demonstrations
      against the Iranian regime after arrival here and became  involved  in
      the Green Wave Voice.


 110. He has known the appellant since starting college after his arrival in
      January 2011. They became involved in anti  Iranian  regime  political
      activity together with Green Wave Voice. They were both  fed  up  with
      the regime and wanted change. They have been attending  demonstrations
      since 2011, often together outside the Iranian  embassy,  the  Islamic
      Centre and the Iranian Consulate and other places.


 111. He continued to demonstrate against  the  regime.  He  is  visible  in
      various  photographs  that  have  already  been  produced  before  the
      Tribunal.


 112. He said that the appellant  is  "genuinely  opposed"  to  the  present
      Iranian regime.


 113. He was recently photographed at such a demonstration on 22 April 2014.
      He is shown in the photograph at F24. He is seen at the centre of  the
      photograph where he has been circled. He has  attended  demonstrations
      with the appellant.


 114. There was no cross examination.


         Submissions


 115. Ms Holmes relied on the reasons for refusal letter,  especially  those
      relating to credibility. She accepted at the outset that the appellant
      had attended at least one demonstration  in  Iran  as  well  as  other
      demonstrations in the UK. The respondent's assertion that his  account
      of coming to the attention of the Iranian authorities is  inconsistent
      is justified in the circumstances.


 116. He had stated at interview that they went to his house  shortly  after
      his arrival in the UK. That was because they had taken photographs  of
      the  appellant  helping  demonstrators  at  the   11   February   2010
      demonstration in Tehran. However, in his screening interview  he  said
      they went to his house because he had been photographed  demonstrating
      outside the Iranian embassy in the UK. She referred  to  questions  94
      and 98 of the interview.


 117.  Further,  the  appellant  stated  that  he  had  a   mask   at   that
      demonstration. How would they know therefore that it was him? In cross
      examination he stated that the authorities came twice to look for  him
      in Iran. When asked if there was an earlier  visit,  he  claimed  that
      there had been. However, this is not reflected in the  chronology.  Ms
      Holmes submitted that "this is a lie". Accordingly, the appellant  was
      not "in that regard" credible.  His  claim  about  the  visit  to  his
      parents was accordingly "fluffy". She submitted that  the  authorities
      would not have been interested in him in Iran.


 118. Insofar as the sur place activities in the UK are concerned, Ms Holmes
      frankly submitted that it was clear that he had  demonstrated  in  the
      UK. If a person is reasonably likely to come to the attention  of  the
      authorities that that would involve him at risk on return.


 119. Following BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -  Risk  on  Return)  Iran  CG
      [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) it was not likely  that  he  would  come  to  the
      attention of the Iranian authorities. His involvement  constitutes  an
      attendance at the demonstrations, and sometimes waving  placards,  but
      even so, he has  not  gone  beyond  a  certain  level  when  attending
      demonstrations. He has been involved in  some  organisations  such  as
      Green Wave but is not a member of Green Wave but a supporter.


 120.  He  did  not  know  the  leader's  name,  so  it  was  a  superficial
      involvement. Further, it appears that  there  were  a  lot  of  people
      participating. It would not make him stand out. She  referred  to  the
      second footnote in BA.


 121. She noted that the Tribunal stated that Iranians returning to Iran are
      screened on arrival. A returnee who meets the profile of  an  activist
      may be detained while searches of documentation  are  made.  Students,
      particularly those who have known political profiles, are likely to be
      questioned as well as those who have exited illegally.


 122. There is not a real risk of persecution for those who have exited Iran
      illegally or are merely returning from Britain. The conclusions of the
      Tribunal in the country guidance case of SB [2009]  are  followed  and
      endorsed.


 123. There is no evidence of the use of facial  recognition  technology  at
      the international airport, but there are a number of officials who may
      be able to recognise up to 200 faces at any one time.  The  procedures
      used by security  at  the  airport  are  haphazard.  It  is  therefore
      possible that those whom the regime might wish to question  would  not
      come  to  the  attention  of  the  regime  on  arrival.  If,  however,
      information is known about their activities abroad, they might well be
      picked up for questioning and/or transferred to a special  court  near
      the airport in Tehran after they have returned home.


 124. The Tribunal also set out the relevant factors to be  considered  when
      assessing risk on return having regard to sur place activities.


 125. Ms Holmes submitted that the appellant is  not  a  leader;  he  is  an
      active member of the crowd.   His participation in demonstrations  may
      be opportunistic.


 126. She submitted that as  there  was  no  facial  recognition  technology
      developed, the question is whether he is prominent enough for them  to
      pick him out or to watch out for him on return. She submitted that  he
      would  not  "excite"  their  attention.  There  had  been   infrequent
      participation at demonstrations. Further,  although  he  has  been  on
      YouTube, his participation is  not  particularly  highlighted  in  the
      video.


 127. On behalf of the appellant, Mr. Collins referred  to  the  appellant's
      rebuttal witness statement at pages 60-66.   It  is  accepted  by  the
      respondent that he has at least attended one  demonstration  in  Iran.
      Mr. Collins submitted that it is more likely  that  he  attended  more
      than one. There had been no cross examination as to the assertion that
      he had been on more than one demonstration there.


 128. Accordingly the appellant is politicised. The question is whether such
      a person's home would have been raided. He submitted that it would.


 129. Why, if the appellant was an opportunist, would he wait for 18  months
      to claim asylum? The appellant has not embellished his evidence.


 130. He came as a student on 19 January 2010 on a visa  valid  until  March
      2011 and until 16 February 2012. He is  not  a  person  who  therefore
      claims asylum at the outset. Nor does he wait  until  his  leave  runs
      out. Why claim asylum when you had an extension and could have  had  a
      further extension? Mr Collins submitted  that  the  probabilities  are
      that this was as a result of his parents having kept the raid from him
      until much later.


 131. In any event, Mr. Collins  submitted  that  it  is  accepted  that  he
      demonstrated in the UK. His family home has  been  visited.  He  would
      clearly be at risk.


 132. As to the point involving the mask, that was not the respondent's best
      point. Some wear masks and others not. Tear  gas  is  thrown.  In  the
      event, in one of the photographs, the appellant's face is  shown.  The
      Iranians could have discovered by way of information or word of  mouth
      that he had attended such a demonstration.


 133. In any event he is clearly shown on the YouTube clips and is shown  to
      be associated with Green Wave Voice.


 134. Although the appellant is not a member of Green Wave, he is in contact
      with them via Facebook as well as texts. This is  an  organisation  in
      the UK. Involvement with them shows that he is an  Iranian  dissident.
      Although he may not be an active member or even a prominent one, he is
      nevertheless subject to the risk factors which do exist.


 135. Mr. Collins submitted that an important feature is that there were not
      thousands of persons in the crowd but merely scores, and maybe  up  to
      100 at most.


 136. The photographs that  have  been  produced  amount  to  about  22.  In
      addition there is reference to his participation in Facebook, which is
      clearly accessible. That is the type  of  document  that  the  Iranian
      authorities would look for.  The  photographs  produced,  particularly
      those in the UK, demonstrate very clearly that the appellant is  right
      in the middle of the first row holding placards. These are  replicated
      in a YouTube video (page F25-26).


 137. In addition, his witness has testified and confirmed  the  appellant's
      active participation in anti Iranian demonstrations in the UK. He  has
      given credible evidence in that regard and his evidence has  not  been
      challenged. He was found to be credible  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge.


 138. Mr. Collins submitted that the facts are more significant  than  those
      found in BA. The situation has deteriorated since BA.


 139. The appellant  has  been  shown  to  be  far  more  than  passive.  In
      particular, his participation as shown on Facebook and  YouTube  would
      be readily available to the Iranian regime. The facts in BA show  that
      the appellant  participated  for  only  a  few  weeks  in  about  five
      demonstrations outside the Iranian embassy.  That  appellant  featured
      briefly for 2-3  seconds  in  a  video  clip  of  the  demonstrations,
      shouting anti regime slogans. The appellant's photograph also appeared
      in a story about the protests in a magazine.  The  Supreme  Leader  of
      Iran appears on the cover of that magazine as a devil.


 140. N M however, has protested regularly outside the Iranian  embassy.  He
      is  on  video  clips.  He  is  featured  at  the  forefront   of   the
      demonstrations holding placards. There is no mention of the  appellant
      in BA being involved to that extent.


 141. The Tribunal in BA however found that his  participation  could  bring
      him to the attention of the authorities.  He  would  therefore  be  at
      risk.


 142. He referred to paragraph 40 and 43 in BA. There are  examples  of  two
      travellers who reported that they were arrested and  questioned  about
      their Facebook accounts. He had been arrested  for  questioning  after
      being allowed to leave the airport. He had been subject to assault and
      abuse. He was shown images of his participating in protests in  Europe
      and was pressed to identify other people in the images.  He  had  only
      attended a few demonstrations and did not even live in Iran.


 143. He submitted that even those allowed through  the  airport  may  still
      have their movements inside the country monitored. They may  be  later
      arrested at the airport when they are leaving Iran.


 144. The Tribunal when determining the appellant's appeal in  BA  noted  at
      paragraph 69 that he participated in five demonstrations  outside  the
      Iranian embassy for a short period. This was associated with a  group,
      UFIN. His participation in demonstrations was recorded  in  a  YouTube
      film and the photograph in the UFIN's publication.  The  demonstrators
      were chanting incendiary slogans. The appellant was not  a  leader  or
      organiser. He was at least for part of the time not on  the  periphery
      either and the video showed him  shouting  inflammatory  slogans.  His
      face was clearly recognisable in the photograph and  the  pictures  on
      the cover  of  that  magazine,  Bambad  e  Iran,  would  certainly  be
      offensive to the Iranian regime.


 145. He would be at real risk, even  if  he  were  not  picked  up  at  the
      airport, he would still be at risk on return  as  the  nature  of  the
      Iranian regime is that if they wish to detain a particular  individual
      they have the means to do so.


 146. Mr. Collins also relied on a Freedom House  publication  on  14  March
      2014, condemning the illegal imprisonment in exile of two prisoners of
      conscience. In addition, he produced a  UK  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
      Office report dated 10 April 2014  in  which  it  is  noted  that  the
      government continued to suppress freedom of expression with arrests of
      journalists, bloggers and internet workers.


 147. At page 3 of that report, Iran's reaction to  international  criticism
      of its human rights record was dismissive.


 148. Hundreds of political prisoners and human rights defenders  remain  in
      prison and there are reports of further arrests during 2013. There  is
      a report in that article of  prison  conditions  remaining  a  serious
      concern. Torture and other ill treatment persist.  There  are  various
      other reports including International Campaign  for  Human  Rights  in
      Iran at pages 12-13.


         Findings and determination


 149. There is no dispute that the appellant's evidence relating to at least
      one demonstration in Iran and several in  the  UK  is  credible.   The
      respondent has however asserted that his  claim  that  his  house  was
      raided after he came to the UK is untrue.


 150. I find on the evidence produced that the appellant arrived in  the  UK
      in February 2010 with valid leave as a  student.  He  applied  for  an
      extension in February 2011 which was granted until 16 February 2012.


 151. During the currency of that leave, he contacted  the  authorities  and
      claimed asylum. That was refused on 25 January 2012.


 152. The appellant's claim was that when he was in Iran  he  had  supported
      the  Green  movement  and  had  attended  some   demonstrations.   The
      respondent accepts at paragraph 20 of the reasons for refusal that  he
      did attend one demonstration.


 153. I have had regard to the photographs of the appellant demonstrating in
      Iran as well as video clips of his demonstrating in the UK. These show
      the appellant's participation at such demonstrations.


 154. I have set out the nature and extent of the appellant's  participation
      in each such demonstration including his most recent participation  at
      an anti-Iranian protest in June 2014.


 155. I have had regard  to  paragraph  4(i)  of  BA,  supra.  The  headnote
      accurately sets out the conclusions of the Tribunal  when  considering
      sur place activity.


 156. Having regard to the photographs and video clips, it appears that  the
      demonstrations in which the appellant was involved were not only  pro-
      Green Movement, but also pro democracy demonstrations such as  seeking
      to have executions stopped as well as protests against injustice.


 157. I do not accept Ms Holmes' submission that the  appellant  was  either
      passive at such demonstrations or that  his  participation  is  to  be
      construed as at a very low level. The evidence shows that  he  was  in
      fact usually at the front of the crowd consisting of not more than two
      dozen on any occasion, usually carrying either a banner or placards.


 158. He has attended several such demonstrations including those before the
      Iranian embassy and consulate. His attendance has been  on  a  regular
      basis.


 159. It appears from the quality of the photographs  produced  as  well  as
      from the video clips that  the  images  are  clear.  Photographs  were
      downloaded from the Internet as well as the  Green  Movement  website,
      all of which will be available to the Iranian authorities.


 160. The background material available since BA, supra, which was  produced
      at the hearing, indicates that the Iranian authorities have  continued
      even more vigorously to  crack  down  on  such  types  of  protest  as
      attended by the appellant. They are likely to continue  to  have  been
      monitored.


 161. I have had regard to the January 2013 COI report, referred to  in  Mr.
      Collins' skeleton indicating the  increased  efforts  to  control  and
      police the internet. In addition, I have had regard to the more recent
      Freedom House press report confirming that such monitoring continues.


 162. I accept the appellant's explanation of the apparent conflict  in  his
      accounts relating to the visit of Iranian security forces to his home.
      It is evident that he only raised that issue about  a  year  after  he
      came into the UK while he had extant leave. He had  been  informed  by
      his parents of that raid. They had delayed telling him about  that  in
      order not to scare or  worry  him.   I  also  accept  the  appellant's
      evidence that he attended more than one such demonstration in Iran. It
      is evident that his  face  was  at  least  partially  exposed  on  one
      occasion.


 163. I accordingly accept to the lower standard that the  family  home  was
      raided as described.


 164. I have referred to the factors said to trigger an  inquiry  or  action
      against him on return following sur place activity in the UK.


 165. I accept that the appellant has regularly attended a  number  of  high
      profile demonstrations in the UK for a significant period. Apart  from
      photographs relating to such demonstrations showing the  appellant,  I
      have also had regard to the  corroborating  evidence  of  his  witness
      confirming his own participation at such events in the company of  the
      appellant.


 166. Some of the  demonstrations  were  recorded  on  YouTube.  These  were
      demonstrations arranged by Green Wave.  Accordingly,  they  will  have
      received international media coverage.


 167. The appellant is shown to be more than a passive background supporter.
      He is shown at the front of these protests. Moreover, he is  shown  in
      some of the videos to be shouting anti-Iranian regime slogans.  He  is
      in possession of placards on several occasions, opposing injustice and
      executions in Iran.


 168. I have set out the dismal human rights violations  which  continue  to
      occur frequently in Iran, including the use of torture  which  remains
      routine.


 169. Having regard to the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I  find,  applying  the
      guidance in BA, supra, that  the  appellant  has  established  a  well
      founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a   Convention   reason   through
      demonstrations in person in both Iran and the UK.


 170. I also find that he would also face a real risk of treatment  contrary
      to Articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention if returned.


         Decision


         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved  the  making
      of an error on a     point of law.  Having set it aside I  re-make  it
      allowing the appellant's appeal.


         Anonymity order made.








                               Signed                     Date:  2/7/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




