

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01337/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |                 Decision and Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                                |
|On 9th November 2015                  |                 On 12th November 2015     |
|                                      |                                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     I A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Manning, counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
        Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the
        Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these
        proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
        indirectly identify the original Appellant. This direction applies
        to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
        direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


   2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Parkes   dismissed   IA's   appeal   on
      international protection grounds against  a  decision  to  remove  him
      pursuant to s10 Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  dated  14th  January
      2015. The First-tier Tribunal decision was promulgated on 6th May 2015
      and permission to appeal was granted on 18th June 2015 on the  grounds
      that it was arguable that undue significance had been given  to  minor
      details and to what was arguably a typographical error in his date  of
      birth and that the  decision  does  not  show  that  the  evidence  as
      properly weighed and considered or that adequate  reasons  were  given
      for the conclusions reached. The appellant is an Arab from  Bulbul  in
      Sudan - this is accepted by the respondent.


   3. Before me Ms Manning confirmed that she was relying on  three  grounds
      of appeal namely:

         i.    Improper weight was  placed  upon  the  dates  given  by  the
            appellant  in  his         interview,  one  of   which   was   a
            typographical error and this led to the judge erring in  law  in
            the weight to be given to the elements of his account
  ii. Failed to give adequate consideration  to  the  expert  report  of  Mr
      Verney and the medical expert.
 iii. Even if the appellant's account was not found credible, the judge  had
      failed to address the pleaded ground that he  was  at  risk  of  being
      persecuted on return to Sudan as a failed asylum seeker, as  evidenced
      by the report of Mr Verney.


     4. With regard to the third ground relied upon I asked Ms  Manning  to
        refer me to the specific sourced part of Mr Verney's  report  other
        than his assertions in [133] to [137] that the appellant  would  be
        identified as a failed asylum seeker and thus have rebel sympathies
        imputed, be accused of having defamed the Sudanese  government  and
        be sent to  a  clandestine  detention  camp.  HGMO  (Relocation  to
        Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 head note (2)  holds  Neither
        involuntary returnees nor failed  asylum  seekers  nor  persons  of
        military age (including draft evaders and deserters) are as such at
        real risk on return to Khartoum. This remains current.  Ms  Manning
        confirmed that it did not appear that Mr  Verney  engaged  with  or
        distinguished this other than to assert the opposite. I  considered
        the report by Mr Verney and his annexes and found (on  pages  49  -
        51) the Executive Summary of a report called "Waging Peace  Report"
        dated September 2014 which refers to 11  testimonies  in  the  full
        report and 6 in the 2012 report showing that many who "...return to
        Sudan after spending time in the UK or elsewhere are put at risk of
        detention and torture". There is no indication in the report by  Mr
        Verney of the basis of  that  report,  who  compiled  it,  how  the
        testimonies were taken and by whom and why relevant or  significant
        weight should be placed upon it. The testimonies are  not  appended
        and it is not possible to ascertain in what way they are similar or
        different factually to the appellant.  There is no engagement  with
        the detailed reasons given in HGMO  why  involuntary  returnees  or
        failed asylum seekers or draft evaders or  deserters  are  not,  as
        such, at real risk.


     5. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  judge  to  deal  with  that
        specific ground of appeal is thus an error of law  but  it  is  not
        material; the conclusion would have been the same.

     6. In so far  as  the  other  two  grounds  are  concerned  these  are
        interlinked. The essence of Ms Manning's submission  was  that  the
        error in the appellant's date of birth was simply typographical and
        should have had no bearing on the credibility findings;  the  error
        in the year he left Sudan (2007 as oppose to 2006)  was  simply  an
        error on his part which he had explained in his evidence  and  that
        the other dates (ie the named months and  year  that  he  spent  in
        Turkey, Italy and Greece) flowed from that. He had accepted that he
        spent three years in France and  not  claimed  asylum.  Ms  Manning
        accepted  that  the  medical  report   could   not   identify   the
        circumstances of the injuries that the appellant had sustained  but
        submitted that the fact that it was accepted that it had been as  a
        result of blast injuries should result in more weight being  placed
        upon it in the determination of the credibility of the claim,  when
        considered  in  the  context  of  the  explanation  for  the   date
        inaccuracies.

     7. The core of the appellant's claim was that  he  had  been  forcibly
        conscripted into the army - although this may have  been  into  the
        Popular Defence Force. He had not served long before he was injured
        and permitted to return home after hospital treatment in  order  to
        recover but that he would be expected to  return  to  complete  his
        military service, which he did not want to do. He did not claim any
        political activity either in Sudan or in the UK. His  evidence  was
        that his family owned a couple of dozen cows and 40 or so sheep and
        goats. A relatively wealthy cousin who was a  trader  in  livestock
        had arranged documents and passage out of Sudan.

     8. Mr Verney in his report states ([6]) "For the poor and  members  of
        ethnic minorities there  is  forced  conscription".  Later  in  his
        report  he  refers  ([129]   "....impoverished   and   economically
        marginalised Darfuri Arabs have realised that  the  regime  is  not
        acting in their interests and there is a  growing  number  of  Arab
        Darfuri who have sided with the rebels".  Ms Manning confirmed that
        the appellant had not sought to rely upon any  political  activity;
        that his claim for international protection was based  upon  forced
        conscription. She submitted that Mr Verney's report,  and  that  of
        Professor  Roberts,  were  relevant  in  the  assessment   of   the
        credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been   forcibly
        recruited. She submitted that the importance of Dr Verney's  report
        which had not been engaged with was that he was saying  that  there
        were increasing numbers of Darfuri Arabs who were in opposition  to
        the government and this appellant was one of them or would be  seen
        as one of them.

     9. The respondent's submission was that the decision of the First-tier
        Tribunal judge was sustainable - the judge  had  been  entitled  to
        reach the conclusion that the evidence relied upon by the appellant
        was tainted because of his failure  to  claim  asylum  for  such  a
        lengthy period of time. Mr Mills submitted that even if  there  had
        been an error in the  computation  of  dates  and  times  spent  in
        Turkey, Greece and Italy, there had been  no  credible  explanation
        why the appellant had not claimed asylum in  France  where  he  had
        remained for three years; the judge was entitled  to  place  weight
        upon that failure.

    10.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge   does   place
        considerable weight on the discrepancies in the dates  provided  by
        the appellant for his travels through Europe since  leaving  Sudan.
        The judge accepts he  was  injured  in  a  blast.  He  specifically
        reminds himself that  he  is  required  to  consider  the  evidence
        overall (see [18]). In addition to the  'dates  issue',  the  judge
        refers  to  Mr  Verney's  statement  that  it  is  the   poor   and
        impoverished who are recruited. The judge says that as an Arab with
        the ability to fund his travel out of Sudan that 'would suggest  he
        is not from a  particularly  poor  section  of  Sudanese  society'.
        Objection to this comment is made in the grounds seeking permission
        to appeal and that this would not mean, as per the expert's report,
        that he was  excluded  from  conscription.  I  cannot  see,  in  Mr
        Verney's  report,  a  sourced  and  reasoned  statement  that  this
        appellant either was or would be perceived as being  in  opposition
        to the government.

    11. Although on the face of the determination - which is, as  commented
        upon in the grant of permission to  appeal,  brief  -  there  is  a
        concentration on the dates given by the appellant  as  to  when  he
        left Sudan (2007 or 2006) and it may  be  that  the  interpretation
        given by Ms Manning that the dates for time spent in Turkey, Greece
        and Italy flowed in error from that first error, the judge does, as
        he  is  entitled  to,  place  weight  upon  the  failure  to  claim
        international protection for a number of years as a  matter  to  be
        weighed in the assessment of the claim. I have already referred  to
        the lack of evidence in the Expert report to distinguish head  note
        (2) of HGMO and it is not possible to see how, even  if  the  judge
        had been accepted that the appellant made an error as to  the  date
        he left Sudan and that the incorrect dates flowed from that,  there
        could have been another conclusion.

    12. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant was  an  Arab,
        did not  come  from  a  poor  or  impoverished  background,  had  a
        relatively wealthy cousin, had been injured in a blast, had  failed
        to claim international protection for a  number  of  years  despite
        spending 3 years in  a  safe  country  with  an  asylum  assessment
        procedure that has not been successfully challenged and that he did
        not claim any anti- government political activity.

    13. The references by Mr Verney to his own concern about filtering  out
        opportunists does not affect the consideration of the material  put
        forward by him in his report which should  be  independent  in  any
        event. The reference to 'no-one  fabricating  a  claim...they  were
        from the Khozam tribe' is unexplained both in terms of why that  is
        so and what relevance it could have to this  appellant's  claim  to
        have been conscripted. Similarly the implication that because  this
        appellant is an Arab Khozam tribe in some way means that he is more
        likely  to  have  been  conscripted  is  unexplained  as   is   the
        implication  that  this  appellant  could  be  seen  as  being   in
        opposition to the authorities. There is nothing in the report by Mr
        Verney which draws  this  appellant  into  a  category  that  could
        credibly be seen as being in opposition to the authorities and thus
        at risk of being persecuted if returned to Sudan. The references in
        [132] to [137] are unsourced and do not identify  any  material  or
        sources relied upon to distinguish HGMO. Even if the appellant  had
        been forcibly conscripted there does  not  appear  to  be  reliable
        evidence either in the other documents before the judge or  in  the
        expert report  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  being
        persecuted if returned to Sudan.

    14. I therefore conclude that although the decision of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal judge could have identified with more rigour the  evidence
        before him, even taken  at  its  highest  and  accepting  that  the
        appellant was conscripted and then given medical leave  of  absence
        after a blast injury, in the light of HGMO the  appeal  would  have
        been dismissed on the evidence before the judge.

    15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error
        of law such that the decision is set aside to be remade.




Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  is  to
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

[pic]
                                    Date 10th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

