
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01691/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th September 2015               |On 06th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                   H T T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in this appeal.   I
    continue anonymity in  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  making  the  following
    direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. On 9th July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Renton sitting in the  First-tier
    Tribunal, gave permission  to  the  appellant  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A J  Parker  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  a
    female citizen of Vietnam.

 3. The grounds of application take  issue  with  the  judge's  credibility
    findings, particularly that the appellant had no risk profile on return
    to Vietnam as a political activist.  It was  also  contended  that  the
    judge's consideration of the best interests of the  appellant's  child,
    applying the provisions of Appendix FM and Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, was inadequate.

 4. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Renton considered that  the
    grounds which  impugned  the  credibility  findings  of  the  judge  in
    relation to risk on return as a political activist had no merit, adding
    that the judge had given a satisfactory explanation about  why  he  did
    not  find  the   psychiatric   report   determinative.    Nevertheless,
    permission was granted on the basis that it was a "significant" part of
    the appellant's case that she was at risk  on  return  because  of  her
    political activities in the United Kingdom as set out  in  a  statement
    dated 12th January 2015.  The judge had made no credibility findings on
    this part of the appellant's claim and no finding as to  whether  these
    activities put the appellant at risk on return.

 5. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal I heard submissions from
    both representatives after which I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge showed an error on a point of law such
    that it should be set aside  and  re-made.   I  summarise,  below,  the
    submissions made and the reasons for my conclusion.

 6. Mr Howard confirmed that the grounds were relied upon,  the  key  issue
    being the judge's failure to deal with the appellant's sur place  claim
    applying the conclusions and guidance of the Court of Appeal set out in
    Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000.  Mr Howard suggested that  the  judge  was
    aware that the appellant claimed to be politically active  as  this  is
    referred to in paragraph 26 of the decision. The judge  also  noted  in
    paragraph 15 that the appellant claimed to be politically active in the
    United  Kingdom  attending  demonstrations  involving   human   rights.
    However,  the  decision  does  not  show  that  the  judge   gave   any
    consideration to that aspect of the  appellant's  claim  when  reaching
    findings about her refugee status.

 7. Ms Johnstone made submissions strongly arguing that the judge had  made
    findings in relation to the appellant's political activity in her  home
    country which did not show errors and so those findings  should  stand.
    She further contended that the judge's adverse credibility findings  in
    relation to the main claim could be extended to cover the claim of  sur
    place activity. That was because the judge had found inconsistencies in
    the main claims which led him  to  conclude  (paragraph  28)  that  the
    appellant's story was inconsistent and implausible and that there would
    be no risk profile on return as a political activist.

 8. When I suggested to Ms Johnstone that the judge's apparent  failure  to
    deal with the sur place claims  at  all  meant  that  the  findings  in
    relation to claimed political activity in Vietnam  could  be  affected,
    she maintained that such adverse credibility  findings  should  remain.
    She also reminded me that the judge granting permission  had  concluded
    that those findings were not affected by arguable error.   I  was  also
    reminded of the content of the Secretary of  State's  response  to  the
    grounds of application under  Rule  24,  which  argue  that,  from  the
    judge's findings on the appellant's inherent lack  of  credibility,  it
    can reasonably be inferred that the appellant's activities  in  the  UK
    cannot be considered  to  be  a  credible  reflection  of  her  genuine
    political position. Following a quote from the Court of Appeal decision
    in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360 the response also contends that the
    appellant would be recognised by the authorities  as  someone  with  no
    real commitment.

Conclusions

 9. The decision does not show that the judge gave any consideration to the
    appellant's claim  to  have  been  politically  active  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This was evidently an important part of the appellant's claim
    it having been included in her statement.

10. Whilst I can accept that the reasons given  in  the  decision  for  the
    negative conclusions about the appellant's claimed  political  activity
    in Vietnam appears to show no arguable error, those conclusions  cannot
    be  seen  in  isolation  from  the  appellant's  claim  to  have   been
    politically active in the United Kingdom in relation  to  human  rights
    issues  by  attending  demonstrations.   I  have  inferred,   from   Ms
    Johnstone's  argument,  that  the  respondent  sees   the   appellant's
    political activity in the United Kingdom  as  different  from  that  in
    Vietnam so the two claims can be seen separately and  the  findings  on
    the latter can therefore stand, but I do not accept that argument.  The
    appellant's claim that she attended  protests  against  the  Vietnamese
    government's seizure of land and claimed failure  to  pay  compensation
    cannot be clearly distinguished from human  rights  issues  in  general
    which are claimed to be the subject of the demonstrations in UK.

11. In any event, if the judge had applied  his  mind  to  the  appellant's
    claims of sur place activity, which evidently he did not, he might have
    reached different conclusions about the claims  relating  to  political
    activity in Vietnam.  It is  not  possible  to  say  that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings on the latter aspect of the  claims  meant
    that he was certain to  find  that  the  appellant  was  incredible  in
    relation to her sur place claims.  If he had found the sur place claims
    to be credible this could also have led to a successful  refugee  claim
    in its own right.

12. Thus, whilst it might be  arguable,  in  isolation,  that  the  judge's
    findings in relation to the appellant's claim of political activity  in
    Vietnam might not show arguable errors that  does  not  mean,  for  the
    reasons I have  given,  that  the  findings  on  those  issues  can  be
    preserved.  Therefore, I conclude that the  decision  must  be  re-made
    before the First-tier Tribunal afresh.  This  conclusion  accords  with
    the provisions of paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  for  the
    Tribunal by the Senior President of Tribunals made  on  25th  September
    2012.

DIRECTIONS

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows a  material  error  on  a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and re-made by the First-
    tier Tribunal afresh.

14. The First-tier hearing will take place on 20th April 2016 at the  Stoke
    Hearing Centre.

15. A Vietnamese interpreter will be required.

16. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

17. The appeal should not be put before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  A
    J Parker.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
