
[pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01117/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 March 2016                          |On 6 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H N M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Oshunrinade, of Samuel & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I F Taylor ("the FTTJ") promulgated on  30  April  2015.
    The FTTJ dismissed the appeal of  the  respondent  (hereinafter  called
    "the claimant") against the refusal of his asylum claim and  his  human
    rights claim under the Immigration Rules; the FTTJ allowed  his  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

 2. Given my references to the child of  the  claimant's  partner  and  the
    family's personal circumstances, an anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  on  [  ]  1969.  He  first
    entered the UK in January 2003 and claimed asylum at  that  time.  This
    was refused and  a  subsequent  appeal  dismissed.  Various  subsequent
    submissions were rejected and the claimant was removed from the  UK  to
    South Africa (from whence he had come) in April 2004.  The claimant re-
    entered the UK on 22 May 2004 having been found by  the  South  African
    authorities to be a Zimbabwean citizen.  He  claimed  asylum  the  same
    day. That claim was refused and his appeal was  unsuccessful.   Further
    submissions were rejected but deemed to amount to  a  fresh  claim  and
    thus gave rise to a right of appeal. That appeal against the refusal of
    asylum by the Secretary of State was dismissed by the FTTJ on 30  April
    2015.  However, his appeal on human rights grounds was allowed  outside
    the Immigration Rules.


 4. The Secretary of state sought permission to appeal and this was granted
    in the following terms:

         "1. In a Decision promulgated on 30 April 2015 Judge Taylor allowed
         on  human  rights  grounds  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
         Respondent's decision to remove him to Zimbabwe having refused  his
         most recent claim to asylum.  The asylum appeal was dismissed.  The
         human rights appeal was allowed apparently on the  basis  that  the
         removal decision was not proportionate given the Article  8  rights
         of the Appellant,  his  partner,  and  his  partner's  child.   The
         Appellant's partner and child are both citizens  of  Zimbabwe,  who
         now enjoy ILR, despite her claim to asylum having been refused.


         2. The Respondent raises no concern about the decision  to  dismiss
         the asylum, humanitarian protection,  and  Article  3  appeals  but
         challenges the decision to allow  the  Article  8  appeal.   It  is
         arguable on the findings of primary fact  that  were  made  by  the
         Judge that his whole approach to the question of the best interests
         of the child, and to the Article 8  appeal  was  flawed.   Arguably
         there was no proper consideration of the inability of the Appellant
         to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for  settlement,
         the ability of the family to return to Zimbabwe together in safety,
         or, to the factors set out in ss117A-D. Indeed it would appear that
         the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  guidance  to  be  found  in  EV
         (Philippines). The Judge  was  arguably  not  entitled  to  make  a
         decision upon proportionality that appears to have rested in  large
         part upon the speculation that the natural father of the  child  of
         the family might at some stage wish to resume contact with him, and
         that he might find it easier to do so if the boy  remained  in  the
         UK, particularly given the long period since  there  had  been  any
         contact between the two and the absence of evidence to suggest that
         either knew where the other was now living."

Error of Law Submissions

 5. There is no cross-appeal by the claimant with regard to  the  dismissal
    of his appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  and  under
    the Immigration Rules insofar as his  Article  8  claim  is  concerned.
    Thus the sole issue is whether there is a material error of law in  the
    FTTJ's decision outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds.


 6. Ms Willocks-Briscoe, for the Secretary of State, notes the  FTTJ  found
    (paragraph 51) that it would not be disproportionate for  the  claimant
    and his partner to enjoy family life together in Zimbabwe but  that  it
    was not reasonable for the partner's son to follow the claimant and his
    partner to Zimbabwe.  Having found that it was in the best interests of
    the child to remain in the UK the FTTJ proceeds to allow the appeal. He
    has failed to follow ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 to  the  effect
    that the best interests of the child are a  primary  consideration  but
    not a "trump card" or determinative.  The FTTJ had failed  to  consider
    the impact on the child of the claimant's removal to Zimbabwe (with the
    option of seeking entry clearance), with the child remaining  with  his
    mother here (R (Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189  (IAC)).  The  FTTJ
    had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  wider  public  interest   of
    maintaining effective immigration control as required by s117A  of  the
    2002 Act.  If the claimant were  to  have  returned  to  Zimbabwe,  the
    separation of the family  members  would  have  been  temporary  and  a
    proportionate interference. The FTTJ had failed to  take  into  account
    the claimant did not fulfil the criteria in the Immigration  Rules  for
    leave to remain and no reason was given for his preferential treatment.
     Those Rules reflected the public interest.  Following Forman (ss117A-C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), the list of considerations  in
    s117B and 117C was not exhaustive.  The FTTJ acknowledged the  claimant
    had no status at  the  time  he  entered  into  the  relationship.  The
    Secretary of State agreed the child was British at the date of  hearing
    (contrary to the grant of permission to appeal which solely  refers  to
    the child and his mother as Zimbabwean).  Finally it was not  clear  on
    what basis the FTTJ found that the child's father  may  with  to  renew
    contact; there was no reference to any evidence to that effect.


 7. For the claimant, Mr Oshunrinade submitted that the FTTJ  had  accepted
    the claimant had a genuine relationship with his partner's child;  this
    had not been challenged by the Secretary of State. It was accepted that
    the FTTJ had not made a finding as to whether the claimant  could  have
    returned to Zimbabwe to  apply  for  entry  clearance.  Mr  Oshunrinade
    initially submitted that it was not accepted that the FTTJ should  have
    done so but then accepted the Secretary of State's  position  that  the
    FTTJ should have "gone further and made an  assessment  on  whether  he
    should  have  gone  back  to  Zimbabwe  to  make  an  entry   clearance
    application" which would give rise to  temporary  separation  from  his
    partner and her child.

Discussion

 8. The FTTJ found the claimant did not fulfil the criteria in Appendix FM.
     The FTTJ also found there are no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    claimant's reintegration into Zimbabwean life  (a  fact  which  is  not
    challenged by the claimant).  Implicitly, therefore the FTTJ found  the
    claimant did not fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules  for  the
    grant of leave to remain on the grounds of his private life.  The  FTTJ
    then goes on to say (paragraph 43) that  "due  to  the  limitations  of
    Appendix FM with regard to the [claimant]'s claimed family life in  the
    UK it is appropriate to deal with his case under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  It is the [claimant]'s case that  he
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship both with his partner ... and
    her son... The respondent disputes that the [claimant] enjoys a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with either Ms ... or her son."  This  does
    not explain why the FTTJ considered it necessary to decide  the  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules (R (on the  application  of  Esther  Ebun
    Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Article  8
    - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC)).  However, this is
    not a ground of appeal to this tribunal and I do not therefore  address
    it.

 9. The FTTJ found (paragraph 51) that, if there were not a child  involved
    in this  case  [he]  would  have  little  hesitation  in  reaching  the
    conclusion  that  it  would  not  be  disproportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances of the case for [the claimant's partner] to enjoy  family
    life with the [claimant] in Zimbabwe.  Both  the  [claimant]  and  [his
    partner]  are  very  familiar  with  Zimbabwe,  they  have   Zimbabwean
    citizenship,  neither  have  refugee  status  and  there  is  no   real
    impediment to them enjoying family life in Zimbabwe." However, he  then
    sets out the best interests  of  the  child  (findings  which  are  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State) and concludes that it is  in  his
    best interests to remain in the UK with his mother  and  the  claimant,
    her partner of five years' standing (paragraph 52). He finds it is  not
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the claimant and his mother to
    Zimbabwe.

10. Section 117B identifies the public interest considerations  "applicable
    in all cases". Whilst there is passing reference  in  paragraph  50  to
    "Section 117" [sic] of the 2002 Act, there is no consideration  of  all
    the public interest considerations  listed  in  s117B.  In  particular,
    there is no reference  to  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control as being in the public interest (s117B(1)).  This is a material
    error of law, given s117A(2) which  is  mandatory.   I  also  find  the
    decision contains an error of law in the assessment of proportionality:
    the FTTJ  has  made  the  best  interests  of  the  child  the  primary
    consideration  and  a  determinative  factor,  rather  than  a  primary
    consideration, contrary to ZH.

11. I invited submissions from the  parties'  representatives  on  the  way
    forward.  They both agreed that it was appropriate for me to remake the
    decision on the facts as found by  the  FTTJ  because  these  were  not
    challenged by either party. I consider this to be appropriate and adopt
    the parties' reasoning for such an approach.

Submissions on Proportionality

12. Mr Oshunrinade submitted for the claimant that the  claimant  played  a
    significant role in the child's  life  and  had  done  since  2010.  He
    accepted that the claimant could  return  to  Zimbabwe  to  seek  entry
    clearance as a spouse; he could do so with his partner  and  the  child
    initially (for example during the school holidays) and, if the  process
    took too long and his partner had to return to work  or  the  child  to
    school, the  claimant  would  remain  in  Zimbabwe  alone  until  entry
    clearance was granted.  He accepted that whilst the couple had  married
    traditionally they could marry formally in Zimbabwe to  facilitate  the
    grant of entry clearance; alternatively, the claimant could  apply  for
    entry clearance as a fianc�.  He said this would bring hardship on  the
    family as the partner was the breadwinner; she was able to work because
    the claimant looked after the child.  It was accepted she could arrange
    childcare in the short term  but  she  would  not  be  able  to  attend
    parents' evenings at school because she worked nights as  a  carer.  He
    submitted that the claimant and his partner "would have to reorganise a
    lot of things and it may not be easy; there would be an impact  on  the
    child's life".  There was no evidence as to the waiting period  for  an
    entry clearance decision.  He said the child had never left the UK;  he
    was born here and had never lived elsewhere; he was British.


13. Ms Willocks-Briscoe for the Secretary of State  submitted  that,  given
    the claimant's case that he  would  apply  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse, a temporary separation was reasonable.  The  claimant  had  not
    succeeded under the Immigration Rules. He had had  no  leave  when  the
    relationship started; he had no legitimate expectation to  remain  here
    indefinitely. There was no evidence to suggest an adverse impact on the
    child resulting from the claimant's absence  (Chen).  It  was  for  the
    claimant to place such evidence before the tribunal.  The claimant  was
    not the breadwinner in the family.  The child's mother would be able to
    make arrangements for alternative care in the absence of the claimant.


Findings

14. I adopt the FTTJ's findings with regard to the best  interests  of  the
    claimant's partner's child: he lives in the family unit with his mother
    and the claimant.  His best interests are for him to remain in  the  UK
    in that family  unit.  The  claimant  currently  undertakes  childcare,
    including taking the child to and from school. The child is aged 11 and
    about to conclude his primary education  and  to  embark  on  secondary
    education.  He sees the claimant as his father. He has no contact  with
    his biological parent. Whilst it may be in  the  child's  interests  to
    regain contact with his biological father, there is  no  evidence  that
    either he or his biological father wish to do so or that there  is  any
    prospect of this taking place at any time in  the  future.  I  discount
    this possibility in the absence of any such  evidence.   The  claimant,
    his partner and her son have genuine relationships  and  are  a  family
    unit.


15. According to paragraph 41 of the decision, the claimant cannot meet the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of being a partner because he  does  not
    meet the terms of GEN.1.2(iv): the claimant and  his  partner  had  not
    been cohabiting for a sufficient period.  He cannot meet the rules as a
    parent  either  because  his  partner's  child's  father  is  not  dead
    (paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules).  Nor  does  the  claimant  meet
    other substantive requirements of the Rules, for example with regard to
    sole responsibility for the child.  However, I note the FTTJ found  the
    claimant's partner to be a credible witness. Her evidence is  that  she
    earns sufficient income to be able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  the
    claimant (paragraph 15).  The claimant speaks  English.   The  claimant
    and his partner intend to marry and it was submitted that they would be
    prepared to return to Zimbabwe to do so and for the claimant to make an
    application for entry clearance as a spouse. It was also submitted that
    they would be prepared to do this during the  school  holidays,  taking
    the  child  with  them.  It  was  accepted  that  this  would  minimise
    disruption to his schooling.  It was not suggested that the  claimant's
    partner would have difficulties with her employment as a result of this
    arrangement.  Whilst it would not be appropriate to predict the outcome
    of such an application in the absence of evidence  as  to  whether  the
    claimant  can  demonstrate  he  fulfils  all  the  criteria  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse (including Appendix FM-SE), there is no  evidence
    to suggest that such a course would impact negatively on the claimant's
    partner's child or indeed the  claimant's  partner  in  any  way.   The
    claimant and his partner are both very familiar with Zimbabwe; they are
    Zimbabwean nationals and have relatives living there.


16. I therefore find that, if the claimant were removed,  his  partner  and
    child would travel  to  Zimbabwe  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  the
    claimant's and his partner's marriage  and  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.  Clearly, in such circumstances, the degree of  interference
    with the family's protected rights under Article 8 would be minimal and
    therefore proportionate to the respondent's  objective.   However,  the
    outcome of an application for entry clearance cannot be  predicted  (SB
    (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  28)  and  I  therefore  consider,
    irrespective of this finding, whether, if the claimant were removed, it
    would be reasonable for his partner's child to leave the UK permanently
    in order to keep the family unit together in Zimbabwe.

17. The FTTJ found that, were it not for the child, he  would  have  little
    hesitation  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that   it   would   not   be
    disproportionate for the claimant and his partner to enjoy family  life
    in Zimbabwe.  He noted they are very familiar with that  country,  that
    they are Zimbabwean citizens without refugee status and that they  have
    family there. The claimant's partner is  working  in  the  UK  and  has
    acquired skills and experience which would assist her in  finding  work
    on return. The claimant too could find employment.  They are capable of
    earning an income to sustain themselves and the  child  and  to  afford
    accommodation or live with their families.

18. I turn to the best interests of the  child  and  make  them  a  primary
    consideration. I consider whether it would be  reasonable  for  him  to
    leave the UK, given that the public interest does not require him to do
    so if that is not the case (section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act).

19. The child is an eleven year old British boy and entitled  to  all  that
    his citizenship brings: an education, access to  healthcare,  a  social
    life with his friends and so on.  He has never lived  outside  the  UK.
    He undoubtedly has friends both in- and  outside  school,  as  well  as
    within the family circle. His  best  interests  lie  in  his  remaining
    within the family unit in this country. In that way he can continue his
    education, moving on to secondary school in the UK. He  would  continue
    to have access to free healthcare.

20. I take into account the public interest considerations in s117A-117C of
    the 2002 Act.  The maintenance of effective immigration control  is  in
    the public interest.  He  has  a  lengthy  and  precarious  immigration
    history. He has no immigration status.  The claimant speaks English but
    is not financially independent: he is dependent on his partner.  He met
    his partner when he had no immigration status and little weight  should
    be given to his private life or relationship with his  partner  because
    it was  established  at  a  time  when  the  claimant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  S117B(6) provides that, in the case of a person who is not
    liable to  deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where-

         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


21. S117D(1)  provides that a "qualifying child" includes a person  who  is
    under the age of 18 and a British citizen.   The  claimant's  partner's
    child is such a child. I therefore turn to  the  issue  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. In
    doing so I bear in mind that it is in his best interests to  remain  in
    the UK within the family unit.

22. The child is on the point  of  completing  his  primary  education  and
    embarking on his secondary education; thus, to some extent, there  will
    be a degree of interruption in his education in any event.  If he  were
    to move to Zimbabwe with his mother and the claimant, the  family  unit
    would remain intact.  The child has  no  contact  with  his  biological
    father and there is no evidence to suggest that this would occur if  he
    were to remain in the UK.  There is an education system in Zimbabwe and
    he could continue his education there.  His mother is working in the UK
    and would be able to find work in Zimbabwe; she has transferable skills
    as a carer.  The claimant is a Zimbabwean citizen and would be able  to
    find work also.  The couple have family in Bulawayo who  could  provide
    the claimant, his partner and the child with support and assistance  at
    least in the short term until they find employment and can afford their
    own accommodation.  The child would have access to  healthcare,  albeit
    not to the same standard as in the UK.   The  child  is  familiar  with
    Zimbabwean custom and culture,  living  as  he  does  in  a  Zimbabwean
    household in the UK. He undoubtedly has contact within  the  Zimbabwean
    diaspora in the UK. English is spoken  in  Zimbabwe  and  he  could  be
    educated in that language.  There is no evidence to the effect that his
    best interests and/or welfare would be  undermined  by  his  living  in
    Zimbabwe.


23. Whilst I recognise  that  the  child  would  lose  the  opportunity  to
    continue his education in the  UK,  his  country  of  nationality,  his
    citizenship is not a trump card (ZH).  I also recognise he  would  lose
    direct contact with school and other friends but he is of an  age  when
    he could make new friends at his new school  and  indeed  he  would  be
    starting at secondary school in the UK in any event: his education  and
    social life will take a slightly different course even if he remains in
    the UK.  In Zimbabwe, he would be able to retain contact  with  friends
    in the UK via the internet and other media and visits.  Taking all  the
    relevant factors into account and giving his best interests and welfare
    primary consideration, I am satisfied that it would be  reasonable  for
    him to leave the UK within the family unit, even if the family  had  to
    remain in Zimbabwe permanently  as  a  result  of  the  claimant  being
    refused entry clearance.  It follows that any temporary or shorter stay
    in Zimbabwe (if  entry  clearance  were  granted)  would  similarly  be
    reasonable.

24. Having considered the evidence in the round, I find that the degree  of
    interference  with  the  claimant's,  his  partner's  and  her  child's
    protected Article 8 rights is justified and proportionate to the public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

Decision

25. I do not set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  or
    under the Immigration Rules. That decision stands.


26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on  human
    rights grounds does involve a material error of law, as set out above.

27. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds and remake it, dismissing the appeal.



A M Black

Signed                                             Date 19 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award
The FTTJ did not make a fee award and,  the  appeal  having  been  dismissed
there can be no fee award now.



A M Black

Signed                                             Date 19 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

