
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01645/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     EY
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Fripp, Counsel instructed by Alaga & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could  give
       rise to contempt of court proceedings.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born on  23  January  1970.  He
       entered the UK unlawfully in May 1996 and applied unsuccessfully  for
       asylum. He appealed but the appeal was abandoned in  April  1998.  In
       October 2010 the appellant applied to remain in the UK on  the  basis
       of long residence and under Article 8. The application was refused on
       30 September 2014 and the appellant appealed. His appeal was heard by
       the First-tier Tribunal on  18  December  2014  and  allowed  to  the
       limited extent that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance
       with the law such that his application remained outstanding with  the
       respondent. Thereafter, on 20 January 2015,  the  respondent  made  a
       further decision refusing leave to remain. Directions were given  for
       the removal of the appellant to Turkey.

    3. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter of 20 January 2015 states
       that the appellant had applied for asylum and  because  human  rights
       had been raised in the original claim prior to the Human  Rights  Act
       1998 his application generated a fresh right of  appeal.  The  letter
       repeated reasons for refusal given in 1996  and  concluded  that  the
       appellant did not  qualify  for  asylum.   The  refusal  letter  then
       considered, and rejected, the appellant's  claim  that  removing  him
       from the UK would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

  Decision of the First tier Tribunal

    4. The appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First  tier
       Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Kelly who, in a  decision  promulgated  on  16
       June 2015, dismissed the appeal.

    5. The FtT did not adjudicate  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.  At  the
       outset of the hearing the judge determined that there was not a basis
       to hear the asylum appeal. The decision records that this was  common
       ground between the representatives of the  parties  although  Counsel
       for the appellant "was instructed to pursue  the  asylum  claim  even
       though she accepted there was no legal basis for doing so."

    6. The FtT then proceeded to consider the appellant's Article  8  claim.
       The judge firstly considered whether the appellant satisfied Appendix
       FM or Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. Having found that he  did
       not, the judge then assessed Article 8 outside  the  Rules  following
       the five stage approach set out in Razgar.

    7. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant was in a  genuine  and
       subsisting  relationship  with  his  purported  partner  or  that  he
       intended to  reside  with  her  permanently.  The  judge  found  that
       although the appellant had been in the UK for 19 years he  maintained
       connections to Turkey having worked  and  been  educated  there.  His
       sister stated in oral evidence that she would support him financially
       in Turkey. The judge  found  the  appellant  was  familiar  with  the
       culture and traditions of  Turkey.  In  respect  of  the  appellant's
       siblings in the UK, the judge found that the relationships did not go
       beyond the normal attachments between adult relatives.

    8. In considering proportionality, the judge took into  account  Section
       117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002
       Act"), noting in  particular  that  Section  117B(4)   requires  that
       little weight should be given to a private life  established  when  a
       person is in the  UK  unlawfully  and  that  the  appellant  had  not
       demonstrated any significant ability  to  speak  English  (117B(2))or
       financial independence (117B(3)).

    9. The grounds of appeal submit that (a) the failure to  adjudicate  the
       appellant's asylum claim was misconceived; and (b) the FtT  erred  in
       its  approach  to  the  treatment  of  proportionality  outwith   the
       Immigration Rules.

  Submissions

   10. With regard to the asylum claim, Mr Staunton conceded that the  there
       had been a material error of law in failing to consider the claim and
       it was common ground between the parties that this  issue  should  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   11. With regard to the claim under Article 8, Mr Fripp made clear that he
       was not  challenging  the  judge's  findings  of  fact.  Nor  was  he
       contending  that  the  component  findings  of  the  judge  were  not
       sustainable. Rather, his argument was that the ultimate  question  of
       whether Article 8 applies should be left open for rehearing  even  if
       all the factual findings made by the FtT are preserved. He  contended
       that there were issues in relation to the asylum claim  that  have  a
       bearing on the Article 8 claim and the FtT had not considered  these.
       Mr Staunton's response was that the appellant's grounds  in  relation
       to Article 8 are  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
       findings. The judge had applied Article 8 properly, carrying out  the
       required balancing act in assessing proportionality and  taking  into
       account  the  relevant  factors  under  the  2002  Act  including  in
       particular that the appellant 's private life  had  been  established
       whilst in the UK unlawfully.

  Findings

   12. The FtT made a material error of law by  failing  to  adjudicate  the
       appellant's asylum claim. The respondent's decision to remove him  to
       Turkey was appealable under Section 82 of the 2002 Act on the grounds
       stipulated in Section 84 of the 2002 Act which include  that  removal
       would result in a breach of  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  1951
       Refugee Convention. This was stated clearly in the removal directions
       served on the appellant on  23  January  2015.  As  conceded  at  the
       hearing by Mr Staunton, it was not open to the FtT to decide  not  to
       hear the asylum appeal.

   13. However, the FtT's decision with respect to the appellant's Article 8
       claim does not contain an error of law. On  the  contrary,  it  is  a
       carefully considered decision where a finding  is  reached  that  was
       clearly open to the judge.

   14. The FtT correctly identified  and  applied  the  relevant  Rules  and
       having found that the appellant could not  satisfy  them  (a  finding
       that has not been challenged)  considered  the  appellant's  position
       outside  the  Rules.   In  considering   proportionality,   the   FtT
       recognised the length of time the appellant had been in  the  UK  but
       weighed against this that he:
        a. did not meet the requirements of Immigration Rules;
        b. had entered and remained in the country unlawfully;
        c. had absconded from the immigration authorities and failed to
           maintain contact with the respondent;
        d. had not demonstrated any significant ability to speak English;
        e. was not financially independent;
        f. speaks Turkish fluently;
        g. has relatives who could assist him if he were returned to
           Turkey; and
        h. remained familiar with the customs and traditions of Turkey.

   15. In  assessing  proportionality  the  FtT  cited  and  considered  the
       relevant provisions of Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  noting  in
       particular subparagraph (4) (concerning the weight  to  be  given  to
       private  life  established  by  a  person  in  the  UK   unlawfully);
       subparagraph (2) (concerning  the  ability  to  speak  English);  and
       subparagraph (3) (concerning financial independence).

   16. Having considered and weighed the evidence, and  taken  into  account
       the relevant statutory provisions, it was  undoubtedly  open  to  the
       judge to dismiss the  appeal  under  Article  8  and  find  that  any
       interference to the appellant's private life  is  outweighed  by  the
       respondent's interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

   17.  Having  regard  to  section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts   and
       Enforcement Act 2007 and the President's Practice  Statement  7.2(a),
       given that the effect of the error of law in relation to adjudicating
       the appellant's asylum claim has  been  to  deprive  him  of  a  fair
       hearing before the FtT, the appellant's asylum claim is  remitted  to
       the FtT for hearing afresh.

 Decision

   18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error  of
       law in respect of the appellant's claim for asylum and is set aside.

   19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  before
       a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Kelly.

   20. An anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 26 October 2015               |

