








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01104/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 22 February 2016                       |on 12 April 2016                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                                    [A A]
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, counsel (instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I make an anonymity direction. This direction is to  remain  in  place
      unless and until this Tribunal or any other appropriate court, directs
      otherwise. As such, no report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
      indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family. Failure
      to comply with this direction could amount to a contempt of Court.


   2. The appellant is a national of Somalia, born on [ ] 1949.  His  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent refusing his asylum  and  human
      rights claims was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a
      decision promulgated on 1 October 2015. The appeal was heard at Hatton
      Cross on 7 May 2015.  There was accordingly almost a five month  delay
      from the date of  hearing  and  the  subsequent  promulgation  of  the
      decision.


   3. On 30 November  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination is unreliable because of
      the effluxion of time. There was "an undeniable and  regrettable  four
      month delay" between the hearing  of  this  appeal  and  promulgation.
      Judge Goldstein was persuaded that this does raise a concern,  mindful
      not least of the  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings,  given  the
      guidance in MOJ and Others (Return to Somalia) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
      00442 (IAC) as it relates to the risk on return to those  claiming  to
      be associated with the Somali government.


   4. Ms Fisher, who did not represent the appellant at the hearing  in  May
      2015, submitted at the outset that there were two grounds  relied  on:
      the delay and the failure to give proper reasons.


   5. She noted the Judge's findings of credibility against the appellant.


   6. She referred to the decision in MOJ, where at  paragraph  (i)  of  the
      headnote, the Tribunal concluded that generally a person  who  is  "an
      ordinary civilian" (i.e. not  associated  with  security  forces,  any
      aspect  of  government  or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or
      international organisation) on returning to Mogadishu after  a  period
      of absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such
      as  to  require  protection  under  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


   7. In the reasons for refusal, the respondent stated at paragraph 34 that
      in applying the guidance "it is deemed possible for you to  return  to
      Mogadishu and not face any persecution, as your claim to work for  the
      government has not been accepted and therefore your risk  upon  return
      to Mogadishu is made in regards to you being an  ordinary  citizen  of
      Somalia."


   8. Ms Fisher noted that there was thus a crucial issue as to  whether  or
      not the appellant had been working for the Somali government. In  that
      respect, the appellant had produced an ID card which had  been  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.  It was also produced at the  hearing  on  22
      February 2016.  The appellant had also  produced  various  letters  in
      support of his claim from the  Deputy  Minister  of  the  Ministry  of
      Commerce and Industry in Somalia, as well as an affidavit of a  lawyer
      certifying the translations and a list of  members  of  parliament  of
      Somalia and various articles and reports.


   9. At [43] the First-tier Judge was not satisfied that the appellant  had
      worked  for  the  Somali  government  as  claimed.   As   there   were
      inconsistencies in his evidence, he had not established that he worked
      for the Somali government.


  10. Ms Fisher  submitted  that  although  the  ID  card  relating  to  the
      appellant's employment was before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Judge
      made no  mention  of  it  when  considering  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's claim that he worked for the government.


  11. The ID card said to have been issued on 6 February 2014  was  produced
      by the appellant. I noted that it stated on the card itself that it is
      issued by the Federal Government of the Somali Republic,  Ministry  of
      Commerce and Industry. It is stated to relate to  the  Office  of  the
      Director General. The ID card also contains a picture of the appellant
      and refers to him as the Head of Section.


  12. Although the ID card was in the bundle, the Judge  did  not  refer  or
      have regard to it at all.  Moreover,  in  relation  to  other  matters
      relied on by the Judge as showing  inconsistencies,  it  is  contended
      that the appellant had sent through his solicitors a detailed document
      setting out his response to the interview. However, the Judge did  not
      deal with that either.


  13. Ms Fisher submitted that having regard to the inordinate delay between
      the date of hearing and the promulgation of the Judge's decision,  the
      assessment of credibility issues was 'rendered unsafe'  and  tends  to
      undermine 'the loser's' confidence in the correctness of the  decision
      - Sambasivan v SSHD [2000] Imm AR at [15]. In the present case, it  is
      clear that credibility was the issue before  the  Tribunal  [38].  The
      Judge did not address  the  submissions  and  documentation  made  and
      supplied by the appellant.


  14. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the  respondent  stated  that  he  had  serious
      "misgivings" in seeking to uphold the  decision.  The  Judge  had  not
      dealt with the ID card which goes to the  heart  of  the  appeal.  The
      issue was whether he was  employed  by  the  Somali  government.  That
      affects the rest of the evidence surrounding that issue.  He  accepted
      that on its own, the failure  by  the  Judge  to  consider  a  crucial
      document was enough  potentially  to  infect  the  subsequent  adverse
      credibility findings made against the appellant.


  15. He therefore accepted that the matter should be remitted to the First-
      tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


Assessment


  16. It is evident that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider  the
      ID card, the original  of  which  was  produced.  There  had  been  no
      contention that the card  was  not  genuine  or  lacked  authenticity.
      Moreover, the Judge failed to have regard to  the  detailed  responses
      made by the appellant through his solicitors regarding his interview.


  17. In the circumstances, I found that the concession made  by  Mr  Tarlow
      was entirely appropriate. The appellant has  thus  not  had  his  case
      considered on the basis of all the relevant evidence relating  to  his
      employment. I find that it is accordingly appropriate having regard to
      the Senior President's Guidance, for the case to be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal, Hatton Cross, for a fresh decision to be made  by
      any other Judge.


  18. The agreed hearing date is [ ], at Hatton Cross.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set  aside.  It  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, Hatton Cross, for a fresh  decision  to  be  made.  The  new
      hearing date is [ ].


      The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is continued.














      Signed                             Date 17 March 2016


      Judge C R Mailer


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

