
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01662/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 8th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Miss M S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Javid, Thompson & Co Solicitors


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

 1. This is the Respondent's application against First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Maxwell's determination promulgated on 18th  March  2015  by  which  he
    allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph   276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State's  grounds  argue  that  the
    Judge was not entitled to go behind the findings of the previous  Judge
    in an earlier appeal who had found that the Appellant  was  not  Somali
    but a national of Djibouti.  The Judge did go behind that  finding  and
    indicated that he did  not  consider  himself  bound  by  the  previous
    Tribunal's Decision.  That is an error of law  and  not  in  accordance
    with the guidance of Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1.

 2. He also criticised the Secretary of State for proceeding on the  basis,
    he said, without evidence or explanation,  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Djibouti national.  However, it is quite  clear  that  the  reason  the
    Secretary of State did so was because that had been the finding of  the
    previous Judge.  The Judge then overturned the finding of the  previous
    Tribunal, finding that the Appellant is a national of Somalia.  He then
    considered paragraph 276ADE on the basis that  she  is  a  national  of
    Somalia when he ought to have considered it on the basis of  her  as  a
    national of Djibouti.

 3. The Decision contains numerous errors but that is the main  one.   Also
    the judge purported to quash the removal directions to  Djibouti  which
    is something that he  had  no  power  to  do.   Having  consulted  both
    representatives before me it was accepted that the Decision is  tainted
    by errors of law which go to the heart of the appeal and that it should
    be set aside in its entirety and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be heard de novo and that is what I do.

Notice of Decision

On that basis the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the  limited
extent that it is set aside and remitted for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 7th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

