

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01672/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Sent           |
|On 9th June 2014                              |On 29th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCARTHY

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            RIDA AHMED MUSA ASKAR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Madanhi of Bake & Co

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) appeals a decision  of  the  First-
      tier  Tribunal,  which  allowed  the   respondent's   (hereafter   the
      claimant's) appeal against a decision to  remove  him  as  an  illegal
      entrant dated 21st February 2014. The claimant had applied for asylum,
      such claim being refused for reasons set out in a  letter  dated  21st
      February 2014.


   2. Permission to appeal had  been  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
      failing to follow the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in RB [2010] UKUT
      329 which was generally upheld by the Court of  Appeal  in  RB  [2012]
      EWCA Civ 277. Permission was further granted on the  grounds  that  it
      was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for finding  the  claimant's  account  plausible  and
      failing to make findings on significant credibility issues  that  were
      before her.


      Background

   3. The claimant claimed to be an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoun and thus  at
      risk of being persecuted for a  Convention  reasons  and  in  need  of
      international protection; the SSHD asserted that he was Egyptian.


   4. The claimant claimed he had been arrested at his employer's address in
      February 2007, the evening after he had been out graffitying; detained
      for two months; beaten on a daily basis and  then  released  after  he
      agreed to inform on other Bidoun activists. A number of  discrepancies
      in his claim for asylum are set out in the reasons for refusal  letter
      including

   i. Different addresses at which he claimed to have lived in Kuwait;
  ii. Whether he was unemployed or a shepherd;
 iii. Whether he had been arrested on the first occasion he  had  graffitied
      or on the second occasion.

   5. The claimant undertook  a  Sprakab  language  analysis  interview  the
      preliminary results of which were that he was,  with  high  certainty,
      likely to have a linguistic background from Egypt. This was put to him
      during his asylum interview and he is recorded to have responded  that
      he had been out of the country since  2007  and  had  not  mixed  with
      Kuwaitis.


      Error of law

   6. Before us Mr Mills stated that in  the  light  of  the  Supreme  Court
      judgment in MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30  he  was  no  longer  relying  on
      ground 1 of the grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been
      granted.


   7. He stated that he continued to rely upon ground 2 but  had  little  to
      add  in  submissions  to  that  which  appeared  in  the  grounds.  He
      acknowledged that Ground 2 in essence flowed from ground 1, namely the
      failure by the First-tier Tribunal judge to place any weight upon  the
      Sprakab report but despite this he submitted that the issues raised in
      the reasons for refusal letter had been inadequately considered by the
      judge and inadequate reasons given by her in allowing the appeal.

   8. We did not consider it necessary to call upon Mr Madanhi and dismissed
      the SSHD's appeal and we now give our reasons.

   9. The reasons for refusal letter identified a number of issues where the
      SSHD considered the claimant's account was  not  credible.  The  judge
      considered the evidence before her and reached  reasoned  findings  on
      why she accepted the appellant's account as regards the  discrepancies
      in his account regarding employment; the number of occasions  he  went
      out graffitiying and with regard to his detention. In  reaching  those
      findings she totally disregarded the Sprakab report, which as referred
      to earlier, Mr Mills no longer sought to rely on.


  10. Although  we  asked  Mr  Mills  to  identify  with  particularity  the
      credibility challenges that remained given the lack  of  challenge  to
      the dismissal of the Sprakab report, Mr Mills was content to rely upon
      the reasons for refusal letter only.


  11. In  the  absence  of  challenge  to  the  claimant's  nationality  and
      ethnicity, the remaining challenges to  his  account  were  adequately
      considered  and  reasoned,  albeit  briefly,  and  adequate   reasoned
      findings given by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  for  her  conclusion
      that the claim for international protection was made out.

  12. Accordingly we find no error of law in the determination  and  dismiss
      the SSHD's appeal. We uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision to allow
      the claimant's appeal against the decision to remove him from the UK.



  13.  Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     We do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge stands.



                                    Date 28th July 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
