
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01436/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2016                  |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     ST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, in-house advocate of Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Reeds  dated  10  December  2015.  The
    appeal relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly whereby
    a Decision was promulgated on 15 October.  The Judge at the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dismissed the appeal on asylum and all other grounds.

2.    The Appellant had appealed against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and relied on three grounds:

      1) A failure to make any findings on  the  Appellant's  background  in
         Afghanistan and in particular in respect of his father (said to  be
         a Mujahedin commander);

      2) A failure to provide adequate reasons  for  findings  made  because
         there are mere assertions only;

      3) Unsustainable reasons for making adverse credibility findings and a
         failure to take into account other evidence including that  of  the
         Appellant's sister who had given evidence at the hearing;

      4) Errors of approach in respect of the Appellant's age;

      5) A material misdirection in law in respect of  internal  relocation;
         and

      6) A failure to take into account the latest background  material  and
         instead reliance on older country guidance.

3.    In readiness for this appeal the  Respondent  had  lodged  a  Rule  24
    reply dated 5 January 2016.

4.    At the hearing before me this morning, after  brief  submissions  from
    Mr Hodson, Mr Kotas said on behalf of the Respondent very carefully and
    thoughtfully that in reality he could take the case no further. He said
    he had discussed the matter with Mr Hodson before the hearing and  that
    he agreed that there has been no proper findings by  the  Judge.  There
    were questions in respect of  paragraphs  40  and  43  of  the  Judge's
    decision as to whether internal relocation was unduly  harsh.  He  said
    that there ought to be a remittal of the case for  a  further  hearing,
    but that there ought to be preserved findings in  respect  of  the  age
    assessment. Mr Hodson replied and said that he agreed that the findings
    in respect of the age assessment ought to remain.

5.    Therefore there is an agreed position in respect of  this  case.  Both
    parties agree that the decision of the Judge cannot stand. That is  not
    only because of the relatively long time which elapsed between the date
    of the hearing and the making of  the  decision  but  because  of  more
    fundamental problems with the findings as  identified  in  the  written
    grounds and amplified orally before me today.

6.    Having considered the  decision  of  the  Judge  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal, in my judgment, Mr Kotas  is  quite  right  to  have  made  the
    concession that he did that the decision is  fundamentally  flawed  and
    cannot stand. Similarly Mr Hodson is also right  to  concede  that  the
    Judge's findings in respect  of  the  age  assessment  were  adequately
    reasoned and ought to remain.

7.    Accordingly I allow the  Appellant's  appeal.  There  will  be  a  re-
    hearing at the First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge  Kelly.  Only  the
    Judge's findings  at  paragraphs  29  to  33  in  respect  of  the  age
    assessment shall stand. The appeal will be re-heard on  protection  and
    human rights grounds.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge discloses material  errors  of
law and is set aside save in respect of the findings referred  to  above  in
relation to the age assessment.

The appeal shall be re-heard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 15 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

