
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 13 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                MA (Somalia)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                             Anonymity Direction

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. By way of an order of 2 May 2018 the Court of Appeal remitted  this
         matter to the Upper Tribunal in terms which included an order that:

             "[3] The appeal is remitted to the Upper Tribunal  for  it  to
             give further directions as to the conduct of the appeal.  Such
             directions are  to  include  provision  for  the  Respondent's
             appeal  to  be  heard  afresh  by  a  differently  constituted
             Tribunal of the First Tier Tribunal, save that the  conclusion
             of the First Tier Tribunal under s72 of the 2002 Act that  the
             Respondent does not constitute a danger to the community is to
             be treated (subject to material change of circumstances  since
             the  First  Tier  Tribunal's  determination)  as   a   binding
             determination of that issue."

      2. Since remittal the appeal has been stayed  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         pending the outcome of the appellant's application for legal aid to
         pursue an appeal against the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  to  the
         Supreme Court. The application to the LAA for funding has now  been
         refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed. For the  past  9  months
         the LAA and the appellant's solicitors have been engaged in further
         correspondence on the issue. I am now told that the solicitors  are
         contemplating issuing judicial review proceedings  challenging  the
         LAA's decision but have not yet instigated proceedings.

      3. The circumstances are such that it is now  time  to  discharge  the
         stay I imposed on these proceedings, and I do so.

      4. Pursuant to paragraph 3 of the Court of Appeal's  order  of  3  May
         2018, I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine
         afresh "save that the conclusion  of the First Tier Tribunal  under
         s72 of the 2002 Act that  the  Respondent  does  not  constitute  a
         danger to the community is  to  be  treated  (subject  to  material
         change  of  circumstances   since   the   First   Tier   Tribunal's
         determination) as a binding determination of that issue."




                    Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                                    [pic]
                           Date: 10 December 2019


