

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01438/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd January 2015                          |On 10th February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr B Hawkins, counsel, instructed by A & P
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which
         dismissed an appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  against  a
         decision to remove him pursuant to s10 Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         1999 (albeit incorrectly described by the First-tier Tribunal as an
         appeal against the refusal of asylum).


      2. Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds:


               i.  The  SSHD  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
                  proceeding on the basis that the appellant was  returnable
                  to India;
              ii. In the light of the findings of  fact  by  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal   the   First-tier   Tribunal   had   erred    in
                  characterising the appellant's activities  as  low  level;
                  had erred in finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
                  involved in 'separatist' activities in India; had erred in
                  failing to consider that if the Government of Sri  Lanka's
                  operations are intelligence led, post war, then the arrest
                  on 19th August 2011 was intelligence  led;  had  erred  in
                  failing to take account of or appreciate  the  appellant's
                  activities post May 2009 who had evaded the rehabilitation
                  process;
             iii. Had erred in failing to make findings of fact or  adequate
                  findings regarding the appellant's father and other family
                  members; had erred in failing to make findings of fact  or
                  adequate findings of fact with regard to  the  appellant's
                  historical links with the LTTE.


      3. The grounds assert that the appellant's evidence was to  be  deemed
         to have been accepted  and,  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission,
         proceeds to set out what they consider to  be  particular  elements
         that have been accepted. This is an incorrect  characterisation  of
         the First-tier Tribunal judgment.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         does not make findings that  he  accepts  all  of  the  appellant's
         evidence but rather that he finds the core of the appellant's claim
         credible. The First-tier Tribunal judge states


             [109] .....the essential evidence given by  the  appellant  is
             consistent, that is that the family left Sri Lanka and went to
             India both due to the fact of his  father's  LTTE  involvement
             and also because his mother was not well.
             ....
             [111].....I do therefore make an adverse  credibility  finding
             under section 8 due to the appellant's failure to claim asylum
             on arrival or within a reasonable period thereafter. I am  not
             however satisfied that that  adverse  credibility  finding  is
             sufficient to interfere with the positive credibility  finding
             I make that the appellant's other evidence as to the  core  of
             his claim is in fact truthful.
             [112] Although the respondent has raised  considerable  issues
             regarding this incident and in particular whether  the  family
             would have continued to support the LTTE,  the  appellant  and
             his brother have given a credible reason why they should  have
             done so once the LTTE  changed  their  position.  Taking  into
             account all of the  evidence  I  am  satisfied  to  the  lower
             standard of proof that the appellant has been a  supporter  of
             the LTTE, as have members of his family.
             [113] I therefore am satisfied that the appellant was detained
             in 2011 and that he was subjected to mistreatment. The  nature
             of his claim  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  independent
             evidence available as to the type of treatment suffered and is
             supported by the medical evidence. ....
             [114] Applying the lower standard of proof I am satisfied  the
             appellant has shown that he was detained and tortured in  2011
             and was then released on payment of a bribe.
             [115] I also accept the appellant's evidence as  to  the  fact
             that  he  has  undertaken  some  activities  in  this  country
             protesting against the Sri Lankan government. He has  provided
             one photograph of one event but this has indicated he attended
             others and there is a letter from Tamil Forum  confirming  his
             membership of that organisation. I am  not  however  satisfied
             even to the lower standard of proof on the evidence  available
             that the appellant would have come to the adverse attention of
             the Sri Lankan authorities as a result of his very  low  level
             involvement in protests in this country.
             ....
             [118]...The appellant's evidence  is  that  he  assisted  with
             purchasing items and then after 2009 with  refugees  who  came
             into India. There is nothing on the evidence available,  which
             would  indicate  the  appellant  has  been   promoting   Tamil
             separatism such as to be of interest to the authorities.
             ....
             [120] ..Although it is stated that the appellant's aunt  moved
             after  he  left  Sri  Lanka  to  avoid  harassment  form   the
             authorities, no statements have been provided from her.  There
             is nothing to support  the  appellant's  contention  that  his
             younger brother was subsequently arrested in 2014 as a  result
             of the family's LTTE involvement.
             [122] The appellant undertook low  level  activities  for  the
             LTTE and from 2009 assisted with refugees who came into India.
             In this country he has attended a number of demonstrations and
             has joined Tamil  Forum.  There  is  nothing  however  on  the
             evidence available which would indicate that the appellant  is
             an activist or that he would be perceived as an activist  such
             as now to be of interest to the authorities on return.
             [123] I am not satisfied even to the lower standard  of  proof
             that the appellant would  come  within  in  any  of  the  risk
             factors currently set out in GJ. I am not therefore  satisfied
             that the appellant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka for
             a convention reasons.
             [124]...The appellant states he could not  return  [to  India]
             due to the fact that Q branch have an  interest  in  him.  The
             appellant states  that  this  is  because  of  his  activities
             helping the refugees leaving Sri  Lanka  and  because  of  his
             family's involvement with the LTTE.
             [125] The appellant has provided a letter from his  father  in
             support, which confirms that they left Sri Lanka in 2001.  The
             appellant states in his oral evidence that he was  advised  by
             his father that Q branch were looking for him and that is  why
             he went back to Sri Lanka in 2011. He did not make any mention
             of his father being at risk until in his own witness statement
             he refers to his father recently being  questioned  about  his
             own activities.
             [126] The appellant's father in his statement  however  states
             in August 2009, at a  time  when  the  appellant  was  on  his
             evidence actively involved in helping Sri Lankan refuges,  was
             himself harassed was (sic) by Q branch on suspicion of helping
             LTTE members and supporters. He  states  in  order  to  invade
             (sic) their harassment they moved to a camp on 20 August 2009.
             [127] The appellant did not make any mention of this and I  do
             not therefore accept this letter as a  credible  statement  of
             the position. The  objective  information  indicate  that  the
             Indian authorities have assisted Sri Lankan refugees and I  do
             not find it credible that Q branch would have any interest  in
             him  whatsoever  for  his  simply  assisting  refugees  on   a
             humanitarian basis.
             [128] .....both his parents still remain in India....


      4. Contrary to the assertions in the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal the First-tier Tribunal did not accept the totality  of  the
         appellant's claim, but the core of the claim.  The  judge  did  not
         make specific findings with regard to every element of  claim  made
         by the appellant but, having made an  overall  adverse  credibility
         finding set out the core elements of the appellant's claim  he  did
         and did not accept: that the family had left Sri Lanka for India in
         2001 partly because of his father's activities but also because his
         mother was unwell; that the appellant and  his  father  had  helped
         refugees in India; that the  Indian  authorities  had  no  interest
         whatsoever in either the appellant or his  father  with  regard  to
         their activities helping  refugees;  that  the  appellant  and  his
         family have been supporters of the LTTE; that the  family  did  not
         move to a camp in  August  2009  to  avoid  harassment  because  of
         support for the LTTE; that his younger brother was not arrested  in
         2014 because of family involvement in LTTE activity; his father has
         not been questioned about his own  activities;  the  appellant  was
         arrested, tortured, detained between August 2011 and November  2011
         and released upon payment of a bribe; the appellant  has  very  low
         level involvement in activities in the UK; the  appellant's  cousin
         has leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a refugee.


      5. The characterisation of the appellant's  activities  as  'very  low
         level' was a finding that was open to the First-tier Tribunal judge
         on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  him  and  the  credibility
         findings made. He accepted that the appellant (and his father)  had
         been  providing  humanitarian  assistance  to  refugees  and   made
         reasoned and sustainable findings that they would be of no interest
         to  the  Indian  authorities.  He  gave  reasoned  and  sustainable
         findings for his characterisation of the appellant's activities  in
         the UK being very low level. His findings were neither perverse nor
         irrational.


      6. Contrary to what  is  asserted  in  the  grounds,  the  judge  made
         findings as regards the appellant' s  father's  activities.  It  is
         plain that the judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  and  his
         father were doing any  more  than  providing  humanitarian  aid  in
         India. The judge specifically rejects the  claim  that  the  family
         moved to a camp or that the appellant's younger  brother  had  been
         arrested  because  of  the  family's  activities.  He  specifically
         rejected the contention that the  father  had  been  questioned  by
         Indian intelligence. Although no specific finding was made  by  the
         judge as to whether the appellant faced any risk because his father
         was "of serious and current adverse interest" to the government  of
         Sri Lanka that is because in the light of the findings made it  was
         not necessary for him to do so - the  father  is  not   at  current
         adverse interest.


      7. In so far as the  assertion  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
         whether, given "historical links to the LTTE, family links past and
         repeated attendance at protests  and  membership  of  a  proscribed
         organisation" the appellant would be at risk, this is an  assertion
         of a failure that is based upon a false  premise.  The  judge  made
         sustainable findings that were open to him on the  evidence  as  to
         the appellant's current involvement; he considered the evidence  as
         to past LTTE involvement and family links and whilst accepting they
         had existed in the past did not accept, for reasons open to him  on
         the evidence before him, that they were current such  as  to  place
         the appellant at risk in the light of GJ  and  others  [2013]  UKUT
         00319 (IAC).


      8. Reference is made in the  grant  of  permission  to  the  issue  of
         whether the judge, given that the appellant's arrest in 2011  would
         have been intelligence-led post the settlement in May 2009,  should
         have or had failed to give consideration to whether he would be  at
         risk of further arrest if returned for similar reasons. This is not
         specifically pleaded  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  but  I
         invited submissions  on  this  point.  Mr  Hawkins  confirmed  that
         release upon payment of a bribe  was  not  determinative  and  also
         acknowledged that upon payment of a  bribe  it  was  reasonable  to
         conclude  that  either  the  person  had  been   released   without
         difficulty and the bribe had been taken in any event  or  that  the
         person who had taken the bribe would take steps  to  see  that  any
         records of the appellant's release would  coincide  with  a  lawful
         release so that the receiver of the  bribe  would  not  himself  be
         implicated in an escape or unlawful release. Although the judge did
         not address this  issue,  in  the  light  of  the  judge's  overall
         findings and the low level of the appellant's  activities  and  the
         guidance in GJ, it is not reasonably  likely  that  this  appellant
         would be on a stop list and would not be  identified  as  being  of
         further interest to the authorities.


      9. Although it could perhaps have been  clearer  had  the  judge  made
         specific findings on more of the elements of the appellant's claim,
         it is apparent from a reading of the determination as a whole  that
         the judge addressed the appellant's credibility and the evidence as
         a whole and  reached  conclusions  that  were  neither  irrational,
         perverse nor unreasonable.


     10. In so far as  the  issue  of  return  to  India  is  concerned,  Mr
         Shilliday commented that he was not sure  how  a  return  to  India
         would fit with the  Refugee  Convention;  the  appellant  had  been
         living in India prior to coming to the  UK  but  there  was  little
         evidence of exactly what his status was.  Although  the  respondent
         refers to him having been recognised as a refugee it  is  difficult
         to accept this to be the case because India is not a  signatory  to
         the Refugee Convention. It Is difficult to ascertain on  the  basis
         of the documents before the First-tier Tribunal or me on what basis
         the respondent would  be  able  to  lawfully  forcibly  remove  the
         appellant to India but in terms of this appeal the matter is otiose
         - this appellant is not at risk of being persecuted  in  Sri  Lanka
         and can return there, the country of his nationality. If he chooses
         to go to India that is a matter for him. If the respondent attempts
         to remove him to India one would expect her to produce evidence  of
         her lawful ability to do so.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



     Date 23rd January 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
