
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2014                          |On 9 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEWIS

                                   Between

                           ARULAMBALAM KATHIRESAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1.   This is an appeal brought  by  the  Appellant  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination dated 19 June 2014 where he dismissed an
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant and a person subject to  administrative  removal  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and asylum Act 1999.  Before  us,  as  he
    was below, the appellant has been represented by Mr Patrick  Lewis.  We
    record at the outset our grateful assistance for his helpful  oral  and
    written submissions.

2.   The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  born  on  28  May  1965  and
    therefore is now some 49 years old.  He claimed to be a  refugee  whose
    removal from the United  Kingdom  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
    Protection Qualifications Regulations 2006.  Alternatively  he  claimed
    to be entitled to be granted to humanitarian protection  in  accordance
    with paragraph 339C of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC
    395 (as amended).  Additionally it was said that his removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
    1950 Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
    Freedoms (with particular reference to Articles 2 and 3).

3.   The Secretary of State issued her refusal decision  in  a  lengthy  and
    reasoned letter dated 4 February 2014. In essence she  found  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for asylum  nor  the  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.  Nor would Convention rights be breached if he was returned
    to Sri Lanka.  She did not consider his account of his arrest  and  his
    detention in Sri Lanka to be credible.  She considered the risk on  his
    return and the country guidance case of GJ and Others (Post  civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) ("GJ").  The  appellant
    was not within a risk category nor was he on a stop list  engaging  any
    of the identified risk factors.

The hearing and determination

4.   The appellant did not give evidence below.  This is said to be  because
    of the unchallenged psychiatric evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  the
    effect that there would be a  risk  of  further  deterioration  in  his
    mental health due to intense anxiety and fear when exposed to reminders
    of traumatic events.

5.   In a careful and lengthy judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  his
    judgment went through the following steps.  He set out the  burden  and
    standard of proof.  He moved on to summarise the appellant's  claim  as
    set out in his asylum screening interview of 22 July 2009,  his  asylum
    interview record of 25 May 2011 and his statement.  As recorded in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter the broad background was that the  appellant
    is a Hindu.  He was a fisherman.  He married on 8 March 2001  and  last
    saw his wife in December 2008.  They have a daughter together  who  was
    born in August 2006.  His claim is to the effect that the government in
    Sri Lanka suspects him of working for the LTTE.  He has  been  arrested
    three times, in 1997, 2008 and 2009.  In 1997 he was working in an LTTE
    controlled area.  He stayed longer than usual.  He  was  arrested  with
    his brother, detained and taken to prison. He began assisting the  LTTE
    in 2006. He had been carrying ammunition on the  boat  when  an  engine
    broke and he was stopped by a navy ship.  He  was  detained  again  and
    questioned. He left Sri Lanka for Greece. He did not know exactly when,
    but was arrested in Greece.  Indeed  his  entire  group  was  arrested.
    Fingerprints were taken and he was retuned then to Sri Lanka.

6.   He was next detained on 19 January 2009.  The  CID  investigated.  They
    handcuffed, blindfolded him and placed him in a van. He  was  detained,
    on one version of events, for ten days and severely  tortured.  He  was
    asked about being a member of the LTTE, something  which  he  initially
    denied but then went on to confess.  He  said  variously  he  was  then
    detained for some two months. His uncle,  he  says,  arranged  for  his
    release.

7.   On 1 April 2009 he was handed over to his uncle who had  paid  4  lakhs
    for his escape to the CID and 1 lakh to another group.   He then stayed
    with a family on a coconut farm for some three  months  before  leaving
    Sri Lanka for the United Kingdom.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  went  on  to  set  out  the  appellant's
    immigration history, including the fact that he was encountered by Kent
    Police on 26 July 2009 having been found under a lorry.  He was  served
    notice of a person liable to removal and considered an illegal  entrant
    under Section 33(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971  (as  amended).   His
    fingerprint results showed that  he  had  previously  been  in  Greece.
    Removal directions were set for Greece but cancelled after  a  judicial
    review claim was lodged.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  record  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal and then also to set out the grounds underlying the
    appeal before her.

10.  Having set out the material background, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    went on to make detailed findings of credibility and fact.  We refer in
    particular  to  paragraphs  21  through  to   paragraph   32   of   the
    determination.

11.  Under Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc) Act 2004 she was obliged to take  into  account  as  damaging  the
    claimant's credibility any behaviour to which that section applied.  On
    the appellant's own evidence he had travelled both  to  Greece  and  to
    France but had failed to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity  to
    make an asylum or human rights claim.  Thus the judge  found  that  his
    credibility was damaged under Section 8(4) of the Act.  To this, whilst
    initially there was a challenge, there is before us now no challenge.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    credibility   was   further   undermined   by    inconsistencies    and
    implausibilities in his account which  were  cumulatively  significant.
    She did not find as credible his account as to the fear of  what  might
    await him in Sri Lanka or as to the threats leading to his travel.  The
    inconsistencies are set out in paragraphs 24 and 25  in  particular  of
    her judgment.  We note that no challenge is made at all to the  judge's
    reasoning as to  or  reliance  on  the  inconsistencies  identified  in
    paragraphs 24 and 25.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  went  on  to  deal  with  the  available
    report on scarring, holding that the mere existence of  scars  did  not
    indicate that the injuries had been sustained in  the  manner  alleged.
    Given the prior lack of credibility on the part of the  appellant,  the
    report was of no assistance.  Again  there  is  no  challenge  to  this
    approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on to  acknowledge  that  there
    was objective evidence that in certain  circumstances  release  on  the
    payment of bribes in Sri Lanka was possible.   However,  on  the  facts
    here, such a version of events was not credible, not least  since  this
    was a second release  of  the  appellant  in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant was not merely suspected of activity with LTTE.  On  his  own
    version of events he had actually admitted such involvement and  indeed
    signed a statement to that effect.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on  deal  in  detail  with  the
    psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   She
    recorded the fact that the appellant had been examined by Dr Dhumad  in
    June 2014, was found to be depressed, withdrawn and slow but having  no
    evidence of thought disorder, delusions or hallucinations.  The  report
    concluded that there  was  clear  evidence  of  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder symptoms, that the appellant  was  not  able  to  recall  some
    details due  to  poor  concentration  but  there  was  no  evidence  of
    significant memory problems.

16.  At paragraph 30 of the judgment the judge proceeded.  Given the  nature
    of this appeal we set it out in full :

         "The psychiatric report paints a picture of the  appellant  who  is
         suffering from PTSD and suicidal ideation if he were to be returned
         to Sri Lanka and also  of  an  individual  who  is  unfit  to  give
         evidence at any court hearing or indeed unfit to fly.   However,  I
         note in the appellant's own witness  statement  (paragraph  53)  he
         states that after his release from detention  in  October  2009  he
         participated in political rallies held in London condemning the Sri
         Lankan  government's  human  rights  violations  and  its   inhuman
         treatment of IDPs and continued to participate in protests and that
         during 2013, he  made  logistical  arrangements  for  a  number  of
         rallies and events, held in London.  He participated in Remembrance
         Day events and Heroes Day events, held annually in London.  He also
         made logistical arrangements for these events (promoting the event,
         volunteer recruitment, setting  up  chairs  and  tables,  providing
         refreshments, crowd control, parking  and  security  and  transport
         arrangements).  I find that if the appellant was suffering from his
         PTSD which  he  purports  to  the  extent  that  he  has  intrusive
         memories, nightmares and has avoidance of activities and situations
         reminiscent to torture (paragraph 9, page 10 psychiatric report) to
         the extent that he stated that he had been avoiding going  out  and
         avoiding watching violent scenes  on  television  as  it  made  him
         anxious and frightened and that he had been scared of  officers  in
         uniform such as the police, ambulance and army that he looks around
         all the time because of his fear he has been followed up by the Sri
         Lankan intelligence, he has been feeling depressed, he has been  in
         low mood, lacks enjoyment and feels lethargic and is  hopeless  and
         has poor concentration (page 10  psychiatric  report)  this  is  in
         direct contradiction to his  organising  events  to  highlight  the
         continued abuses by the authorities in Sri Lanka against the  Tamil
         separatist movement."

17.  She then went on to deal with the  fact  that  the  psychiatric  report
    mentioned the appellant  taking  overdoses,  having  been  admitted  to
    hospital in March 2013.  She highlighted  the  fact  that  the  medical
    notes available for that attendance did not refer to  any  overdose  at
    all.  Moreover the medical records for that occasion recorded the  fact
    that the appellant had apparently said he was not  personally  actively
    involved in fighting but had witnessed a lot of  war  experiences.   No
    mention of severe torture or detention  was  recorded  in  the  medical
    records for that occasion.

18.  Having made all of these findings, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  went
    on to conclude as follows:

         "32. Due to the conflicts in the appellant's accounts and what  has
             been said to the various medical personnel from time  to  time
             and the appellant's own statements as to his  actions  in  the
             United  Kingdom  I  place  little  or  no  weight   upon   the
             psychiatric report as corroborative evidence of his  treatment
             in Sri Lanka.  I note that the report from  the  South  London
             and Maudsley NHS Trust under the heading "Impression" stated

                 'This gentleman appears to be suffering from  a  depressive
                 episode  with  PTSD  type  features  triggered  by  ongoing
                 uncertainty in his immigration status.  He appeared to have
                 suffered a dissociative episode yesterday which appears  to
                 have recovered from.  There are no  thoughts  or  plans  to
                 harm himself currently.'

             Whilst I accept that the appellant may be anxious and
             concerned about his return to Sri Lanka as a failed asylum
             seeker I do not find on the evidence before me that there is
             anything to show that he has suffered the treatment he
             purports at the hands of the authorities in the past."

19.  In conclusion she found that the appellant had  fabricated  his  story.
    Whilst he might be suffering certain psychological problems due to  the
    thought of being returned, those problems were not linked to  any  ill-
    treatment that he had suffered. Thus the appeal on asylum, humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds failed.

This appeal

20.  Before us Mr Lewis for the appellant raises three  central  grounds  of
    appeal.  Firstly, it is said that the judge materially erred in law  in
    failing adequately to consider the psychiatric evidence of  Dr  Dhumad.
    It is said that  the  rejection  of  that  evidence  was  a  matter  of
    speculation only.  It was wrongly rejected for what were in essence  no
    more  than  minor  discrepancies.  Moreover  it  is   said   that   the
    inconsistencies found between the appellant's political activities  and
    the psychiatric  evidence  advanced  was  something  not  explored  the
    hearing.  It is also said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  wrong
    to conclude that the appellant did not mention severe  torture  in  Sri
    Lanka nor the detentions he purportedly experienced. Again it  is  said
    that that error was material.  It is also said  that  the  errors  made
    were highly relevant to the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  case  on
    Article 3.  The appellant argued that his removal  would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3 on the basis of his risk of suicide (see  YNZ  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    362).

21.  Secondly, it  is  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    material error of law in  failing  to  consider  the  risk  facing  the
    appellant arising from his diaspora activities in the  United  Kingdom.
    Reliance is placed on  GJ  and  in  particular  on  the  risk  category
    identified in paragraph 7A thereof:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to post  conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."


22.  What is said is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  reject  the
    appellant's evidence in paragraph 53 to which we have already referred.
     On that basis she ought to have found that the appellant either was or
    would be perceived to be a threat to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  and
    fall within the risk category identified in GJ.

23.  Thirdly, it is said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a  material
    error of law in failing to have regard to the country guidance in GJ  :
    in particular the finding  at  paragraph  28  was  at  odds  with  that
    guidance.  In GJ it was accepted that it was possible to use bribery as
    a method of release and that the seriousness of the charge would not be
    an impediment to any such activity.

24.  For the Secretary of State in essence it is said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  directed  herself  appropriately.   The  dismissal  and
    consideration of the psychiatric evidence was  an  exercise  adequately
    carried out.

Ruling

25.  We remind ourselves at the outset that an appeal to this Tribunal  lies
    only on the basis of a  material  error  of  law  (see  Section  11  of
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and for example R  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982).

26.  We turn to address the first ground of appeal,  namely  the  allegation
    that the judge failed adequately to consider the psychiatric  evidence.
    We reject this criticism. Firstly, the  psychiatric  report  was  based
    primarily on the appellant's factual account of events.  Dr Dhumad  was
    not in a position to make a credibility  assessment.   His  report  was
    based on what the appellant told him and little more, that itself being
    based on a single interview carried out on a single day in June.

27.  The appellant's criticism also in  our  judgment  underplays  what  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge held at paragraph 30.  Her reasoning was  not
    mere speculation as to the therapeutic  or  non-therapeutic  nature  of
    protesting against oppressors, but involved reliance on  activity  that
    necessitated going out, something which the appellant was supposedly to
    avoid, that necessitated exposure to officers in uniform, something  of
    which he was supposedly frightened, and was broadly  inconsistent  with
    feelings of lethargy, hopelessness poor concentration as set out in the
    psychiatric report.  We can identify no material error of law.

28.  Additionally the criticism in our judgment ignores  the  fact  that  in
    paragraph 32 of the determination the dismissal  of  any  weight  being
    placed on the psychiatric evidence was based on three specific  planks:
    the conflicts in the appellant's accounts, conflicts  as  to  what  had
    been said to various medical  personnel  from  time  to  time  and  the
    appellant's own statements as to his activity in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This was sound reasoning with which we see no good reason to interfere.



29.  As for mention of torture, all that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
    doing in paragraph 31 was recording the fact that the appellant did not
    mention torture on admission to hospital in March 2013, rather than  in
    any failure to mention torture elsewhere for example to Dr Dhumad.

30.  We turn finally to the question of suicide risk and Article  3.   There
    was some evidence of suicide risk (as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    herself specifically identified).  However, we note that  the  evidence
    of such risk was based essentially in  the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr
    Dhumad.  That view and the evidence there was premised on what  appears
    to have been a factual inaccuracy.  It appears that Dr Dhumad was under
    the impression that there was an admission to hospital on 10 March 2014
    following an overdose.  It appears that the appellant  in  this  regard
    gave Dr Dhumad both a discrepant  account  as  to  the  nature  of  the
    incident and as to the date.  The  relevant  hospital  record  referred
    only to a dissociative episode on 10 March 2013 (not 2014)  leading  to
    falling over in the street.  Dr Ghosh, the psychiatrist  examining  the
    appellant on  10  March  2013,  recorded  that  on  that  occasion  the
    appellant had no thoughts or plans to harm himself currently.

31   In our judgment, on  the  question  of  suicide  risk,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, having stated at paragraph 30 that she placed little or
    no weight on the psychiatric evidence, implicitly went on to reject the
    assertion of suicide.  There was no risk of army  torture,  that  being
    the risk and the threat against which the risk of suicide arose.

32.  Turning to the second ground of appeal, namely the failure to  consider
    the risk arising from diaspora activities in the UK, it is right to say
    that the judge did not deal with this risk in terms. However, we do not
    consider any error in this regard to be material.   First,  we  do  not
    accept that the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied  on  the
    existence of activities as outlined in paragraph 30 of the judgment  as
    meaning that she was then obliged  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    accounts of activities had to be accepted  in  every  respect  at  face
    value.  We have considered carefully paragraph 53  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement. The evidence there is general at its best. There  is
    no particularisation of which rallies, what  dates  or  what  locations
    (apart from London being mentioned on one occasion).  Nor is there  any
    supporting evidence  as  to  the  precise  nature  of  the  appellant's
    involvement in the rallies and events to which he there refers.

33.  This evidence suggests that  the  appellant's  activities  went  beyond
    mere attendance. He was involved in some logistical  arrangements,  for
    example, setting up chairs and tables.  In our  judgment,  taking  this
    evidence at its highest and  accepting  it  at  face  value,  there  is
    nothing to suggest that his activities come  close  to  making  him  an
    activist working  for  separatism  or  an  activist  destabilising  the
    unitary state, as  opposed  to  somebody  simply  joining  in  protests
    against abuses and commemorating martyrs.

34.  In short, we  do  not  find  that  it  can  properly  be  argued,  even
    accepting the  appellant's  own  evidence,  that  he  either  played  a
    significant role or could be perceived or would be perceived as playing
    a significant role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism within
    the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

35.   So  for  those  reasons,  whilst  the  judge  did  not  consider  this
    particular aspect in terms, we do not consider  it  to  be  a  material
    failure.

36.  The third ground of appeal, as  we  have  identified,  relates  to  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to bribes.  It is
    wrong to say the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    country guidance in GJ.  Whilst she did not  expressly  refer  to  that
    authority in the context of his findings, she did in terms refer to the
    fact that there was in existence objective  material  showing  that  in
    certain  circumstances  release  on  payment  of  a  bribe   could   be
    facilitated (see paragraph 27 of the determination).

37.  In our judgment she was fully entitled to find on  the  facts  of  this
    case that the appellant's version of events as to the payment of bribes
    to secure his release in circumstances where it was not just a question
    of him being on a wanted list, but in circumstances where he was  being
    arrested for a second time  and  had  admitted  his  past  history  and
    involvement, having signed a statement to that effect.  The credibility
    of such an assertion, independent but taking into account the  relevant
    country guidance, was something on which  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach a conclusion.

38.  For all these reasons, despite the able submissions  of  Mr  Lewis,  we
    dismiss the appeal.
39.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an anonymity direction.   We
    have not been asked to and in the absence of any explanation as to what
    good reasons there might be we do not make such a direction.

40.  We should not conclude without  commenting  that  there  has  been  new
    material put before us which has not been relevant to our consideration
    in the light of our finding that there has been no  material  error  of
    law.  We wish to make it clear that we make no comment at  all  on  the
    merits of any fresh claim that might be made in reliance  on  any  such
    additional or fresh material.

41.  But for the reasons we have given, (in  the  absence  of  any  material
    error of law) the judgment below stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mrs Justice Carr


TO THE RESPONDENT

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date

The Honourable Mrs Justice Carr

