
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01346/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2016                            |On 1 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     b f
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Miss Sood, instructed by 1st Call Immigration
                  Services,
         Nottingham
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, BF, is a female citizen of Gambia.  She arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2013 and claimed asylum.  She has two  daughters  who
    are minors  and  also  United  States  citizens.   They  claim  as  her
    dependants.  The appellant's asylum application  was  refused  and  the
    decision was made on 8 January 2015 for her  to  be  removed  with  the
    children to Gambia.  She appealed against that decision to  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hillis)  which,  in  a  decision  and   reasons
    promulgated on 9 April 2015, dismissed the appeal.   She  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  decision  of  Judge  Hillis  contains  a  number  of  unfortunate
    typographical or template errors.  In particular,  at  [14]  the  judge
    wrote, "The appellant's children will be the same  ethnicity  as  their
    father which the appellant states is Wolof  and,  therefore,  they  are
    Mandinka as claimed."  One of the issues in this  appeal  is  that  the
    Secretary of State does not accept that the  appellant's  children  are
    Mandinka, as the  appellant  claims  rather  that  they  are  of  Wolof
    ethnicity.  In the light of the expert report (see below) this issue is
    important as the incidence of FGM (female genital  mutilation)  amongst
    Mandinka is very much greater than amongst  the  Wolof.   Read  in  the
    context of the entire decision, I find that this is  no  more  than  an
    unfortunate error on the part of the  judge  and  one  which  does  not
    penetrate to the heart of his reasoning.  It is  also  an  error  which
    occurs  in  that  part  of  the  decision  entitled  "the  respondent's
    submissions"; in this section, the judge has set out the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for refusing asylum contained in the refusal letter and
    an error in this part of the decision  is  less  serious  than  in  the
    analysis by the judge of the evidence and his findings of fact.

 3. The appellant relied upon an expert report of Bettina  Shell-Duncan  of
    the University of Washington, Seattle.  At [8]  Dr  Shell-Duncan  noted
    that "Ethnicity in the circumcising tradition are  typically  inherited
    along paternal lines."  She goes on to make her assessment of  risk  in
    Gambia on the basis that "[The appellant's]  daughters  are  considered
    Mandinka ...."  She notes that FGM  among  Mandinkas  is  96.5%  whilst
    amongst the Wolof (who are generally said  not  to  practice  FGM)  the
    prevalence is 12.1%.  She notes that,

         What largely determines whether a girl in a particular family  will
         or will not be cut is whether it is considered a tradition in their
         lineage.  The fact that Mrs Faye's co-wife, girls are all cut tells
         me that FGM is a tradition in this family.   Hence  I  believe  her
         daughters are at risk of  being  cut  should  they  return  to  the
         Gambia.

 4. It is clear from his decision that Judge Hillis  was  aware  that  this
    passage of the report summarises the central issue in the appeal before
    him.  At [34] (and relying on the decision of K and  Others  (FGM)  The
    Gambia CG [2013]  UKUT  00062  (IAC))  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant and her children were of Wolof and  not  Mandinka  ethnicity.
    The judge noted that a woman  tended  in  Gambia  to  take  the  ethnic
    identity of her husband.  Therefore, the  appellant's  husband's  first
    wife (a Mandinka) became, in effect,  a  Wolof  upon  marriage  to  the
    husband.  That is a finding that was clearly open to the judge  on  the
    basis of the evidence before him and in accordance  with  the  guidance
    provided by K.  However, the judge indicated that he was alive  to  the
    issues raised in the expert report where at [34] he wrote (not entirely
    clearly),

         If, however, the appellant's first wife was a Mandinka at birth  I,
         of course, acknowledge that tribal and  family  traditions  may  be
         carried on in line with  her  ethnicity  at  birth.   Whether  that
         practice will be applied to the appellant and  her  children  is  a
         central issue in this appeal."

    The judge was aware that this was not a case which turned merely upon a
    determination of ethnicity but (as the expert  expressed  it)  "whether
    [FGM] is considered a tradition in [the appellants'] lineage."

 5. On the one side of this argument  is  the  expert's  observation  that,
    notwithstanding her marriage to a Wolof man, the appellant's  husband's
    first wife permitted or arranged for her own children to  undergo  FGM.
    Set against this are the observations made by the judge at [37] et seq.
     Judge Hillis points out that the appellant would have known  that  the
    first wife's family had been circumcised and that the first wife was  a
    Mandinka  woman  and  that  "she  was   to   be   his   second   wife."
    Notwithstanding that knowledge, the appellant had gone ahead  with  the
    marriage and there had been no demands for her to be circumcised at any
    time until she made the present claim for asylum in the United Kingdom.
     The judge also states  [38]  prior  to  travelling  to  the  USA,  the
    appellant would  have  known  of  her  husband's  first  wife's  family
    preference for FGM.  The judge finds that the appellant would not  have
    travelled back from the  USA  to  Gambia  with  her  children  had  she
    believed that circumcision would be carried out  against  their  wills.
    The judge concluded [39] that the appellant "would not  have  left  the
    USA without applying for asylum if she or her children  were  genuinely
    at real risk of circumcision in the Gambia."  He goes on  to  make  the
    not unreasonable observation that, given  that  the  children  were  US
    citizens, the appellant  herself  had  a  reasonable  chance  of  being
    granted asylum in the USA.   I  also  note  [42]  that  a  testamentary
    guardianship agreement in favour of the appellant's sister  would  only
    take effect in the event of the appellant's "death or incapacity".

 6. The question posed by the grounds of appeal was whether the  judge  has
    given adequate reasons for disagreeing with the assessment of  risk  of
    that made by the expert witness in her report  at  [8].   I  find  that
    Judge Hillis has tackled the central issue in this appeal and  that  he
    has (in those parts of the decision  which  I  have  summarised  above)
    given adequate reasons for departing from the  expert's  assessment  of
    risk.  In summary, he finds that (a) the influence of  the  appellant's
    husband's first wife is diminished on account of her now having a Wolof
    rather than a Mandinka identity; (b)  notwithstanding  the  appellant's
    claim that  the  first  wife's  children  have  been  circumcised,  the
    appellant herself would not have behaved in the way  described  in  her
    evidence had she genuinely believed that she or her children  would  be
    circumcised in Gambia.  Given that the judge's findings  were  open  to
    him on the evidence and that he has surpassed  all  of  those  findings
    without adequate and cogent reasoning, I see  no  reason  to  interfere
    with his decision.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 30 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 30 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
