
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01493/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th April 2013 and 30th September 2013      |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                                                   MISS I A

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Plimmer, Counsel, instructed by the GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th March 2011.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 17th January 1970.   She  is
    separated from her husband and has three children.  She is an  educated
    woman and worked for an  international  NGO  in  Iraq  called  Premiere
    Urgence who provided humanitarian aid.  The Appellant was an  architect
    with them  from  March  2004  until  2007,  before  becoming  the  Base
    Administrator.

 3. It was accepted by the Respondent and by the Judge that in January 2010
    somebody opened fire on her car, the bullets hitting  one  of  the  car
    doors, but she was not injured.  It was also accepted that  around  the
    same time a bullet hit a window at the front of her house.

 4. During the last week of October or in  November  an  officer  from  the
    National Guard came to her house and was very  aggressive,  asking  her
    children questions about who was living there and why their father  was
    not there and who was responsible for the house. Around the  same  time
    her elder son was approached by local  youth  who  threatened  to  tell
    police that he was a homosexual unless he gave them his  mobile  phone,
    digital camera and laptop.

 5. The Appellant resigned from her job in December 2010 and  travelled  to
    Jordan by taxi, then flying to Heathrow where  she  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.

 6. The judge concluded that  the  Appellant  had  described  two  isolated
    incidents of random violence in Baghdad which were common.  It made  no
    sense for the National Guard to take the trouble to visit her  and  ask
    her children questions if they already had her name and  address  on  a
    list of employees for Premiere Urgence.  If they  wanted  to  persecute
    her because they believed she was working for a  foreign  company  they
    could have simply killed her or kidnapped her. She said that there were
    some inconsistencies in her account of the visit by the National  Guard
    but in any event what she described did not amount to persecution.  The
    Appellant continued to work for her employer after  the  incidents  and
    did not modify her behaviour.  If she was being  specifically  targeted
    because of her religion or employment why would the attackers stop when
    she continued to work and remained a Sunni Muslim?  She concluded  that
    the incident relating to her  son  was  motivated  solely  by  criminal
    intent.

 7. The judge said that since she heard the case the Home Office  published
    a COI Report after the date of the hearing.  She considered whether  it
    was necessary to reconvene the hearing to allow the parties to  comment
    on the report, but she said that the relevant passages  were  available
    to them before 25th March 2011 and were not new sources of information.
     The country materials showed that uneducated widows, mainly  in  rural
    areas and as female heads of household, are more  vulnerable  in  Iraq,
    but the Appellant was in fact an educated female head of household  who
    had shown herself to be able to successfully work  for  many  years  in
    Baghdad and had been able to support herself and her family.

 8. The judge applied the case  law  of  NS  (Iraq  perceived  collaborator
    relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046 and LM (educated women - Chaldo-
    Assyrians - risk) Iraq CG [2006] UKAIT 00060 but did not  consider  the
    Appellant to be a vulnerable female. She dismissed the  asylum  appeal.
    She observed that the family would all return to Baghdad  together  and
    dismissed the human rights appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to properly consider the country background material  or  to
    consider the country guidance cases and  had  considered  material  not
    before her at the hearing.   She  had  also  made  adverse  credibility
    findings on perceptions of what a reasonable persecutor  would  do  and
    had not considered Article 15(c) or Section 55 and the  best  interests
    of the children at all.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds by  Judge  Plumptre  on
    27th April 2011.

11.  On  17th  May  2011  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination in respect of the asylum decision but  acknowledging  the
    error in relation to  Article  8  which  it  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine with particular reference to the Section 55 best interests of
    the children.

Submissions

12. Ms Plimmer relied on her grounds.  She submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider that this particular Appellant had  been  vulnerable
    to targeting in the past and on return would  be  vulnerable  again  by
    reason of her  particular  characteristics,  given  that  it  had  been
    accepted that four incidents had occurred whilst she was in  Iraq.   It
    was incumbent on  the  judge  to  step  back  and  decide  whether  the
    Appellant's particular  characteristics  may  have  led  to  her  being
    targeted in the  past,  which  was  indicative  of  future  risk.   The
    Appellant was a single woman, head of household, and separated from her
    husband.  The judge accepted that she was estranged from him  and  that
    her own family were in Malaysia apart from one sister with whom she was
    not on good terms.  She was also a Sunni who worked for a European NGO.

13. Secondly, the judge took into account the COIS Report which  tended  to
    suggest that educated women were less vulnerable  without  hearing  any
    submissions  on  the  point.   It  would  have  been   clear   to   the
    representative, if she had been aware what was  in  the  judge's  mind,
    that an argument should be put that the case had  to  be  assessed  not
    simply on the basis of whether the  Appellant  was  a  single  educated
    woman, but also in the light of her other  characteristics  which  made
    her vulnerable. Simply because the Appellant was  educated  and  had  a
    higher chance of gaining employment did  not  mean  that  she  was  not
    vulnerable when taking into account the combination  of  risk  factors.
    The judge did not consider the cumulative effect of  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on account of her family status and  her  employment  in  the
    NGO. The Appellant  did  not  have  direct  knowledge  as  to  why  the
    incidents occurred and had made her own assumptions.

14. Ms Plimmer argued that the judge had erred in  her  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility when stating that there was an inconsistency in
    her evidence in relation to the National Guard visit, although she  had
    accepted that the visit had taken place and indeed that  the  Appellant
    would have felt threatened.  The  judge  said  that  at  interview  the
    questions which the guards had asked gave  far  less  emphasis  to  the
    Appellant's employment but by the time of  the  hearing  she  suggested
    that this is what the questions were focused upon.  She said that there
    was a lack of evidence as to the motives  of  the  National  Guard  and
    insufficient evidence to be able to say that it was  reasonably  likely
    that they visited the family on account of her religion or  employment.
    Ms Plimmer said that the judge's conclusion that there was a difference
    in emphasis was  not  borne  out  by  the  interview  record  when  the
    Appellant had given a detailed response to the question of whether  she
    thought that the visit was to do with her work  with  an  international
    organisation or for some other reason.  The judge was not  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion that the evidence was  inconsistent,  particularly
    when it was accepted that the Appellant could not be sure as to who had
    targeted her.

15. Finally, the judge had unlawfully substituted her own view  of  what  a
    reasonable  persecutor  would  do  at  a  number  of  points   in   the
    determination.

16. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that the Secretary of State accepted  that  the
    incidents took place but said that the judge was entitled to find  that
    the Appellant's fear was not objectively well-founded.

Consideration of Whether there is an Error of Law

17. Ms Plimmer's submissions are made out.  In particular the  judge  erred
    in not considering the risk posed to the Appellant holistically.   This
    is a case where it is accepted that four incidences of varying  degrees
    of threat occurred. With respect to Article 8, there was no mention  of
    the Section 55 duty.  The children have been in the  UK  for  over  two
    years, and in the context of  a  return  to  a  country  which  remains
    troubled it was incumbent on the judge to consider their best interests
    first.

18. For these reasons the decision is set aside.

19. Mr Diwnycz said that there  would  be  no  need  to  cross-examine  the
    Appellant in relation to her  previous  claim  but  the  Appellant  has
    adduced a  further  witness  statement  relating  to  lengthy  domestic
    violence in Iraq to which she and her children were subjected,  and  he
    was not in a position to give a clear view as to whether  or  not  that
    would be challenged.  There was no available interpreter booked for the
    hearing.  It was therefore agreed that the  appeal  would  be  relisted
    before Mrs D Taylor at  Bradford  on  23rd  May  2013  with  an  Arabic
    interpreter on the basis that the Appellant's account of the  incidents
    which had taken  place  in  Iraq  were  accepted.   The  Respondent  is
    directed to consider whether she wishes to challenge any of  the  fresh
    evidence at an oral hearing in relation to the  Appellant's  claims  of
    domestic violence and to inform the Appellant and the Tribunal  of  her
    position seven days before the hearing.

20. Miss Plimmer sought an anonymity direction which was  unopposed  by  Mr
    Diwnycz and is granted.

Resumed Hearing

21.  Mr  Diwnycz  confirmed  that  no  challenge  was  being  made  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account and he did not  wish  to  cross-
    examine her, including in relation to the domestic violence  which  she
    suffered at the hands of her husband in Iraq prior  to  her  separation
    from him in August 2010.  Neither was it challenged that, since leaving
    Iraq, her husband has contacted her children five or six times by phone
    and sent threatening messages to her, swearing and abusing her. He  has
    threatened to take revenge upon her.

22. The Respondent also accepts that the  Appellant's  brother-in-law,  who
    lives in Malaysia, had been informed by the Appellant's neighbour  that
    National Guards went to the Appellant's house  last  December  with  an
    arrest warrant for her and asked the neighbour  where  she  was.   They
    also asked whether there were any family members in Baghdad.

23. It was therefore agreed between the parties that  the  risk  on  return
    should be assessed on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  worked  for  an
    international NGO from March 2004 to December 2010 when she left  Iraq.
    In 2010 her car was hit by bullets and the front windows of  her  house
    were also hit by  bullets  in  two  separate  incidents.  Although  the
    Respondent initially challenged the evidence that it was member of  the
    National Guard  who visited the Appellant's  home  in  October/November
    2010 no challenge is made to the evidence of  the  brother-in-law  that
    members of the National Guard approached her home in February 2011 with
    an arrest warrant.  *There was a further attack on the Appellant's  son
    by local youths shortly before the family left Iraq.

24. The Appellant believes that the interest by her by the  National  Guard
    is because of her work with a foreign NGO.  She believes  that  in  the
    registration details provided in 2009 the organisation's employees were
    named and there was increasing hostility to them as  a  result  of  the
    growing influence of Mukhtada Al Sada's militia which  had  moved  into
    the premises next door to the NGO, Premiere Urgence shortly before  the
    visit took place.

25. The Appellant's mother and two of her sisters live  in  Malaysia.   Her
    father is deceased. She has a remaining sister in Iraq but  is  not  on
    good terms with her following the break up of her marriage and she  can
    no longer trust  them  because  she  believes  that  they  are  on  her
    husband's side.  She has had no direct contact with them since  leaving
    Iraq.  Again this evidence is unchallenged.

26. The Appellant would therefore  be returning to Iraq as a  Sunni  single
    female head of household with no family members  to  turn  to  who  has
    worked for an NGO for an extended period of time and  who  has  already
    been  targeted for threats, harassment and violence in the past.

27. The Appellant relies on the decision in  MK  (Documents  -  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 00126 which held, inter alia,

         "Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not such as
         to give rise to a real risk of persecution or serious  harm,  there
         may be particular problems  affecting  female  head  of  households
         where family support is lacking and jobs and other means of support
         may be harder to come by.  Careful examination  of  the  particular
         circumstances  of  the  individual's  case   will   be   especially
         important."

28. The Appellant relies on the Human Rights Watch Report "At A Crossroads,
    Human Rights in Iraq Eight Years After the US Led Invasion" dated  21st
    February 2011, which states:

         "Militias promoting misogynist ideologies have targeted  women  and
         girls for assassination, and intimidated them to stay out of public
         life. Increasingly women and girls are  victimised  in  their   own
         homes, sometimes killed by their fathers, brothers and husbands for
         a wide variety of perceived transgressions that allegedly shame the
         family or tribe. If  they seek official  protection  from  violence
         in the home, women risk harassment and abuse from Iraq's  virtually
         all male police and  other  security  forces.  Iraqi  law  protects
         perpetrators of violence against women: Iraq's penal code considers
         honourable motives to be a mitigating factor  in  crimes  including
         murder. The code also gives husbands a legal  right  to  discipline
         their wives."

29. It also states:

         "Today  armed  groups  continue  to  target  female  political  and
         community leaders and activists. This threat of violence has had  a
         debilitating impact on the daily lives of women and girls generally
         and has reduced their participation in public  life.   It  has  had
         profound consequences for women's economic participation,  as  many
         female processionals, including  doctors,  journalists,  activists,
         engineers, politicians, teachers and civil servants are  forced  to
         cease working fearing for their safety."

30. The most recent evidence shows  a  sharp  increase  in  the  number  of
    civilians being killed in acts of random violence with at  least  4,137
    civilians killed and 9,865 injured since the beginning of  2013.   More
    than 800 people were killed in incidents in Iraq  during  August  2013.
    The international crisis group report for 14th August 2013 states  that
    Iraq is on the verge of a relapse into a  general  sectarian  conflict.
    According  to  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  The
    International Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Iraq, dated  31st
    May 2012, women have also been singled out for attacks, as well as men,
    if  they  have  assumed  a  public  role  as  politicians,   government
    officials, rights activists or professionals. Women without support and
    protection provided by their family or tribal network are  particularly
    vulnerable to being harassed,  kidnapped  or  sexually  assaulted.  The
    UNHCR report that attacks against NGO workers, which at the  height  of
    the violence in 2006 to 2007, were becoming less  frequent  until  2011
    when the killing of several NGO workers and rights  activists  in  what
    appeared to be targeted attacks were noted.  The US Department of State
    recorded that place conducted unannounced and  intimidating  visits  to
    some NGOs which Miss Plimmer argues is corroborative of the Appellant's
    belief that members of the National Guard have  shown interest in her.

31. She submits that cumulatively, the Appellant  meets  the  threshold  of
    establishing real risk. She  also  faces  risk  of  violence  from  her
    husband.  It would be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate to another
    part of Iraq.  She relies on the independent social worker's report  of
    Christine Brown and in particular  her  assessment  of  the  impact  of
    removal on the children. The Appellant's son  F  suffers  from  chron's
    disease and described to the social worker both his fear of his  father
    and his concern about returning to Iraq.  The  Appellant's  daughter  N
    was also extremely fearful about the prospect of return. She  concluded
    that removal would be to their personal  detriment  and  that  she  was
    sufficiently concerned about the family that she decided  to  recontact
    them after the report was completed in order to assist them  to  obtain
    therapeutic help.

32. Again, Mr Diwnycz made no challenge either to Miss Brown's expertise or
    to her concern.

33. Mr Diwnycz states that the Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    story was true but submitted that it would be reasonable to expect  her
    to relocate to the KRG where she would be safe.

34. Miss Plimmer submitted that the Appellant's evidence was that an  uncle
    from her father's side was the leader of  the  Iraqi  armed  forces,  a
    general in Saddam Hussein's army, who led the  Iraqi  armed  forces  in
    Kurdistan.  He fought against the  Kurds  until  he  was  arrested  and
    killed by the resistance.  This family  history  would  jeopardise  her
    safety and would make it difficult, to say the least,  for  her  to  re
    establish herself in the KRG.   She  relied  on  the  evidence  in  the
    witness statement that unless the Appellant cut herself off  completely
    from any personal whom she knew, including her mother  and  sisters  in
    Malaysia, that she had returned to Iraq it would only be  a  matter  of
    time before her husband found that she had returned and  she  would  be
    fearful that he would come and find her.

Findings and Conclusions

35. It was not argued by Mr Diwnycz that the Appellant would be at risk  of
    harm on return to her home  area.   She  is  a  person  whose  accepted
    history includes targeting in the past  and  in  whom  members  of  the
    National Guard have shown a particular interest as a consequence of her
    extensive work for an NGO.  The only issue  which  he  raised  was  the
    reasonableness of relocation.

36.  I  accept  Miss  Plimmer's   argument   that   in   these   particular
    circumstances, relocation to the KRG  would  not  be  reasonable.   Her
    family has a history of violence against the Kurds.  The evidence of on
    going interest in her by her husband is unchallenged and I accept  that
    the Appellant would always  be  fearful  that  he  would  discover  her
    whereabouts and indeed it is in all likelihood only a  matter  of  time
    before the family were located.   The  evidence  from  the  independent
    social worker about the effect on the children of a return is  powerful
    and unchallenged. The diagnosis of chron's  disease,  whilst  no  doubt
    treatable in the KRG, is an additional factor.

Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge has been set aside and is
    remade as follows.  The  Appellant's  appeals  are  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.er Her



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

