


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/01877/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 1st December 2016                         |On: 16th December 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Ms Poyner, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in 1993.    He  appeals
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Robinson) dated 26th August 2016 to dismiss his appeal[2] on asylum and
    human rights grounds.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Procedural History


 3. This matter has now a long history. The Appellant claimed asylum on the
    10th  November 2011, one day after  he  was  apprehended  entering  the
    country illegally.  The basis of his claim was that  he  was  a  Hazara
    Afghan who faced persecution by the Taliban  because  his  brother  had
    worked as an interpreter and driver for the American Army.  He  claimed
    to be under 18 years of age on entry.  There  followed  some  delay  in
    dealing with the protection claim because the Respondent  disputed  the
    Appellant's  claimed  date  of  birth.    That  matter  was  eventually
    resolved by Upper  Tribunal  Judges  Perkins  and  Dawson  following  a
    substantive age-assessment hearing. The Tribunal held,  in  a  decision
    dated 28th May 2013,  that the Appellant had been  born  in  May  1993.
    The Respondent then refused the protection claim, disputing the  entire
    account and the Appellant's claimed nationality. The matter came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Flynn.


 4. In a determination promulgated on the 26th  March  2015  Judge  O'Flynn
    recorded that the Appellant now disassociated himself  from  the  claim
    that his brother had worked as an interpreter  for  the  Americans.  He
    told Judge O'Flynn  that  this  was  not  true.  He  had  lied  to  the
    immigration officers because he was told to do so by his uncle, who was
    his guardian in the UK.  He  nonetheless  maintained  that  he  was  an
    Afghan, was Hazara, and was at risk. These facts were accepted by Judge
    O'Flynn and the appeal was allowed.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  and  on  the  6th
    November 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana set aside the  decision
    of Judge O'Flynn on the grounds  that  he  had  conducted  post-hearing
    internet research into the position  of  Hazaras  in  Afghanistan.  The
    matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 6. So it was that the appeal came before Judge Robinson, sitting at Hatton
    Cross. The matters in issue before Judge Robinson were:

              i) Is the Appellant from Afghanistan?
             ii) Is he Hazara?
            iii) Does he have a well-founded fear of persecution in his home
                 area of Wardak for reasons of this ethnic origin?
             iv) Can he reasonably  be  expected  to  avail  himself  of  an
                 internal flight alternative by relocating to Kabul?


 7. It is correct to say that in respect of issues (i)-(iii) the  Appellant
    had something of an uphill struggle, given his acceptance that  he  had
    advanced  a  largely  fabricated  account  upon  claiming  asylum.   He
    nevertheless pursued his case, relying on his new appeal statement  and
    a number of items of evidence in support. These included:


               . Letters  and  live  evidence  from  Bryony  Norman,  Senior
                 Programmes Officer at the Refugee Support Network
               . An expert report by Mr Claudio Franco dated 24th July 2014
               . A letter from the Chair of  the  Hazara  Council  of  Great
                 Britain, Rahila Muhibi
               . Documents from  the  Afghan  embassy  which  confirmed  the
                 Appellant's place of birth as Wardak
               . Home Office documents relating to the Appellant's  paternal
                 uncle, a Mr Habib Ahmadi, who had also claimed to be Hazara
               . Documents  issued  by  the  Austrian  authorities  granting
                 asylum to one Noorollah, a young man accepted to be  Hazara
                 who is said to be the Appellant's brother.


 8. In determining the appeal the First-tier Tribunal clearly  placed  very
    significant weight on the fact that  the  Appellant  advanced  a  false
    claim  when  he  first  arrived.   Although  the  determination   makes
    reference to the evidence in respect of the  Appellant's  brother,  the
    report of Mr Franco  and  the  letter  from  the  Hazara  Council,  the
    Tribunal is not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  can  be  considered  a
    reliable witness. He claim to be Hazara is rejected on that basis,  and
    the entire appeal dismissed.




    Error of Law


 9. The Appellant's appeal against Judge Robinson's decision was  heard  on
    the 7th November 2016 at Field House. The Appellant was represented  by
    Ms Poyner and the Respondent on that day by Senior  Presenting  Officer
    Mr Singh.


10.  The grounds of appeal were lengthy  and  detailed  but  before  me  Ms
    Poyner very helpfully distilled them into two central areas of dispute.
    First, did the Tribunal err in law in its  approach  to  ethnicity  and
    second, were the overall credibility findings infected as a result?

11. I need not set the determination,  the  grounds  or  the  Secretary  of
    State's response out in any great detail,  since  before  me  Mr  Singh
    conceded that the errors as alleged in the first ground was  made  out.
    Whilst he did attempt to salvage the Tribunal's overall  negative  view
    of the Appellant's credibility, for the reasons I give below I did  not
    consider that the matter of ethnicity could properly be extricated from
    those findings. The entire decision was therefore  set  aside  for  the
    following reasons:


        i) The First-tier Tribunal made an error as to fact.


           At paragraph 61 the Tribunal says "his claim  to  be  of  Hazara
           ethnicity was  not  disclosed  until  several  years  after  his
           arrival in the UK". At paragraph 52 the determination refers the
           "amended claim" that the  Appellant  is  Hazara.   This  is  not
           correct.   The Appellant has consistently stated  his  ethnicity
           as Hazara since the day that he claimed asylum  in  2011.  Since
           this was a finding  which  led  the  Tribunal  to  approach  the
           Appellant's claim as to his ethnicity "with great  caution",  it
           follows that it is a material error of fact.


       ii) The Tribunal has failed to take material evidence into account.


           The  expert  Mr  Franco  met  with  the  Appellant.  He  had  an
           opportunity to engage with him and to evaluate him in person. He
           asked him detailed questions. Having done so Mr  Franco  was  of
           the opinion, with reference to the Appellant's  appearance,  his
           language/dialect, and his knowledge  of  the  geography,  social
           dynamics and key figures in Wardak, that he was indeed a  Hazara
           from that area.  None of  that  evidence  is  addressed  in  the
           determination. Although  Mr  Franco's  report  is  mentioned  in
           another context, it is not in  respect  of  the  key  matter  of
           ethnicity.


      iii) Failure to assess credibility in the round.


           As I note above, the Appellant cannot get  away  from  the  fact
           that he did, albeit it as  a  teenager,  tell  the  Home  Office
           things  that  were  not  true.  That  is  a  matter  which  will
           inevitably weigh against him.   It is not however a matter  that
           can be considered determinative of whether or not he is  Hazara.
           That is a discrete question  of  fact.  The  Appellant's  entire
           claim could be a fabrication but he could still be Hazara.  What
           the Tribunal appears to have done in this  case  is  reject  the
           claimed  ethnicity  on  the  grounds  that  he  has  lied  about
           something else. That is an error of  law.  The  proper  approach
           should have been a careful evaluation of  all  of  the  evidence
           (see 6 above) in order to reach a conclusion as to ethnicity.


12. Although the issue of ethnicity is a discrete factual matter,  it  does
    form the backdrop to the Appellant's claimed persecution and  for  that
    reason it is not possible to preserve any findings  on  credibility  or
    risk. For instance, at paragraph 74 the Tribunal finds that  it  cannot
    be satisfied as to risk since it cannot  even  be  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant is from Wardak (his claim  to  be  from  Wardak  was  closely
    connected to whether or not he is Hazara).


13. It was not possible to proceed  to  remake  the  decision  on  the  7th
    November 2016 since there was no Dari interpreter present.

14. The hearing was reconvened on the 1st December 2016 at Field House.   I
    heard oral evidence from the Appellant. Ms Bryony Norman and Ms Belinda
    Drake were both in  attendance  but  Mr  Walker  indicated  that  their
    evidence was agreed so there was no need for oral evidence.



    The Re-Made Decision

15. Having regard to the cumulative weight of evidence Mr Walker  indicated
    that the Respondent was, at this resumed hearing, prepared to agree the
    Appellant's claimed nationality and ethnicity. That  evidence  included
    the view taken by the Hazara Council  of  Great  Britain,  Dr  Franco's
    expert opinion, the documents from the Afghan  embassy,  and  the  fact
    that the Austrian authorities had  treated  his  brother  Noorollah  as
    Hazara. There was in addition home office  correspondence  relating  to
    the Appellant's uncle which  indicated  that  he  had  asserted  Hazara
    ethnicity when he had claimed asylum in March 2007.    Although  it  is
    unclear whether that particular claim had been made accepted, Mr Walker
    was able to tell me that the gentleman in  question  had  been  granted
    asylum following a successful appeal in October  2007  and  was  now  a
    British citizen.

16. I have before me unchallenged medical evidence to the effect  that  the
    Appellant is under  the  care  of  psychiatric  services,  having  been
    referred there by his GP, Dr  Sarah  Morris.  In  her  letter  of  28th
    November 2016 Dr Morris confirms that the Appellant has been  diagnosed
    with  depression   that   is   "greatly   impacting   on   his   life",
    notwithstanding that he is on prescribed anti-depressant medication and
    is receiving regular counselling. The GP notes record instances of self-
    harm and there are repeated  references  to  the  Appellant  expressing
    hopelessness and  a  feeling  that  he  would  "be  better  off  dead".
    Correspondence from West London Mental Health NHS Trust indicates  that
    the Appellant has also been found to have symptoms of PTSD.

17. This evidence accords with that given  by  Bryony  Norman  and  Belinda
    Drake. Ms Norman met the Appellant in October 2013 when he was referred
    to the Refugee Support Network. She was then based at RSN as  a  Senior
    Support Worker. Her role was to provide support to young asylum seekers
    in London, but she had  previously  lived  and  worked  in  Afghanistan
    whilst working for the 'Tearfund UK' charity.  Ms Norman  continued  to
    work closely with the Appellant until she left RSN  in  November  2016.
    She has consistently expressed concerns about  his  mental  health  and
    emotional well-being. Her concerns about his  vulnerability  were  such
    that she continues to support the  Appellant  today,  for  instance  in
    attending the appeal hearing with him.  Ms Drake is a  British  citizen
    who  met  the  Appellant  through  volunteering  to  accommodate  young
    refugees in her home. He was referred to her by the  charity  'Refugees
    At Home'. He had to move out of his accommodation whilst  some  repairs
    were carried out and during that time he lived with Ms  Drake  and  her
    family.  In her letter of the 14th  November  2016  she  describes  the
    Appellant as an "honest, responsible and loving person" who was, by her
    estimation, "very depressed and vulnerable".   When she met him it  was
    as if he was in a "long dark tunnel", but through the  friendship  that
    he formed with her and her family she has seen his emotional  wellbeing
    gradually improve.  Ms Drake also attended the  hearing  before  me  in
    order to support the Appellant.

18. These then are the uncontentious  facts  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    personal characteristics. I agree that the Respondent's  concession  as
    to ethnicity and nationality was properly made on the evidence. I  find
    as fact that the Appellant is an Afghan national of  Hazara  ethnicity.
    His year of birth has been determined as 1993 and so at the date of the
    hearing before me he is 23 years old.   He  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since November 2011, having entered the country illegally  when
    he was 18 years old.    He has experienced  significant  mental  health
    problems since his arrival, to the extent that he has been required  to
    specialist psychiatric services. His emotional wellbeing  is  gradually
    improving with the support of clinicians and friends,  including  those
    he has met through refugee support networks.   It  remains  for  me  to
    decide whether the Appellant is at risk today in his home  district  of
    Wardak, and if so whether there  is  a  safe  and  reasonable  internal
    flight alternative for him in Kabul.



    Past Persecution


19. My starting point for assessing risk in Wardak today is the Appellant's
    historical account of the events that he claims led him  to  flee.  The
    evidence of events in Afghanistan in 2008 comes from three sources: the
    Appellant himself, the account given by Noorollah to the Federal Asylum
    Office of the Republic of  Austria,  and  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Claudio Franco.


20. The Appellant states that he is from a hamlet near  Behsud,  in  Wardak
    Province, close to Kabul. His family had their  own  agricultural  land
    and he grew up there with his parents, and  two  younger  brothers.  He
    states that in April or May 2008 he and his brothers were in the fields
    lifting potatoes one afternoon. Sometime in the  early  afternoon  they
    had heard gunshots coming from the direction of the village, but  since
    that is a common occurrence they had thought nothing of it.  When  they
    had finished their work they  headed  back  to  the  village.  As  they
    approached they could see smoke  and  fire  rising  from  some  of  the
    houses. As they reached their house their neighbours  and  some  police
    were standing outside it. The house next door was on fire and this  had
    spread to the boys' house, damaging the kitchen area.  They  could  not
    see their parents anywhere.   The Appellant was frightened and demanded
    to know where they were. The villagers told him  not  to  go  into  the
    house. The Appellant insisted and finally he was allowed to enter.   In
    his witness statement he describes what he saw:

         "I went through the gate into the front yard from where I could see
         that two out of the three doors to rooms of the house that opened
         onto the yard had been broken. One of the broken doors was for the
         main room of the house and the other was for my parents' bedroom
         which we boys would share when it was colder. I went into the
         bedroom and saw the bodies of both my parents lying on the floor. I
         began to scream and cry and then neighbours came quickly and took
         my outside. When I told my brothers that our parents were dead they
         began crying and wanted to enter the house but the neighbours said
         that they should not..."

21. The statement goes on to describe how the bodies were  taken  from  the
    house to the mosque, where the bodies of other  people  killed  in  the
    attack  were  taken.  The  Appellant  describes  that  the  attack  was
    perpetrated by the Taliban and that approximately 20 people  died  that
    day. He later acknowledges that  he  was  not  there  when  the  attack
    happened so he did not see the attackers but whether they were Kuchi or
    Taliban, they are the same to him.  His mum and  dad  were  buried  the
    next morning.  The day after the funeral the Appellant spoke with  some
    police officers who were outside of his home. They said that there  was
    not much they could do but they would tell him if they  found  anything
    out. They never got back to him.  A  friend  of  the  family  whom  the
    Appellant and his brothers referred  to  as  'Kaka'  (ie  uncle)  Rahim
    helped them repair their house. he arranged for  the  smallholding  and
    the house to be sold. The Appellant and his brothers left for  Pakistan
    with $6000. After they got to Pakistan Kaka  Rahim  sent  them  another
    $4,000.  They stayed in Peshawar for about 5 months, renting a room and
    working for relatives of Kaka Rahim.  The Appellant managed to  get  in
    touch with his uncles in London. One  of  these  uncles,  Aman  Ahmadi,
    advised the boys to move to Lahore. He had a  friend  there  who  would
    give the Appellant work. Whilst they were in Lahore the Appellant found
    an agent to take Noorollah to Europe. He chose  to  get  Noorollah  out
    because he was old enough to face the journey - the Appellant kept  his
    younger brother Abbas with him.   The decision to send  Noorollah  away
    was not taken lightly, but the Appellant explains that life in Pakistan
    was very difficult.  They  were  unregistered  and  their  lives  there
    precarious.


22. Noorollah applied for asylum in Austria in June 2009 having entered the
    country illegally. It  would  appear  that  he  was  initially  refused
    asylum, but this decision was subsequently reversed by the Asylum Court
    in Innsbruck.  The determination document (provided to me in  certified
    translation) reads as follows:


         "Personal Information


         I was born in the village of Behsud in Wardak Province and grew  up
         there with my parents. I attended school for 5 years and  can  read
         and write in Dari. I can also speak Hazari. I even  know  a  little
         German. My father was a farmer and had  his  own  smallholding.  He
         died in April or May 2008. My  mother  was  a  housewife  and  died
         together with my father. I have two brothers, Abdullah  and  Abbas,
         who live  in  Pakistan.  After  school  I  worked  on  my  father's
         smallholding until the death of my parents.  The  smallholding  was
         about 30 to 40 paces long and about 30 to 40 paces  wide.  We  grew
         potatoes, wheat etc. We had 3 cows,  6  sheep  and  3  donkeys  who
         grazed freely. The entire family could live off  the  smallholding.
         We also sold agricultural products.  Our  house  consisted  of  two
         ground floor rooms. After the death of my parents, I went  with  my
         brothers to Pakistan.  My brothers are still in  Pakistan,  Lohore,
         Pindi. My parents were Hazara and Shiites. I am Hazara and Shiite.


         Information about the escape route:


         Q. When did you decide to leave home?


         Note: the applicant starts to cry.
         A: In April or May 2008, I was working  with  my  brothers  in  the
         field. When we got home, we found our parents in  the  house  dead.
         The neighbours have told us that the Taliban had  been  there,  and
         had killed my parents. They said it made  no  sense  if  we  stayed
         there and this is why we fled from Kabul to Pakistan.


         Q. Can you remember  details  of  the  journey  that  you  made  in
         Traiskirchen?
         A. Yes. I was about one  year  in  Pakistan  and  then  my  brother
         decided to send me away.
         ..."


23. Noorollah went on to give further detail about the  incident  in  which
    his parents were killed:


         "...I was working in the field together with my brothers.  When  we
         arrived home at about 2pm, we saw people from the village  gathered
         in front of our house. The village elders  were  also  there.  They
         said that we should not go into the house, because our parents  had
         been injured. Abdollah went into the house anyway,  but  came  back
         out, crying and screaming. Then I ran into the house and  saw  that
         my parents were lying dead on the floor in our bedroom. My  brother
         told me later that they had been shot. The people from the  village
         took us to the mosque to calm us down. That evening my parents were
         buried. The next day was the funeral. We stayed in our house for 10
         to 12 days. During this time the village elders came several  times
         to us and advised is to leave  Afghanistan.  We  decided  to  leave
         Afghanistan, and we went to Pakistan. That is all"


24. I note that the account are substantially similar. There are however  a
    small number of discrepancies, which the  Appellant  addresses  in  his
    witness statement. He was not aware that his brother  had  entered  the
    house after him, but he acknowledges that he was very distressed at the
    time, so may not have noticed. Noorollah also told the  Austrian  judge
    that the Appellant had actually gone to the police station but  he  may
    have misunderstood: in fact the Appellant just spoke to the  police  in
    the village.   The Appellant states that Noorollah  has  got  it  wrong
    when he says that their parents were buried that night. They were taken
    to the Mosque that night, and buried  in  the  morning.      I  am  not
    minded to attach any significant weight to any of these  discrepancies,
    particularly since in the case of Noorollah it is an account  given  in
    Dari, translated into  German  and  then  into  English,  and  it  also
    records the funeral as being the next day.  Overall  I  find  that  the
    accounts are consistent with one another. I note further that  this  is
    the same account that the Appellant has consistently given to Ms Norman
    and Ms Drake.


25. I have been provided with a very helpful report by Dr  Claudio  Franco.
    No issue is taken with  his  expertise  so  I  need  not  set  out  his
    curriculum vitae in any great detail. Dr Franco has spent the  past  17
    years travelling, living and working in Afghanistan  as  a  journalist,
    author and analyst. He  was  the  co-founder,  along  with  Dr  Antonio
    Giustozzi, of specialist consultancy 'Research and  Analysis  Unbound'.
    His report addresses a number of issues including the Appellant's claim
    to be a Hazara from Wardak. As mentioned above,  he  finds  that  claim
    very likely to be true, having regard to the Appellant's dialect, local
    knowledge and appearance. For  the  purposes  of  this  section  of  my
    determination I  am  primarily  concerned  with  Dr  Franco's  detailed
    evidence about the events that took place in Wardak provide  in  Spring
    2008.   In brief summary he concludes that the Appellant's  account  is
    entirely plausible since it  accords  with  the  objective  information
    about what happened.  He writes:

               . That in the spring and summer of  2007  and  2008  violent
                 clashes took place between Hazara villagers in and  around
                 Behsud and nomadic Kuchi herders.  These  Pathan  herdsman
                 arrive each spring to take advantage  of  summer  pasture.
                 That territory is already occupied by the Hazara and given
                 increased pressures on the  land  from  both  communities,
                 increased levels of violence  have  been  seen  in  recent
                 years;
               . The Hazara do not distinguish between the  Kuchi  and  the
                 Taliban, partly because both groups are Sunni Pathans, but
                 also because the Taliban has taken part in, and supported,
                 Kuchi raiding over the years;
               . In 2008 the clashes were particularly bad, with  24  local
                 Hazara being killed and 11 injured. 84 houses were  burned
                 down,  a  large  number  of  livestock  taken,  properties
                 looted, agricultural products destroyed and more than  six
                 thousand families were forced to flee the area.


    In addition to his own knowledge Dr  Franco  derives  this  information
    from five sources: a  TOLO  news  report  of  2008,  a  report  by  the
    Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission entitled Report on  the
    Case of Conflict between Kochis and the Local People in Behsood [2010],
    a Frontline Club news  blog  Behsud:  Kuchi  Atrocities?  [1.8.08],  an
    article by Dr Lenard Milich published by the Afghanistan  Research  and
    Evaluation Unit The Behsud Conflicts 2005-2008,  and  Dr  Franco's  own
    interview with the chairman of the Behsud  local  council  in  December
    2012.


26. These  are  the  three  primary  sources  of  evidence  supporting  the
    Appellant's claims about what happened  to  make  him  leave  his  home
    village in Afghanistan.  Ordinarily  I  would  have  no  hesitation  in
    finding that this evidence was sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  There  are  two  individual  accounts  that  are  substantially
    similar,  notwithstanding  that  they  have  been  given  to  different
    authorities in two different countries, translated into  two  different
    languages and at different times. Those accounts are  wholly  plausible
    in the light of the country background material supplied by Dr  Franco.
    And yet there must be some hesitation, because the Appellant has  given
    significant cause to doubt his credibility as a witness.


27. In November 2011  the  Appellant  was  interviewed  by  an  Immigration
    Officer at the Asylum Screening Unit in  Croydon.  He  was  interviewed
    again on the 4th December 2011. On both of those occasions he  advanced
    a claim which he now admits was largely made up.  He said he  was  from
    Balkh and that his elder brother had worked as an interpreter  for  the
    American Army.  He said that the Taliban came  and  killed  his  entire
    family as a result, the only escapees being the Appellant and a younger
    brother who hid under the bed.  I have read the account  given  at  the
    substantive asylum interview. It is notable that  in  contrast  to  the
    account currently relied upon, it is low on detail and high on "I can't
    remembers".     The Appellant now says that he was told  to  tell  this
    story by his uncle, who advised him that his own account would  not  be
    enough to secure international protection. He would need  to  invent  a
    particular reason why the Taliban would be after  him.   The  Appellant
    states that he did what he was told by this uncle because he was young,
    he was new to this country, and because in his culture it is  the  norm
    for young men to do what they are told by their elder  male  relatives.
    Dr Franco confirms, and I accept, that this is the  case.  There  is  a
    cultural expectation  that  a  teenager,  and  perhaps  particularly  a
    teenage orphan, will do as he is advised by an uncle. I note that  this
    is the same uncle who advised the three young brothers that they should
    leave Peshawar and travel to Lahore, again a command that they  obeyed.
    I have borne in mind that there is a credible explanation for  why  the
    Appellant initially told a lie, but I nevertheless find  that  it  must
    weigh in the balance against the  Appellant  that  he  sought,  on  two
    separate occasions, to mislead the Respondent and  to  gain  asylum  in
    this country on the basis of a fictional account.


28. Having considered all of the evidence going to the  historical  account
    in the round, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  discharged  the
    burden of proof. Although his behaviour on arrival must  weigh  against
    him, I am satisfied that he is now  telling  the  truth  and  that  the
    events he narrates as having  happened  in  Spring  2008  in  his  home
    village in Wardak did take place. I find that the  Appellant  has  been
    subject to past persecution.



    Future Risk

29. Mr Walker did not dispute the evidence contained in Dr Franco's report,
    and he accepted that on the basis of that, and other objective material
    before me, he could not hope to  persuade  me  that  the  situation  in
    Wardak  had  improved  to  the  extent  that  the  risk  of  harm   has
    significantly diminished. On the contrary,  the  situation  appears  to
    have worsened.  Having  regard  to  the  material  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle, the report of  Dr  Franco  and  the  Respondent's  own  Country
    Information and Guidance I find as follows:


         . Wardak province is currently under  Taliban  control  or  is  at
           least 'contested' territory [7.2.2 December 2016 CIG]
         . There is not a sufficiency  of  protection  there  against  harm
           inflicted by non-state agents [2.4.2 CIG]
         . Ethically-based violence, killing  and  forced  displacement  of
           Hazara has increased in the recent years [paragraph  5  Franco].
           Where attacks have decreased in parts of Wardak  it  is  because
           the Hazara population there has fled
         . Hazara-Kuchi violence continues [paragraphs 16, 19 Franco]


30. On the basis of this information I cannot be satisfied that the risk of
    harm to the Appellant has decreased  since  he  left  Wardak.  Applying
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules I am satisfied that there is  a
    currently well-founded fear of persecution there.




    Internal Flight


31. It is the Respondent's case that unless a claimant has  a  particularly
    high profile which might lead  non-state  agents  to  pursue  him  with
    determination, internal flight is a safe option:  see  2.5  CIG.   This
    broadly accords with the view taken by the Upper Tribunal in  the  last
    pertinent country guidance case:  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC). There the Tribunal concluded, on evidence given
    in March 2012, that relocation to Kabul would not in general be unsafe.
    As to whether it might be reasonable, Mr Walker referred me to the fact
    that the Appellant is now an adult male with  no  significant  physical
    health concerns.


32. It is the Appellant's case that relocation  to  Kabul  would  today  be
    unsafe, and  in  the  alternative,  unreasonable.  To  make  good  that
    submission Ms Poyner relied on a number of  different  country  reports
    highlighting  recent  atrocities   perpetrated   against   the   Hazara
    community, and the expert evidence on the worsening security, and socio-
    economic  conditions  in  Kabul  for  IDPs.   Before  I  consider  that
    evidence, I remind myself of  the  correct  approach  to  be  taken  to
    questions of internal flight.


33.  The  relevant  legal  framework  is  set  out  at  Article  8  of  the
    Qualification Directive:

         1.          As  part  of  the  assessment  of  the  application for
         international protection,  Member  States  may  determine  that  an
         applicant is not in need of international protection if in  a  part
         of the country of origin there is no  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted or no real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and  the
         applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of  the
         country.


         2.        In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin is
         in accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at the time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


         3.        Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles
         to return to the country of origin.

34. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 the House of Lords make clear that the question of whether  internal
    flight is "reasonable" is not to be equated with the test under Article
    3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his  own  guidance  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:




        "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
        approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
        all my noble and learned friends agreed:


        'The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
        pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide
        whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
        whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him  to  do  so....There
        is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of State
        for the Home Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of
        cases. The decision-maker must do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
        material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular case
        falls... All must depend on  a  fair  assessment  of  the  relevant
        facts'.


        Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
        these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
        easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
        It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed  to
        the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
        experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
        relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
        consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
        persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
        to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
        country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
        in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
        expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
        to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
        founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
        it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
        around the world, desirable though of course that is."


35.  At 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view that  the  test
    is whether the individual will be able to  live  a  "relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi:


        "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
        case:


        '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness of IRA
        [internal  relocation   alternative]   is   to   assess   all   the
        circumstances  of  the  individual's  case  holistically  and  with
        specific  reference  to  the  individual's  personal  circumstances
        (including past persecution  or  fear  thereof,  psychological  and
        health  condition,  family  and  social  situation,  and   survival
        capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context  of  the
        conditions in  the  place  of  relocation  (including  basic  human
        rights,    security    conditions,    socio-economic    conditions,
        accommodation, access to  health  care  facilities),  in  order  to
        determine the impact on that individual of settling in the proposed
        place of  relocation  and  whether  the  individual  could  live  a
        relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


        I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
        approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
        opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the  country  to
        which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."


36. In AH the Tribunal had had to consider  whether  the  appalling  socio-
    economic conditions faced by Darfuris returning to refugee  settlements
    in Khartoum were "unduly harsh", and whether that fell to be determined
    with reference to the fact that many other Darfuris were already living
    in these circumstances in IDP camps. Rejecting the notion  that  parity
    of the two groups defeated the claim  under  the  Convention,  Baroness
    Hale said this [at 27]:
           .... We know that the standard of comparison is not the lives
           which the returning claimants are living here: that is what
           Januzi was all about. We know that the lives they led before the
           persecution are a relevant factor but not, as the Court of
           Appeal thought, the starting point. We know that the lives they
           will face on return have to be considered in the context of
           "standards prevailing generally in the country of nationality":
           Lord Bingham in Januzi, para 20. If people can return to live a
           life which is normal in that context, and free from the well-
           founded fear of persecution, they cannot take advantage of past
           persecution to achieve a better life in the country to which
           they have fled: see Lord Bingham in para 5 of his opinion. But
           this does not mean that the holistic consideration of all the
           relevant factors, looked at cumulatively, can be replaced by a
           consideration of whether their circumstances will be worse than
           the circumstances of anyone else in that country.
         1.  Yet the Tribunal concluded that because the conditions faced by
            returning Darfuris, however appalling, would be no worse than
            those faced by other Sudanese IDPs it would not be not "unduly
            harsh" to expect them to return. The standard of comparison was,
            not with their lives in Darfur before their persecution, not
            with the general run of ordinary lives in Sudan, not even with
            the lives of poor people in Sudan, but with the lives of the
            poorest of the poor, internally displaced victims of the civil
            war in the south, living in camps or squatter slums, and
            "subject from time to time to relocations, sometimes involving
            force and human rights violations" (para 244). They too had been
            subsistence farmers, ill-equipped to survive in the city slums
            (para 239); they too had suffered the psychological horrors of
            civil war (para 238), if not of government-backed genocide; the
            Darfuris would be no worse off, unless particular individuals
            attracted the adverse interest of the authorities (para 242).
            With respect, this is not the individualised, holistic
            assessment which the question requires.

37. Against that background,  I have had regard to Dr Franco's  assessment,
    which is entirely consistent with all of the objective evidence  before
    me. In respect of the position of Hazara generally, Dr Franco concludes
    from the evidence that there has been a sharp increase in the frequency
    and intensity of sectarian attacks against this community.  His  report
    refers to several horrific incidents where large groups of  men,  women
    and children have been separated from other  passengers  on  buses  and
    executed, or marched off  into  the  desert  and  "disappeared".   This
    increase in attacks is in part attributable to the 'turf war' currently
    taking place between militias who have aligned  themselves  with  Daesh
    ("Islamic" State) and  "more  traditional",  al-Qaeda  aligned  Taliban
    groups.  Dr Franco concurs with the view expressed in a 2015  New  York
    Times piece: "the spate of recent Taliban attacks on  Hazara  civilians
    represents an attempt to upstage Daesh's notorious brutality  and  show
    that  the  Taliban  is  just  as  capable  of  causing  such  gory  and
    intimidating spectacles", but adds his  own  view  that  the  Taliban's
    antipathy to the Hazara was motivated  as  much  by  sheer  racism  and
    ethnic prejudice.  Some of the most dangerous routes for Hazara  trying
    to travel around the country are the roads in and out of  Kabul.   This
    year has seen large scale attacks  mounted  against  the  community  in
    Kabul itself: on the 23rd July 2016 a Daesh suicide bomber  targeted  a
    Hazara demonstration in the city, killing 80  people  and  leaving  230
    wounded.

38. In  respect  of  the  connected  risk  of  attacks  against  the  Shi'a
    community, Dr Franco notes that these were not until recently a feature
    of the insurgency in Afghanistan. That changed in Ashura  2011  when  a
    huge bomb exploded at Kabul's most important Shi'a shrine,  killing  at
    least 70 people. That attack is believed to have been  carried  out  by
    Pakistani-based militant group Lashkar-e-Jhangvi.   The  frequency  and
    severity  of  such  sectarian  attacks  in  the  city  appears  to   be
    increasing.

39. As to the wider social issues the Appellant has no known connections to
    Kabul  and  has  never  spent  any  time  in  the  city.  Against  that
    background, Dr Franco concludes that he would be forced to try and gain
    access to one of the IDP settlements there. There are believed to be 55
    of these settlements, and conditions are uniformly described  as  dire.
    The main form of "shelter" available is tarpaulin or tents provided  by
    UNCHR. IDPs who have been there a  little  longer  might  improvise  by
    using sheets of discarded metal, pieces of timber and other  rubble  to
    try and construct dwellings.   There is no sanitation or  clean  water.
    Every winter children, the elderly and other vulnerable individuals die
    because of the cold, disease and infection.  If the  Appellant  chooses
    to try and squat amongst the urban poor  he  will  face  the  "routine"
    challenges of discrimination, lack of security, difficulties in finding
    employment, lack of food and  water,  safe  and  secure  housing.    Dr
    Franco observes that most  of  the  displaced  Hazara  from  the  Kuchi
    conflict in Wardak have ended up as IDPs in Kabul, squatting in Mosques
    or in the open air in the west of the city.  If the Appellant does have
    any distant relatives in this group to whom he could turn for emotional
    support, it is extremely unlikely that they would be able to offer  him
    any financial assistance or  help  to  meet  his  basic  socio-economic
    needs.  Although the Appellant is a young man  and  as  such  might  be
    expected to look for employment and provide  for  himself,  I  note  Dr
    Franco's evidence that obtaining  decent  employment  is  still  widely
    dependent upon having 'connections'.   I add to this dismal picture the
    uncontested fact that  the  Appellant  has  significant  mental  health
    problems. He has been accessing psychiatric  and  counselling  services
    for three years and is, on the evidence of those who know him  best,  a
    fragile and vulnerable young man.


40. Having considered all of  that  evidence  in  the  round  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that there is a reasonable internal  flight  alternative  for
    the Appellant.  What might be considered 'normal' is not to be measured
    against his life here, but nor is it to be measured simply against  the
    life led by the Hazari IDPs already in Kabul, akin as they are  to  the
    "poorest of the poor", the displaced Darfuris in Khartoum.   Considered
    holistically, and taken cumulatively, the factors  that  weigh  against
    him leading any kind of 'normal' life in Kabul are as follows. There is
    a real likelihood that he will be  forced  to  enter  one  of  the  IDP
    settlements. The conditions there are well below international norms of
    basic socio-economic human rights. There is little sanitation, no clean
    water, and only shelter of the most rudimentary variety.     He has  no
    connections or influence to help him get  secure  employment.  Even  if
    manages to find menial, temporary work, he will  be  unlikely  to  earn
    enough, on a  regular  basis,  to  lift  him  out  of  this  precarious
    existence.  As a Hazara he will be part of one of the most marginalised
    communities in Afghanistan, facing widespread societal  discrimination.
    They are a community under violent  assault  for  their  ethnicity  and
    religion, who have endured atrocious persecution in their  home  areas,
    and now find themselves under attack even in  the  relative  safety  of
    Kabul. Whether these acts of persecution are of sufficient frequency to
    justify a finding of 'real risk' is not a conclusion  that  I  need  to
    reach. That is because I accept that for this  particularly  vulnerable
    Appellant, the subjective fear of such attack will be overwhelming.  As
    a young and vulnerable  individual  without  family  support  he  would
    further be easy prey for traffickers and other criminals.   Taken  with
    the  aforementioned  challenges  in  day   to   day   survival,   these
    vulnerabilities mean that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Kabul.  It follows that this appeal must be allowed.





    Decisions


41. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


42. I re-make the decision before me as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


43. There is an anonymity order in force.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            15th December
                                    2016




    Post-Script


    I would add this. It is evident from the account given  that  prior  to
    his departure from Afghanistan the Appellant had effectively become the
    head of the household. His younger brothers,  and  the  decisions  made
    about where they could go, were under his control.   The  brothers  now
    find themselves in three  different  countries.  Abbas  is  in  France,
    Noorollah in Austria and the Appellant in the United Kingdom. They  are
    all still very young, and given their shared  history  of  persecution,
    vulnerable.   I would hope that any application made for family reunion
    would,  in  all  the  circumstances,  be  favourably  received  by  the
    Respondent.


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on the 26th
May 2016
[2] Decision under appeal was the decision dated 11th March 2014 to remove
the Appellant from the United Kingdom  pursuant to s10 of the Immigration
and Asylum Act 1999

