

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Numbers: AA/01968/2014
                                                               AA/06008/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14 May 2015                              |On: 22 May 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    MR MG
                                    MR FH
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Lagunju, counsel instructed by Howe and Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   It has previously been found  appropriate,  given  this  appeal  involves
   asylum issues, that the Appellant be granted anonymity unless  and  until
   the Tribunal directs otherwise.  As such, no report of these  proceedings
   shall directly, or indirectly, identify the Appellant or any  members  of
   his family.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  a
   contempt of court.



 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of M W P
    Harris of the First-tier Tribunal on  08  October  2014  following  the
    hearing of the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to grant asylum and her decision to give removal directions  to
    each respondent, whom we shall  call  'the  claimants'  as  an  illegal
    entrant.

 2. The claimants' case is that they are both gay Pakistani  citizens,  who
    were in a relationship with one another  in  Pakistan,  a  relationship
    which has continued in the UK, that as a result of that position  being
    known to their families they  suffered  persecution  in  Pakistan,  and
    cannot return to Pakistan and live openly, as they wish to do, as a gay
    couple. They separately applied to come to the UK as students in  order
    to evade that persecution, and subsequently sought  asylum  because  of
    their fear of repeat persecutory treatment on return.

 3. In the course of the Secretary of State's investigation  of  the  claim
    the Appellants provided written statements and  were  interviewed.  The
    Secretary of State noting the persecution of  gays  in  Pakistan  found
    that their account of their having expressed their sexuality there  was
    implausible.   Discrepancies  between  the   written   statements   and
    interview accounts were noted. The claims were not made on arrival  and
    were delayed without good cause. The claim was not believed.

 4. At a hearing before Judge Harris  the  claimants  appeared  in  person.
    They adopted recent witness statements, gave their  accounts  of  their
    individual histories,  and  were  subject  to  cross-examination  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  In the course of their evidence,  as  is  apparent
    from Judge Harris's determination, they  provided  explanations  for  a
    number of the factors that had caused the Secretary of State  to  reach
    the conclusions that she did. The judge found that many of  the  issues
    raised by the Secretary of  State  were  inappropriate  concerns  about
    implausibility. Judge Harris found them credible in their claims to  be
    gay, to have been discovered to be in a relationship in  Pakistan,  and
    to be in a relationship now and  actively  choosing  to  express  their
    sexuality openly in the UK.  The judge found that they  fully  intended
    to continue to live openly as gays.  The assessment of risk  on  return
    is predicated on the judge concluding that the couple are genuinely  in
    a gay relationship and would, absent threat of persecution, live openly
    as a gay couple in Pakistan.

 5. Judge Harris's decision is challenged on the grounds that he  erred  in
    law by failing to give sufficient reasons for rejecting the credibility
    concerns of the Secretary of Sate.

 6. Ms Savage relied on the elegant summary of  the duty on a  judge  given
    in the  case of Malaba v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 820 at paragraphs 19  and
    20 as follows:

         "It follows that at least in this important respect, there were
         significant discrepancies in the appellant's account. Indeed, the
         adjudicator said that she accepted the view of the Secretary of
         State that there were discrepancies. As we have seen, the Secretary
         of State had said that the discrepancies were so serious that they
         completely undermined the credibility of her claim. A number of
         possible conclusions were available to the adjudicator. First, she
         could have said that, accepting the discrepancies at face value
         (without taking account of the response statement), they did not
         undermine the core of her claim. Secondly, she could have said
         that, if taken at face value, the discrepancies completely
         undermined the core of her claim; but she accepted the explanations
         given in the response statement and for that reason concluded that
         the discrepancies were more apparent than real and did not
         undermine the core of her account. Thirdly, she could have said
         that she accepted that some of the alleged discrepancies had not
         been adequately explained by the appellant in the response
         statement, but that these did not undermine the core of the
         account. Fourthly, she could have accepted that some of the alleged
         discrepancies had not been adequately explained in the response
         statement, and that these did undermine the appellant's account.
          In my judgment, the existence of these possibilities underlines
         the fact that it was imperative for the adjudicator to explain how
         she reached her main conclusion that, having regard to the response
         statement, the discrepancies did not completely undermine the core
         of the claim. It was insufficient simply to say that she had had
         regard to the response statement. She should have identified the
         discrepancies which she considered had been satisfactorily
         explained by the appellant and those which had not, giving short
         reasons for her findings, and explained why such discrepancies as
         had not been satisfactorily explained did not completely undermine
         the appellant's account. I agree with the conclusion of the IAT
         that the adjudicator did not give adequate reasons for her finding
         that the appellant was a credible witness, particularly in
         circumstances where she did not give oral evidence beyond the
         adoption of her witness statement. Even if it was open to the
         adjudicator to place any, still less "particular", reliance on the
         medical report of Dr Pilgrim, her reliance on that report to
         support her finding that the appellant's account was credible did
         not absolve her from the duty to provide adequate reasons for her
         finding in relation to the discrepancies."
 7. The complaint is that the judge explicitly recognised  the  credibility
    issues raised, and agreed that there remained  discrepancies  in  their
    accounts.  He did not however identify them except by reference to  the
    paragraph numbers of the Reasons  for  refusal  letter.   He  did  not,
    therefore, explain what their significance was, what  the  explanations
    were,  or  why  he  found  them  acceptable,  or  at  least   why   the
    discrepancies did not undermine the core account.

 8.  Ms Savage did not take us to the individual  discrepancies  identified
    by the judge in this way as remaining but we have looked at them.

 9. The Court of Appeal addressed a similar issue in  AT  (Guinea)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1889. Laws LJ (with whom Sir Igor Judge P  and  Leveson
    LJ agreed) said this at paragraph 18:

         "Now I do not suggest that there may not be a credibility  case  in
         which  the  immigration  judge  is  indeed  obliged  to  provide  a
         substantial explanation of his or  her  approach  to  discrepancies
         which are found to exist. That was the position  in  Malaba  [2006]
         EWCA Civ 820 (see the judgment of Dyson LJ at paragraphs 19 and 20)
         and also AK [2006] EWCA Civ 1182.  But  every  case  is  of  course
         different. Discrepancies may sometimes be more important where they
         are internal to a witness's evidence. The duty to give  reasons  is
         not a matter of ticking a checklist. Its essence is to ensure  that
         the parties to a decision - and indeed any relevant appeal court  -
         should understand why one has won and the other has lost. Here  the
         immigration judge Mr Camp gave objective  overarching  reasons  for
         accepting the appellant's testimony: its  internal  consistency  in
         the face of thorough cross-examination (paragraph 17); its detailed
         nature; the support given on some points by documents found  to  be
         genuine; and a point about the date when he left the  country.  The
         three individual points on which the AIT founded on  21st  November
         2005 could (and I am bound to say should) have been dealt with more
         fully than they were, and it may be that  a  different  immigration
         judge might have  found  them  more  damaging  to  the  appellant's
         credibility. But in the end that is neither here nor there. Looking
         at the matter in the round, the parties reading the  decision  made
         by Mr Camp know why he accepted the appellant's evidence."

10. That is, in our judgement, the position here. This was not a situation,
    as in Malaba, where the Appellant did not give evidence and there  were
    no sustainable credibility findings so that it was not clear  that  the
    judge  had  grappled  with  the  disputed  credibility  points  and  to
    understand what he had made of them. In this case the Immigration Judge
    directed himself correctly as to the burden and standard of proof.  The
    judge had the opportunity of seeing the claimants in person and  seeing
    for himself  their  performance  in  cross-examination.   Further,  the
    credibility issue was, in this case, the only issue.  There can  be  no
    concern that the Judge may  somehow  have  decided  this  case  without
    asking himself the direct  question:  are  the  claimants  telling  the
    truth?

11. Unlike the case of Malaba, we do not have the concern  that  the  judge
    has not held the relevant issues in mind here.  A full reading  of  the
    decision, particularly paragraphs 31 to 37, reveals that the judge gave
    sustainable reasons for finding that  evidence  of  the  claimants  was
    credible.  The judge clearly had regard  to  the  Secretary  of  Sate's
    concerns: indeed much of the determination is devoted to seeing whether
    the reasons mentioned  were  truly  matters  which  should  affect  his
    conclusion.  The judge set out in some detail why  he  found  that  the
    implausibility factors relied upon amounted to nothing.  Indeed he took
    an entirely contrary view to the Secretary of State, finding  that  the
    detailed  accounts  of  the  couple's  behaviour  in  expressing  their
    sexuality and of the discovery  of  their  relationship  by  family  in
    Pakistan, far from being implausible, were established as credible.  He
    had before him two opposing possible conclusions and in our judgment he
    was entitled to  make  the  choice  that  he  did  between  them.   The
    submission fails to read the decision in the round, and particularly to
    take account of the positive credibility findings  as  to  their  being
    gay, and having expressed their sexuality in Pakistan and in the UK and
    of being in a relationship.

12. The reality is that the credibility points that  remained  are  not  so
    serious as to undermine the core of the account.  By  way  of  example,
    and we do not find any need to be exhaustive, one claimant  said  their
    relationship  started in January  whilst  the  other  said  it  was  in
    September, both said it was four years ago. One said that they had been
    "discovered" in December 2009, and then in the next  question  said  it
    was a month later, i.e.  January 2010, and did not accept that  he  had
    said December, and the other  said  it  was  May  2010.  One  said  the
    relationship started one or two weeks after they met and the other that
    it was two or three months after.   The fact of those discrepancies was
    clearly noted by the Judge who nonetheless  concludes,  in  the  round,
    that the claim of  fear  on  return  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  is
    established i.e. to the low standard applicable in asylum claims.

13. It is not said by the Secretary of State, as we understand it, that the
    claimants' story, if true, would not give rise to  a  proper  claim  to
    asylum.  The Secretary of State's  position  on  the  contrary  is  and
    always has been that the story simply is not true;  and,  indeed,  that
    the claimants are not gay.  Reading the decision overall it is clear to
    the Secretary of State  that  she  lost  the  case  because  the  judge
    disagreed, and whilst the adequacy of reasoning  has  been  challenged,
    it is  not  suggested  that  there  was  no  evidence  upon  which  his
    conclusion could be based, so as to be perverse. Whilst we would expect
    to see a fuller  analysis  than  we  have  in  this  decision,  in  our
    assessment the judge has done enough to explain  to  the  Secretary  of
    State why she lost.   It would have been better to  identify  in  terms
    the more significant discrepancies together with  any  explanations  of
    them  by  the  claimants.   A  short  explanation  of  their   ultimate
    significance could then have been included.  Some of the  discrepancies
    relied upon by the Secretary of State are truly minor points which pale
    into insignificance when compared  with  the  probative  force  of  the
    finding based on the oral evidence that the claimants are actually gay.
     An explanation of this kind from the FTT need not be long or  detailed
    and may be  valuable  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  officials  when
    considering what kind of reasoning by them is likely to  be  upheld  on
    appeal.  This is another useful purpose which  is  achieved  by  giving
    sufficient reasons.

14. In XL China v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  575   Lord  Justice  Jackson  made
    comments at paragraph 32 which we find apposite in this case,  although
    we would not be quite as critical of the determination of the Judge  in
    the present case:
         I am bound to say that Immigration Judge Callow's determination
         falls some distance short of excellence. On the other hand, in my
         view the Immigration Judge has reached a decision that was open to
         him on the evidence. Also, although this is not an easy case, the
         Immigration Judge has gone just far enough to explain why he has
         reached the decision which he did. In the result, therefore, I
         conclude that there is no error of law in that decision which
         warrants it being set aside and the whole matter being reconsidered
         at a reconsideration hearing.
         33. It follows from this conclusion that, although I have some
         sympathy for the criticisms expressed by Senior Immigration Judge
         McGeachy, I reject his conclusion that Immigration Judge Callow's
         decision was flawed by an error of law. In my view Immigration
         Judge Callow's decision, both in respect of past persecution and
         also in respect of the risk of future persecution ought to have
         been upheld upon reconsideration.

15. For the reasons above we have concluded that the judge's  determination
    discloses no error of law and the First-tier  Tribunal's  decisions  to
    allow these appeals accordingly stands.



                                                                 E M Davidge

                Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
Date: 15 May 2015
