
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01790/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 19th November 2018    On the 29th November 2018

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  MR M. M.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Yeo (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on the 3rd January 2018, in  which
      she accepted that the Appellant is gay, but found that  he  would  not
      thereby be at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.

   2. This case has a long history having previously been up to the Court of
      Appeal, who remitted the case back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reconsideration and it is the reconsideration of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Rowlands that forms the basis of this appeal.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Ryan on the 26th September 2018 who found that it  was  an  arguable
      material error of law that having accepted the Appellant was  gay,  in
      light of the arguments made by the Appellant that the country guidance
      case of LH and IP (Gay Men: Risk) (CG) [2015] UKUT 73 was  of  limited
      relevance and had been surpassed by more  recent  country  information
      that it was arguable the Judge materially erred in failing to set  out
      in any or  sufficient  detail  the  information  relied  upon  by  the
      Appellant in that regard.  He also  considered  that  given  that  the
      Judge refused to admit the unreported Upper Tribunal decision  in  the
      case of AA/07983/2015,  on  the  basis  that  the  objective  evidence
      referred to it was going to be referred to in the present proceedings,
      it made it all the more important the Judge refer to that evidence  in
      the decision and that this amounted to an arguable error of law.

   4. At the appeal hearing, the Appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Yeo  of
      Counsel and the Respondent was represented by Ms Pal, the Senior  Home
      Office Presenting Officer.

   5. Mr Yeo relied upon the Grounds of Appeal, which  I  have  fully  taken
      account of, and elaborated upon the same in his oral submissions.   He
      submitted that the Judge's failure to fully deal with the evidence  of
      the Appellant regarding the situation of gay men in Sri Lanka and  the
      fact that it was only dealt with in a generic way and the  failure  to
      refer specifically to any country information meant that the Judge had
      erred in law.  He argued that the Judge had failed  to  properly  take
      account of the evidence relied upon by the Appellant  as  detailed  at
      paragraph 11  of  the  Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument  and  that  the
      Appellant had relied upon the unreported determination  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal and the evidence dealt with therein  and  that  although  the
      Judge indicated that that evidence  was  to  be  relied  upon  by  the
      Appellant and therefore did not give permission specifically  to  rely
      upon the unreported decision itself, the  Judge  had  failed  to  deal
      adequately with that evidence referred to in that decision.  He argued
      that there was clear evidence in the Appellant's bundle, that  65%  of
      gay men asked said that they had suffered violence  at  the  hands  of
      police in Sri Lanka and the Judge had simply failed to adequately deal
      with the evidence presented by the  Appellant  to  indicate  that  the
      previous country guidance case should not be followed.

   6. Mr Yeo further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's analysis of
      HJ (Iran) was wrong and that although the  Judge  had  said  that  the
      Appellant could live discreetly if he wanted to,  the  Judge  had  not
      indicated why he would want to live  discreetly.   He  further  argued
      that at paragraph 22 of the  determination  the  Judge  had  erred  in
      finding that there was nothing about the Appellant  which  would  lead
      someone to identify him as being gay and it was not just a  matter  of
      the way that the Appellant  looked  but  more  subtle  characteristics
      including his dress, speech, demeanour, etc.  He  submitted  that  the
      Judge had not dealt with the issue as to whether or not  even  if  the
      Appellant tried to be discreet he would  be  identifiable  as  gay  or
      perceived as being different or that he would  be  engaging  in  risky
      behaviour.

   7. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Ms Pal argued that the
      Judge had noted that the Appellant's representative  had  relied  upon
      the Skeleton Argument and had clearly made reference  to  the  country
      guidance case and that the Judge at paragraph  19  had  said  that  he
      considered carefully all  the  evidence  in  the  case  and  again  at
      paragraph 26 he said that he had carefully considered the new evidence
      presented by the Appellant which showed that there had been  a  number
      of issues on a number of occasions when  people  had  been  persecuted
      because of their sexuality however  the  incidents  had  involved  sex
      workers and transgenders in the main  and  that  there  is  only  some
      evidence of discrimination as far as gay men are concerned and  it  is
      not enough to amount to persecution.  She argued that  the  Judge  had
      adequately dealt with the new evidence at paragraphs 26 and 27 of  the
      decision and had properly considered the case of HJ  (Iran)  and  that
      there is nothing in terms of the Appellant's presentation which  would
      lead him to be identified as being gay and the Judge was  entitled  to
      make the findings that he made in that regard.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. It is clear having considered the Skeleton Argument presented  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge, that at paragraph  11,  the  Appellant  had
      relied upon a substantial amount of new evidence contained within  the
      Appellant's bundle including evidence at pages  211,  212,  213,  214,
      216, 217, 218, 219, 222, 223, 226, 227, 234, 235, 236,  239,  243/244,
      250, 254, 255, 266-267 and 280 together with updated case law in order
      to try to get the First-tier Tribunal Judge to depart from the country
      guidance case of LH & IP (Gay Men: Risk) [2015]  UKUT  00073.  However
      the Judge's consideration of the entirety of that evidence is  limited
      to his finding at paragraph 26 that "I have considered very  carefully
      the objective evidence including the new evidence put before me and it
      clearly shows that there have been a number of issues on a  number  of
      occasions when people have been persecuted because of their sexuality.
       However, the incidents have involved sex workers and transgenders  in
      the main and although that is not right there is only some evidence of
      discrimination as far as gay men are concerned and it is not enough to
      amount to persecution".  Although the Judge is not duty  bound  to  go
      through and analyse each and every piece of evidence  put  forward  by
      the parties to the case, there has to be sufficient  consideration  of
      the evidence presented in order to justify the findings of fact  made.
      The Judge has not referred to any specific document that he has relied
      upon in the Appellant's bundle to say that in the main such  incidents
      had involved sex workers and transgenders  who  had  been  persecuted;
      that there was some only evidence of discrimination as far as gay  men
      were concerned and not enough to amount to persecution.

   9. Indeed, in that regard, the Appellant had specifically relied upon the
      evidence considered in the unreported case of AA/07983/2015, which the
      Judge had indicated although permission had not  been  given  to  rely
      upon the decision itself, that the evidence contained therein could be
      relied upon, that at paragraph 44 of that decision reference was  made
      to the latest COIS report where at paragraph 4.1.3 it was stated  that
      65% of gay men surveyed had reported police violence  based  on  their
      sexuality/gender identity and the US  State  Department  Human  Rights
      Report for Sri Lanka 2014 had  made  findings  of  arbitrary  arrests,
      detention, blackmail, extortion, violence and coerced sexual acts.   I
      am not satisfied that the analysis of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in
      this case was  sufficiently  thorough,  in  order  to  deal  with  the
      evidence presented fairly in order to  examine  whether  or  not  that
      evidence did show persecution as  opposed  to  simple  discrimination.
      The Judge has not analysed the objective  background  evidence  relied
      upon by the Appellant, nor adequately dealt with the large  amount  of
      information put forward by the Appellant between pages  211  and  280.
      The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  paragraph  26,  is
      insufficient to show why that evidence did not in fact show that there
      was a  risk  of  persecution  as  opposed  to  simply  discrimination.
      Insufficient reasons have been given to  allow  the  losing  party  to
      understand fully why they have  lost.   Further,  the  Judge  has  not
      adequately explained why the evidence from  the  US  State  Department
      Human Rights report for Sri Lanka 2014 regarding the police conducting
      arbitrary  arrests,  detention,  blackmail,  extortion,  violence  and
      coerced sexual acts for example has not been dealt with.

  10. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's failure to  deal  adequately
      with the evidence presented by the Appellant does amount to a material
      error of law such that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Rowlands should be set aside in its entirety and the  matter  remitted
      back for a further hearing before a differently constituted  Tribunal.
      The re-hearing must not be before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands
      nor before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Froom  who  did  the  original
      hearing back in March 2014, which was  the  subject  of  the  previous
      appeals.

  11. Although Mr Yeo argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his
      consideration of HJ (Iran) in stating that if the Appellant  did  live
      discreetly that will be simply because that would be how he would wish
      to live at paragraph 27, given the fact that the Judge found that  the
      Appellant could in fact live openly as a gay man in  Sri  Lanka,  that
      the statement does not amount to a material error of law as the  Judge
      indicated specifically he did not need to consider the question as  to
      whether or not the Appellant could live discreetly.   I  further  find
      that it was open to the Judge to make findings that there was  nothing
      in the Appellant's presentation that would lead him  to  consider  the
      Appellant was gay.  I also find it open to him on the evidence and  it
      was not I find simply based upon his appearance and I accept the Judge
      has taken into account all of the nuance factors indicated by  Mr  Yeo
      in reaching such a finding.

  12. However, given that the Judge's decision does contain a material error
      of law in terms of how the fresh evidence was dealt with, the decision
      in its entirety has to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands does contain  a  material
error of law and it is set aside in its entirety.  The  matter  is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing de novo,  before  any  First-
tier Tribunal Judges other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands or First-
tier Tribunal Judge Froom.

Given the nature of the appeal, the Appellant is entitled to anonymity.   No
record or note or transcript of these proceedings may in  any  way  identify
the Appellant or any members of his family.  This direction applies both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
can lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 19th November 2018
