
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 24 February 2016                   |On: 8 March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                   Miss IA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms E Rutherford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
      decision of the  respondent  dated  3  December  2014  to  refuse  her
      application for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
      Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Prior  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal in a determination promulgated on 30 May 2015.




   2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Murray
      who stated that it is arguable that the Judge when he referred to  the
      standard of proof  in  immigration  cases  being  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities made a material error of law when the standard of  proof
      is lower, as being "real risk" and therefore the Judge used too high a
      standard of proof.






   3.  Ms  Rutherford  stated  that  the  Judge   used   "the   balance   of
      probabilities" as the standard of proof required which has tainted his
      consideration of the appeal.




   4. The Judge stated at  paragraph  4,  under  the  title  "The  Law"  the
      following. "In immigration appeals the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
      appellant and the  standard  of  proof  required  is  the  balance  of
      probabilities.".




   5. This was not an immigration appeal  but  an  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection appeal. Ms Rutherford could not point to me any  particular
      paragraph in the determination where it became obvious that the  Judge
      had applied the balance of probabilities standard of proof to a set of
      facts. She said, she cannot point me to  a  particular  paragraph  but
      stated that the Judge used the wrong standard of  proof  for  all  his
      findings.




   6. The Judge however stated at paragraph 26  in  conclusion,  "it  is  my
      decision that the appellant would be at no real risk of persecution or
      serious harm, or of insufficient protection therefrom, on  her  return
      to Turkey." This is the correct burden of proof.




   7. It is clear to me that the  Judge  used  a  template  for  immigration
      appeals. Since this was not an immigration appeal, his setting out the
      standard of proof in immigration appeals was superfluous,  unnecessary
      and a mistake. It however does not suggest to  me  that  that  is  the
      standard that he used in considering the appellant's asylum appeal. It
      is clear that at paragraph 26 the Judge  had  regard  to  the  correct
      standard of proof, which  is  real  risk.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted only on this ground and I find that it has no merit.




   8. I find on my consideration of the determination  that  the  Judge  has
      given cogent grounds for not finding the appellant  credible  and  her
      claim credible. He did not find that the appellant was a  sufficiently
      high profile to be persecuted by the Turkish authorities on return. He
      stated that the appellant was a 17-year-old  woman  with  a  very  low
      political profile indeed and this would not put at risk of persecution
      upon her return to Turkey.






   9. Having considered the determination as a whole, I  conclude  that  the
      Judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
      asylum, humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.




  10. I accept that there is a mistake in the  determination,  in  that  the
      Judge refers to the burden of proof in immigration appeals  which  was
      wrong, but that does not amount to a material  error  of  law.  It  is
      clear to me in examining the reasoning  of  the  Judge,  he  used  the
      correct burden of proof in his analysis of the facts and the  findings
      that from those facts.



      DECISION

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is upheld.

Appeal dismissed


Signed by


A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
                                              This 24th day of February 2016







