
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/01191/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 October 2016                       | On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     Ttk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    C Warren, instructed by Dicksons, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the appellant as the  respondent  and
    to the respondent as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal). The appellant, TTK, was born  in  1993
    and is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   In  April  2013,  the  appellant  was
    convicted for an offence of robbery for  which  he  received  a  prison
    sentence of three years and six months.  In addition, he was  sentenced
    to eight months' imprisonment (consecutively) for breach of a suspended
    sentence for  a  previous  offence.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Turnock) against a decision of the respondent to refuse
    him  and  to  refuse  his  protection  on  human  rights  claims.   The
    respondent's  decision  is  dated  9  January  2015.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 8  August  2016,  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  but  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with
    permission, against that  decision.   There  was  no  appeal  from  the
    appellant in  respect  of  the  dismissal  of  his  asylum/humanitarian
    protection appeals.

 2. The judge dealt with Article 8 ECHR at [94] and following.  He recorded
    that the respondent accepted that the  appellant  had  a  daughter  and
    partner in the United Kingdom who was of the view  that  there  was  no
    compelling evidence that the appellant had maintained family life  with
    them.  The judge, however, at [96] found that the appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  partner  (E)  and  their
    child.  He found that the relationship had  existed  for  approximately
    five years.  The child of the couple (H) was born towards  the  end  of
    2015.  The appellant also has  indirect  contact  with  a  child  of  a
    previous relationship (M) who is now aged 5 years.

 3. The grounds of  appeal  assert  the  judge  failed  properly  to  apply
    provisions of paragraph 399(a) and (b) of HC 395 (as amended) and  also
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended):

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

    (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

    (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  the  7
    years immediately preceding the date of the immigration  decision;  and
    in either case

    (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country  to
    which the person is to be deported; and

    (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK  without
    the person who is to be deported; or

    (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
    who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK, and

    (i) the relationship was formed at a time when  the  person  (deportee)
    was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status was not precarious;
    and

    (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the  country
    to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of   compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
    Appendix FM; and

    (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the person who is to be deported.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals

    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

    (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
    life,

    (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

    (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration  into
    the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

    (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

    (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

 4. The Secretary of State complains that the  judge  failed  correctly  to
    apply the "unduly harsh" test contained in those provisions.  At [111 -
    112], Judge Turnock wrote:

             111.  [Having  found  the  appellant  does   not   face   very
             significant obstacles to his integration into Zimbabwe]  I  am
             satisfied  the  appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 who is a British
             citizen and that it would be unduly harsh for the child either
             to live in Zimbabwe  or  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
             appellant.  If the child were to be  removed  to  Zimbabwe  it
             would mean a severe curtailment of the benefits  which  accrue
             to him as a British citizen and if the appellant  were  to  be
             removed it would effectively mean the child would be  deprived
             of a meaningful family life with his father.

             112. Further I am satisfied the appellant has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  who  is  a  British
             citizen  who  is  settled  in  the  UK.   I  find   that   the
             relationship was formed at a time when the appellant had  been
             granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK and it  would  be
             unduly harsh for  his  partner  to  live  in  Zimbabwe  taking
             account of conditions which prevail in that  country  and  her
             parental responsibilities in this country.  It would be unduly
             harsh for the appellant's partner to remain in the UK  without
             the appellant as that would be effectively end the family life
             which has been established by them.  The  Secretary  of  State
             observes  that  the  judge  has   failed   to   identify   any
             circumstances which could be  described  as  being  more  than
             'uncomfortable,    inconvenient,    undesirable,     unwelcome
             .....................difficult  and  challenging'  (MAB:  para
             399; 'unduly harsh') USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC)).

    Further, the Secretary of State relies on MM (Uganda) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    450 at [26]:

         For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was wrongly decided by the
         Tribunal. The expression "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5) and Rule
         399(a) and (b) requires regard to be had to all  the  circumstances
         including the criminal's immigration and criminal history.

 5. The Secretary of State also relies on PF (Nigeria) [2015] EWCA Civ  251
    at [43]:

         In my judgment, the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
         not identify, as it should have done, what were the features of the
         Appellant's case that  amounted  to  compelling  reasons,  or  were
         exceptional circumstances, justifying the success  of  his  appeal.
         Indeed, I would go further and state that I  have  been  unable  to
         identify in the determination findings of fact that could  properly
         be categorised as exceptional, or amounting to  compelling  reasons
         for him to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  this  country,  given  the
         seriousness of his repeated criminal  conduct.  I  fully  recognise
         that if the Judge's factual findings are well founded,  there  will
         be a real and damaging impact on his partner and the children;  but
         that is a common consequence of the deportation of a person who has
         children in this country. Deportation will normally be  appropriate
         in cases such as the present, even  though  the  children  will  be
         affected  and  the  interests  of  the  children  are   a   primary
         consideration. In some cases the family may be  able  to  join  the
         deportee in the country  of  his  nationality,  but  that  was  not
         explored in this case, and I assume was not a real possibility.

 6. As recorded above, the Court of Appeal decided that the Tribunal  erred
    in MAB  by  excluding  from  the  assessment  of  "unduly  harsh"  "all
    circumstances  including  the  criminal's  immigration   and   criminal
    history."  Judge Turnock has not excluded consideration of those latter
    factors in terms but, equally, he has not explicitly  relied  upon  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in MM.  Ms Warren, for  the  appellant,
    submitted that Judge Turnock had carried out a very  detailed  analysis
    (his  decision  runs  to  22  pages).   The  judge  had  addressed   in
    considerable  detail  the  appellant's  criminal   offending   in   his
    discussion of Section 72 of the  2002  Act.   Having  done  so,  I  she
    submitted that there was no need for the judge to repeat that  analysis
    in his determination of the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 7. I agree with Ms Warren.  There was no suggestion in the  decision  that
    the judge has, in assessing whether the circumstances will  be  "unduly
    harsh", focussed only upon the effect of the  immigration  decision  on
    the children.  The judge has  considered  the  appellant's  immigration
    history (see the passage of the decision which I have quoted above) and
    his account of the appellant's offending and of the efforts  which  the
    appellant has made to rehabilitate himself is very  detailed.   I  find
    that Judge Turnock has had all the circumstances in mind when  applying
    the provisions of the 2002 Act and paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Secretary of  State  does  not  suggest  that  the  outcome
    reached by the judge is perverse on  the  facts  only  that  the  judge
    committed an error of  process  in  achieving  that  result.   For  the
    reasons I have given, I disagree.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


