

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/01175/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |                 Decision and Reasons |
|                                |Promulgated                           |
|On 30 July 2015                 |                 On 7 August 2015     |
|                                |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                                   MR N K
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel (instructed by JD Spicer Zeb)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  on  19  June  2015  against  the
           decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso made in a  decision
           and  reasons  promulgated  on  27  May   2015   dismissing   the
           Appellant's asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
           appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, whose date of  birth
           was stated as 1 January  1998.   He  had  appealed  against  his
           removal from the United Kingdom.  He stated that  he  feared  to
           return to Afghanistan because of his father's  involvement  with
           Hizb-i-Islami, his  forced  recruitment  into  the  Taliban  and
           current conditions there.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Grant-Hutchison considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
           Veloso had failed  to  (a)  give  due  weight  to  the  previous
           determination for the Appellant's older  brother,  (b)  to  take
           into account the ages of the Appellant and of his brother at the
           material  times  and  (c)  had  taken  into  account  irrelevant
           matters.  It was also arguable that the judge had erred  in  her
           treatment of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.
           (There was no challenge to the judges' dismissal of the  Article
           8 ECHR private life claim.)


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms King for the Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted, together with the grant of  permission
           to appeal.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
           numerous respects, such that the decision and reasons could  not
           stand.  The determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Watters
           in the appeal of the Appellant's brother should have been  Judge
           Veloso's starting point, as Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -
           Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702, Ocampo
           [2006] EWCA Civ 1276 and  AA  (Somalia)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1040
           showed.  Moreover there had been  insufficient  engagement  with
           the brother's evidence.  The judge's whole sequence of reasoning
           had been illogical and defective.


      6.    Ms  King  developed  those  submissions  in  dialogue  with  the
           tribunal.  The judge had failed to take  into  account  relevant
           evidence and had at the same time considered irrelevant matters.
            It was quite wrong and unfair of the judge  to  have  drawn  an
           adverse inference from  the  absence  of  any  evidence  from  a
           witness the judge  had  identified  as  present  in  the  United
           Kingdom.   Counsel's submission was that the judge had failed to
           take account of the respective ages of  the  Appellant  and  his
           brother at material times, and the impact of their ages on their
           recall and understanding.


      7.    Ms King  further  submitted  that  Judge  Veloso's  approach  to
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive was wrong and  self
           contradictory.  The country guidance for Afghanistan was out  of
           date and the situation was now within Article 15(c) terms.   The
           judge's credibility assessment had  contained  misunderstandings
           and errors, with undue weight being given to minor matters.  The
           decision and reasons should be set aside and the appeal  reheard
           by another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


      8.    Mr Whitwell for the Respondent relied on the  Respondent's  rule
           24 notice.  He submitted that the decision and reasons disclosed
           no error of law.  The current objective evidence did not support
           the claimed error of law in relation to the Article 15(c) claim,
           which the tribunal should note was supported by a  large  volume
           of material produced on the morning  of  the  hearing.   Despite
           that ambush, the judge had given full, text  book  consideration
           to that material. The judge gave proper  reasons  for  departing
           from the earlier determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
           she was free to do.  There had been ample consideration  of  the
           age factor.  TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ  40  showed  that  the
           judge was entitled to draw an adverse inference from the absence
           of corroboration which was readily and  safely  available.   The
           Appellant's complaints at most were just a disagreement with the
           judge.


      9.    In reply, Ms King reiterated her client's case.   Chiver  [1994]
           UKAIT 10578 remained relevant.  The judge had failed in her duty
           to consider the core of the claim.   The  decision  and  reasons
           should be set aside.


      10.   The tribunal reserved its determination, having  indicated  that
           its finding in principle was that no material error of  law  had
           been shown.




      No material error of law


      11.    The  tribunal  accepts  Mr  Whitwell's  submissions.   In   the
           tribunal's view, the grant of permission to  appeal  was  overly
           generous.  As always, the judge's decision and reasons needed to
           be read as a whole, which it has to be said Ms King's grounds of
           appeal and subsequent submissions conspicuously  failed  to  do.
           Indeed, her submissions at times seemed premised  on  the  basis
           that the judge had set out to dismiss the appeal, which no  fair
           reading of the determination can  support.    On  the  contrary,
           there was a meticulous examination  of  what  was  a  case  with
           numerous documents, to which the  judge  devoted  ample  hearing
           time and subsequent consideration.   There can  be  no  sensible
           doubt that the judge fully understood the context of  the  claim
           and had the current country background firmly  in  mind  at  all
           times.


      12.   It was incorrect to assert that  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -
           ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT  00702
           applied to the determination of the Appellant's brother's asylum
           appeal which it was contended had to  be  the  judge's  starting
           point.  The earlier determination was simply evidence which  had
           to be taken into account, alongside  the  Appellant's  brother's
           subsequent evidence given at the appeal hearing, which the judge
           demonstrably did.  The law is as stated  by  Hooper,  LJ  in  AA
           (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 at [29]: "[W]here the parties are
           different, the second tribunal should have regard to the factual
           conclusions  of  the  first  tribunal,  but  must  evaluate  the
           evidence and submissions as it would in  any  other  case.   If,
           having considered the factual conclusions of the first tribunal,
           the  second  tribunal  rationally  reaches   different   factual
           conclusions, then it is those conclusions which  it  must  apply
           and not those of the first  tribunal.  That  is  precisely  what
           Judge Veloso did.


      13.   As to Judge Veloso's concern as to the  absence  of  potentially
           relevant evidence from a witness present in the United  Kingdom,
           if authority were  needed,  TK  (Burundi)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40
           supports her approach.  The judge explained in detail at [32] to
           [34] of the determination why an  adverse  inference  was  drawn
           from the absence of the witness.  That inference was open to her
           as part of her "in the round" assessment.


      14.   The judge gave close attention to the issue of  the  Appellant's
           age: see [27] to [31] in particular of the  determination.   The
           Appellant's age and vulnerability were noted as central  issues:
           see [9].  There was no challenge to the Tower Hamlets report and
           it was accepted that even on the Appellant's own account he  was
           now over 18.  The tribunal considers that Judge Veloso took full
           account of the Appellant's (and his brother's) claimed age(s) in
           reaching her credibility assessment.


      15.   It is very difficult indeed to see what  more  the  judge  could
           have done in examining the article 15(c) claim.  As was  pointed
           out by Mr Whitwell,  this  was  raised  without  regard  to  the
           tribunal's  standard  directions  and  without  proper   notice.
           Nevertheless,  the  judge  dealt  with  the  relevant   evidence
           meticulously  at  [41]  onwards  of   the   determination,   see
           especially  [44]  onwards.   The  judge  examined  the  evidence
           presented and gave sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  any
           deterioration in the  security  situation  was  insufficient  to
           warrant a departure  from  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
           [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).


      16.    In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the   multi   layered   adverse
           credibility assessment which the judge reached was open to  her.
           Her decision was a comprehensive and  thoughtful  reflection  on
           the various issues raised in the appeal.  There was no error  of
           law.  There  is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the  judge's
           decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal, which dismissal must
           stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

