
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa014952015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2016                             |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     nt
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by S Satha and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on  9  January  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1989.  He  claims
    that he was forced to join the LTTE in 2008 and  served  with  the  Sea
    Tigers and on land. He fled after fighting at  Iranaipala  in  February
    2016. On 18 March 2009 he went to search for his brother and  was  shot
    in the leg by the army. His brother had been killed  in  February  2009
    and his body was eventually returned to the family by the army.  On  22
    March 2009 the appellant was taken to a nearby  camp  and  hit  with  a
    rifle. He was taken to a hospital until July 2009 and then  transferred
    to Poosa camp in Colombo. He was held there  until  November  2009  and
    tortured. He denied LTTE membership and was released on a bribe. He was
    detained again in about January 2012 because he did  not  have  release
    papers and was returned to Poosa camp. He was tortured again  and  held
    until February 2012. He was  released  following  intervention  by  his
    father but had a weekly reporting requirement and sometimes  was  taken
    by bus to locate LTTE weapon caches. He left Sri Lanka on 18 May  2012.
    The authorities searched for him, questioned his father and  issued  an
    arrest warrant in July 2012.

 4. The respondent rejected the appellant's account as not credible.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 6 January 2016. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence as to what happened up to the point when  he  left
    Sri Lanka to be plausible. However, the judge did not accept  that  the
    evidence about the brother's death and  the  existence  of  the  arrest
    warrant. There was a discrepancy in that the  letter  from  the  mother
    suggested that the brother was killed before the appellant  joined  the
    LTTE. That affected the appellant's  reliability  as  a  witness  where
    matters were not corroborated by  other  witnesses  or  documents.  The
    appellant did not fall into any GJ categories  and  his  mental  health
    condition was not such that return would  breach  Article  3.  He  also
    failed under Article 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    failed  to  adequately  consider  paragraphs  441-456   of   GJ   which
    demonstrate that there is inadequate treatment for those with  PTSD  in
    Sri Lanka. The requirement  for  corroborative  evidence  was  a  clear
    misapplication of the burden of proof. The judge also failed to  engage
    with the appellant's profile as a person arrested post-conflict who was
    held until February 2012 and fled Sri Lanka in May 2012.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    4 February 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  erred
    in  rejecting  the  arrest  warrant  and  in  requiring   corroborating
    evidence. His injuries were incurred post-conflict.  All  grounds  were
    arguable.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 15 February 2016, the respondent sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the medical reports  were
    adequately considered and the  judge  found  insufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that there was a suicide risk and inadequate mental  health
    facilities. The judge was entitled to find that an arrest  warrant  did
    not exist for the appellant and gave adequate reasons.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

10. Ms Allen submitted that the appellant was largely found to be  credible
    and his second detention was two years after the end of  the  war.  The
    judge misapplied the burden of proof in relation to the arrest  warrant
    at paragraphs 117-119  of  the  decision.  Paragraph  109  sets  out  a
    requirement for corroborative evidence  which  effectively  raises  the
    standard of proof. There  was  no  discrepancy  in  the  evidence.  The
    warrant was a logical response to the failure to comply with  reporting
    conditions. There was a failure to take  into  account  the  breach  of
    reporting conditions and the appellant's links in  the  UK.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant may suffer from mental illness and that  he
    was tortured during detention. The judge did  not  adequately  consider
    the psychiatric evidence or return conditions in Sri Lanka.

11. Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  always  on  the
    appellant. The judge was not bound to accept that an arrest warrant had
    been issued. There were contradictory  elements  to  the  evidence.  If
    corroboration was easily available then an adverse credibility  finding
    could be made in relation to the failure to submit that  evidence.  The
    judge did not impose a requirement for corroboration. People do  employ
    third party lawyers in Sri Lanka to obtain court documents.  The  judge
    rejected the psychiatric report and there was no real challenge to that
    in the grounds. The judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  did
    not fall within the risk categories.

12. Ms Allen submitted in reply that  the  appellant  was  on  an  official
    reporting condition that has now been breached and the  judge  did  not
    fully consider the implications of that breach.  The  judge  failed  to
    consider the suicide risk and did in reality impose  a  requirement  of
    corroboration.

13. I find that the judge did in effect impose a corroboration  requirement
    at paragraph 109 of the decision by stating that, "this discrepancy ...
    does affect the appellant's reliability as a witness where matters  are
    not corroborated by other witnesses or documents". After a  search  for
    corroboration at  paragraphs  118-119  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had failed to prove that the warrant existed given the  "lack
    of corroboration from the appellant's father or other sources that such
    a warrant exists". There is no requirement for corroboration in  asylum
    cases and the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  by  imposing  such  a
    requirement. I find that the error  of  law  infects  the  decision  in
    relation to asylum and therefore a rehearing is necessary. I  have  not
    found it necessary to consider the remaining grounds  of  appeal  which
    involve matters that can be fully argued at the rehearing.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

15. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    asylum decision as a whole and therefore the  re-hearing  will  require
    further substantive findings of fact with many issues to be  considered
    again by the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

17. The positive credibility findings at paragraphs 104-108 of the decision
    are preserved.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 21 May 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

