
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01353/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 13th September 2013                          |On 10th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Djamal Sayah

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwinycz, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain of Counsel, instructed by Fadiga &
Company


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Hindson made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th April 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Algeria,  born  on  9th  July  1988.   He
    arrived in the UK in 2011 and claimed asylum  on  two  bases,  both  of
    which were found not to be made out.  He made a  fresh  application  on
    the basis that he was a genuine Christian convert who proselytises  his
    Christian faith in the UK and would feel bound to continue to do so  on
    his return to Algeria which was refused on 31st January 2013.

 3. The Presenting Officer told the  judge  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the claimant was a genuine convert  to  Christianity  and
    accepts that he would continue to practise his religion and proselytise
    on return to Algeria. It was not disputed that  there  is  a  2006  law
    which makes proselytising a criminal offence carrying a maximum of five
    years' imprisonment.  The Secretary of State's position is that the law
    is rarely enforced and the claimant is not at  risk  and  could  safely
    live in Kabylie where many evangelical  Christians  live  and  practise
    their faith.

 4. The judge referred to a report in the reasons for refusal letter  which
    recorded a court convicting a convert to Christianity of offending  the
    Prophet Mohammed under the penal code and sentencing him, on  25th  May
    2011 to five years' imprisonment and a fine.  He was freed  pending  an
    appeal scheduled for November 2011.

 5. The judge said that the  USSD  Report  talked  of  societal  abuse  and
    discrimination based on religious beliefs and says that some  Christian
    converts keep a low profile because  of  concerns  for  their  personal
    safety and potential legal and social problems.  He also recorded  that
    extremists harassed and threatened some converts to Christianity.

 6. He then wrote as follows:

         "Having considered all of the background material  I  am  satisfied
         that the Appellant would be at real risk of persecution in  Algeria
         if he was to return and proselytise his faith  as  it  is  accepted
         that he would.  It is not in issue that to  do  so  is  a  criminal
         offence punishable with imprisonment.  The fact that the law is not
         regularly enforced is of little consolation to those  against  whom
         it is enforced and there is a relatively recent  example  described
         above.  I note that  Christianity  is  practised  more  widely  and
         openly in the Kabylie region but there is  no  evidence  that  this
         area is excluded from the  reach  of  the  legislation  prohibiting
         proselytising so I am not satisfied that  the  Appellant  would  be
         safe from persecution there.  He would also be at risk of harm from
         extremist religious groups and individuals."

    On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the objective evidence does not  allow  the  judge  to  then  make  his
    findings on risk; he referred to insufficient evidence to demonstrate a
    real risk of persecution  of  any  Christian  in  Algeria.   The  judge
    misdirected himself in stating that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Kabylie  region   is   excluded   from   the   legislation   preventing
    proselytising.  The relevant question is, is there  any  evidence  that
    this law is enforced in this area or elsewhere such as  to  generate  a
    real risk?

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 26th April 2013 by Judge Nicholson.
    He said that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the judge was
    entitled to find that the 2006 law applied to Kabylie, there  being  no
    reason to suppose that laws passed in Algeria  did  not  apply  to  all
    parts of the country.  However he granted permission on the basis  that
    it was arguable that where, as  here,  a  serious  issue  arose  as  to
    whether the law was applied in an  area  in  practice  and  whether  in
    consequence a claimant would actually be at risk there, it was for  the
    claimant to satisfy the judge that it was reasonably likely he would be
    at risk in the area: not for the Respondent to satisfy the  judge  that
    the calaimant would be safe from persecution there, as the  wording  in
    paragraph 24 suggests.

 9. On 21st June 2013 the claimant served a reply. He states that since the
    judge  found  that  State  persecution  existed,   with   laws   passed
    prohibiting the conduct with the sanction of imprisonment, he  need  do
    no more.  In Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 the court held:

         "The more closely the persecution in  question  is  linked  to  the
         State and the greater the control of the State over those acting or
         purporting to act on its behalf,  the  more  likely  (other  things
         being equal) that a victim of persecution  in  one  place  will  be
         similarly vulnerable in another place within the State."

10. The grounds then cite at some length the relevant case law with respect
    to  internal  relocation  and  rely  on  AMM  and   others   (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445  where
    the UT held:

         "The person who claims international  protection  bears  the  legal
         burden of proving that he or she is  entitled  to  it.   What  that
         burden entails will however very much depend upon the circumstances
         of the particular case ... in many cases the Respondent will  point
         to evidence regarding the general conditions in the proposed  place
         of relocation.  It will then be for the Appellant to make  good  an
         assertion that notwithstanding those conditions  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to relocate there.  Those  reasons  may  often  be  ones
         about which only the Appellant  could  know;  for  example  whether
         there are people living in the  area  of  proposed  relocation  who
         might identify the Appellant to those in  his  home  area  whom  he
         fears.  The Secretary of State clearly cannot be expected  to  lead
         evidence on such an issue."

11. It is not for a claimant  to  establish  that  they  have  no  internal
    relocation alternative.  A claim  succeeds  if  the  relevant  risk  is
    established in the home area unless the Tribunal is  satisfied  by  the
    evidence before it that there is a part of the country where:

      a) there is no equivalent relevant risk; and

      b) the asylum seeker can reasonably be expected to stay.

    The focus with respect to (b) is whether it is reasonable to expect the
    claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  him
    to do so.

12. The reply cites Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 342 where Sedley LJ held:

         "Once the judge of fact is  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  a
         justified fear of persecution or harm if returned to his home  area
         the claim will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied
         that he can nevertheless be safely returned to another part of  his
         country of origin.  Provided the second issue has been  flagged  up
         there may be no formal burden of proof on the  Secretary  of  State
         but this does not mean  that  the  judge  of  fact  can  reject  an
         otherwise well-founded claim unless the evidence satisfies him that
         internal relocation is a safe and reasonable option."

13.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  shown  how  the  law  prohibiting
    proselytising with a penalty of five years' imprisonment handed down to
    a Christian as recently as 2011 is not enforced in Kabylie.

Submissions

14. Mr Diwinycz relied on his grounds.  He accepted that there were laws in
    Algeria prohibiting proselytising and said  that  things  were  not  so
    harsh in Kabylie but he could not provide any evidence to back  up  his
    view.

15. Mr Hussain relied on his reply and said that  the  Secretary  of  State
    simply had not supplied the evidence  that  the  law  is  not  enforced
    throughout the State.  It was not enough to assert that the law was not
    administered in the proposed area of relocation without evidence.

Findings and Conclusions

16. This determination is thin and, had the judge set out his reasons  more
    fully it is likely that  permission  to  appeal  would  not  have  been
    granted.

17. The question of who bears the burden of proof in  establishing  whether
    it is reasonable to relocate  is  not  critical  to  this  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State does not dispute that the  law  is  persecutory.  It
    makes proselytising a criminal offence and carries a punishment of  one
    to three years in jail  and  a  maximum  fine  of  500,000  dinars  and
    stipulates a maximum of five years in jail and the same fine for anyone
    who "insights, constrains or utilises means  of  seduction  tending  to
    convert a  Muslim  to  another  religion;  or  by  using  to  this  end
    establishments  of  teaching,  education,  health,   social,   culture,
    training ... or any  financial  means".  The  Respondent  accepts  that
    anyone who makes, stores or distributes printed documents,  audiovisual
    materials or the like with the  intent  of  "shaking  the  faith  of  a
    Muslim" may also be punished.

18. The Secretary of State accepts that the claimant has a  fear  of  State
    sponsored persecution.  The argument is placed firmly on the basis that
    the law was not always enforced.  The reasons for refusal letter states
    that "it is noted that those living in Kabylie  are  able  to  practise
    their religion without any problems,"  but Mr Diwinycz could  point  to
    nothing in the background material  to  establish  the  basis  for  the
    assertion.  It may be that  such  evidence  is  available  but  if  the
    Secretary of State wants to rely on it she ought  to  produce  it.   It
    ought to be a matter of public record and reasonably easily obtainable.



19. The claimant bears the legal burden of proving that he is  entitled  to
    international protection. He can point to a law  which  is  persecutory
    and in the absence of any evidence at all from the Secretary  of  State
    that the law is not enforced in a particular geographical area, that is
    sufficient to discharge any burden upon him.

Decision

20. The judge's decision  stands.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

