
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01104/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 February 2014                           |On 23 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                         MRS DINA SHAFIK LABIB ESAK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by B.H.T.
                    Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a national of Egypt, born on 18 August 1963, is a
    Coptic Christian.  She arrived  in  this  country,  together  with  her
    husband and two children, on 9 December 2012, the  family  having  been
    granted visit visas on 5 September that year.

 2. Very  shortly  after  arrival,  on  11  December  2012,  the  appellant
    telephoned the respondent in order to apply for asylum and she formally
    applied on 27 December 2012 at the Croydon  Asylum  Screening  Unit  at
    which an appointment had been made.   When  applying  for  asylum,  the
    appellant named her husband, Ashraf Thabet Labib Bibawy Tolba (born  on
    18 August 1963) and their two sons, Youssef Ashraf Thabet  Labib  (born
    on 9 September 1996) and Daniell Ashraf Thabet Labib Bibawy (born on 11
    January 2003) as her dependants.

 3. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent on 23 January
    2013, and the refusal letter is dated the  same  day.   The  notice  of
    decision and refusal letter  were  served  on  25  January  2013.   The
    decision included a decision to remove the appellant  and  her  husband
    and two sons from the United Kingdom.  This decision had the effect  of
    invalidating their  visit  visas  pursuant  to  Section  10(8)  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  as  amended  by  Section  48  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant (apparently without reference to the other members of her
    family) appealed against this decision pursuant to Section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and her appeal  was  heard
    at Taylor House on  8  March  2013  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow, but in a determination dated  24  March  2013  and  promulgated
    shortly thereafter, Judge Callow dismissed her appeal.

 5. The appellant has appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on  24  April
    2013.

 6. Subsequently, following a hearing at  Field  House  on  19  June  2013,
    before Lord Burns and Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, this Tribunal  found
    that Judge Callow's determination had contained an error  of  law  such
    that the determination must be set aside and the decision re-made.

 7. Following further directions, the appeal was then relisted before  this
    Tribunal, in order that the decision could be  re-made.   Although  the
    appellant's husband and sons were named as dependants in  the  original
    asylum claim, none of them are named in the appeal documents, and  they
    are not formally parties in this appeal.



Appellant's Case

 8. The appellant's case is set out in her screening and substantive asylum
    interviews and also in the witness statements which she and her husband
    prepared in advance of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    is supported by various other  documents  contained  within  the  file,
    including expert reports.  It can be briefly summarised.

 9. The appellant is a practising Coptic Catholic, whilst her husband is  a
    Coptic Orthodox Christian.   Although  the  appellant's  husband  would
    attend the appellant's church, he would go to his own church  for  Holy
    Communion.  The children belong to the appellant's church.

10. While living in Cairo, where the appellant, who is a qualified midwife,
    worked at a Montessori nursery  and  her  husband  worked  for  Telecom
    Egypt,   they,   along   with   other   Coptic   Christians,   suffered
    discrimination  on  account  of   their  religion.   For  example,  the
    appellant's husband claims he was "skipped for promotion on a number of
    occasions" (at paragraph 11 of his statement).  The appellant's husband
    also complains that he would be taunted and harassed by work colleagues
    about his religion.  Egypt is a country in which the  majority  of  the
    population are Muslim, but Christian Coptics  account  for  a  sizeable
    minority of the  population,  possibly  about  10%,  which  is  several
    million  people.   There  are  various  large  communities  of   Coptic
    Christians within Egypt.

11. In or about July 2012 (in the appellant's statement at paragraph 9, she
    refers  to  an  incident  in  July  2013,  but  this  is  obviously   a
    typographical error) the appellant was  at  a  scouts  meeting  at  her
    church with her children when a man in the street threw a bottle at the
    group. The appellant, who was a  "servant"  at  the  church  (in  which
    capacity she helped out at  various  events)  decided  that  she  would
    report this incident to the police, which she did,  even  though  other
    servants at the church advised her not to because it was too dangerous.
     When she reported the incident, a police officer returned with her  to
    the church in order to  see  what  happened,  but  told  her  that  the
    individual who had thrown the bottles was mentally ill.

12. Eventually, the appellant returned  to  the  police  station  with  her
    husband and one of the church  leaders,  who  was  the  leader  in  the
    scouts, where the appellant said that she wished to pursue the  matter.
     The police told her that she should withdraw the complaint, because it
    would cause difficulties.  He  told  her  that  the  police  could  not
    protect her or the church but that they should make the church  secure,
    possibly by putting some barbed wire around its roof.

13. The following  Friday,  there  was  another  scouts  meeting,  and  the
    appellant's husband dropped the children off at church but when he came
    back to his car the car battery was missing.  It  had  apparently  been
    stolen. The appellant believes (although there does not appear  not  be
    any specific evidence that this is the case) that the battery had  been
    stolen by "the Muslims that I have made complaints about" (at paragraph
    24 of her statement).

14. A week later, the following Friday, the appellant was  walking  towards
    the church from her father's house, in order to collect  her  children,
    her husband  having stopped the car at the top of the  street,  when  a
    car across the road sped up and, according to the sponsor,  nearly  hit
    her.  There were two men in the car and they told  the  appellant  they
    were not going to leave her alone.   Although  the  appellant  did  not
    recognise these men, she believed she was "being  targeted".   The  men
    then drove off.  The following Friday, again  when  the  appellant  was
    walking to the church in  order  to  pick  up  her  children,  somebody
    grabbed her hair and  pulled  it  very  hard  from  behind.   When  the
    appellant turned round, the man who had done this let her  go  and  ran
    off.   Again, the appellant believed she was being targeted.   She  did
    not believe there could be any other explanation, as there  were  other
    Christians who lived in this area and she was the  one  who  was  being
    singled out to be attacked.

15. The appellant says that it was at this stage that she and her   husband
    decided to apply for a visa in order to come to the  UK  so  that  they
    could  escape Egypt.

16. On 18 August 2012, which was the appellant's  husband's  birthday,  the
    appellant went out to buy her husband a birthday cake.  After  she  had
    bought the cake, she put it in a bag and went to the market in order to
    buy some vegetables from a van.  The owner of the van snatched the  bag
    from her, whilst she was choosing some vegetables to  buy,  and  called
    her "an atheist Christian infidel".  He also told her that if  she  did
    not go away he would kill her.

17. Although the appellant and  her  family  had  always  suffered  general
    harassment in Egypt because they were Christian Copts, as the appellant
    puts it, "things seemed to be getting much worse".

18. The appellant then decided that she would go  to  church  again  on  24
    August 2012, because she wanted her children to continue being  scouts,
    but apparently the church was attacked again on that day,  even  though
    barbed wire had been  put around the roof.  The appellant  thinks  that
    stones were thrown, while her  husband  thinks  it  was   bricks.   The
    appellant's  husband claims that it was the same person who had  thrown
    the glass previously who had thrown bricks on this occasion.

19. Two days after this incident, the appellant says she  received  a  call
    from the priest, who told her, when she went to see him, that  she  and
    her children should not come to the church any more.  The  priest  said
    that this was for her own safety, and told her she was not to  complain
    to the priest again.  The appellant says that she "had the  impression"
    that the priest had been "instructed by someone" to  tell  her  not  to
    attend the church.  She believes that possibly the people who had  been
    attacking the church had demanded that she did not attend any more.

20. Following this occasion, the family stopped attending the church  as  a
    family, although her children attended church once more in order to say
    goodbye to the scout group.  The priest had given  permission  for  the
    children to attend.

21. Although the children had stopped attending church in the first week of
    the following school term (it had started on  15  September  2012)  the
    appellant's son Daniell was verbally abused by a  girl  in  his  class.
    She told him that he could not speak to her as  he  was  Christian  and
    "was garbage".   Although the head teacher and the social  worker  said
    they would deal with this, they did not in fact take any action.

22. Another complaint regarding Daniell is that although  because  he  wore
    glasses he needed to sit at the front of the  class  so  he  could  see
    properly, a Muslim teacher would send him to the back if  he  tried  to
    sit at the front.

23. On 27 September 2012, one of the other  children  hit  Daniell  in  his
    shoulder, but he did not see who it was because whoever it was ran away
    too fast.  No one was willing to help him at the school, and he had  to
    be taken to the hospital by a Christian teacher, since  which  time  he
    refused to go to school.

24. The family eventually came to the UK  in  December  and  the  appellant
    claimed asylum as already noted above.

25. Both the appellant and her husband are practising Coptic Christians and
    wish to continue practising their religion. However, they fear that  if
    they return to Egypt they will not be safe wherever they are.



Respondent's Case

26. The basis of the refusal was set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  of  23
    January 2013,  and  can  be  summarised  as  follows.   The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant was a Coptic Christian and although  noting
    that she had not brought her claim for asylum on the first occasion she
    could and had instead used a visit visa to obtain  entry  clearance  to
    the UK,  nonetheless  the  respondent  considered  the  claim  "at  its
    highest".   The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the   incidents
    concerning which the appellant had complained had taken  place  "solely
    because of your religion" but in any event even though  "the  treatment
    you claim to  have  suffered  whilst  in  Egypt  is  considered  to  be
    discrimination, and whilst it is lamentable, it is does not  reach  the
    level of severity so as to constitute persecution".

27. The respondent also considered  that  the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate within Egypt, noting at paragraph 47  of  the  refusal  letter
    that "It is noted the problems  you  claim  to  have  personally  faced
    whilst in Egypt  were  limited  to  the  area  around  the  church  you
    attended" and that "Furthermore, it is noted that the incident that led
    you to claim asylum took place in August ... However  you  remained  in
    Egypt until 9 December 2012." Reference is then made to the appellant's
    asylum interview at which "it was put to you that you  could   relocate
    to Upper Egypt or Alexandria to avoid any discrimination  due  to  your
    religion,  and your responded "it is not possible, it will not work.  I
    won't be able to have a normal life.  My  child  is  scared  of  Muslim
    people. I cannot work. I cannot go to church"."  The respondent did not
    accept "that if needed, you  could  not  relocate  to  Upper  Egypt  or
    Alexandra or anywhere else in Egypt, particularly when  you  have  been
    able to relocate to the UK".

28. Reference is then made to the background evidence then available  which
    the respondent considered supported her contention that  the  appellant
    and her family could relocate internally within Egypt.





Determination of First-tier Tribunal

29. Essentially, Judge Callow was first  of  all  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and her family had suffered from "persecution".  His findings
    in this regard are set out at paragraph 19  of  his  determination,  as
    follows:

         "19.  Unlike her husband, the appellant and her son  were  targeted
             in their  home  area.   The  background  evidence  reveals  an
             increase in sectarian violence since the removal of  President
             Mubarak in 2011.  In his expert report Dr Tadros reveals  that
             in 2011 revolutionary incidents sectarianism almost doubled to
             70 when compared with 2010  and  that  up  to  December  2012,
             subject to final verification, such incidents had increased to
             112. Mindful of a Christian population of  about  6,000,000  -
             10,000,000 people representing 8% - 12% of the  population  it
             might  be  said  that  the  number  of  unlawful  attacks   on
             Christians is nominal.   However,  background  evidence  shows
             that the authorities do from time to time take  action.   Some
             have been prosecuted. Destroyed churches  have  been  rebuilt.
             Whilst no effective action was taken by the police to  address
             the appellant's complaint  arising  from  the  incident  which
             occurred on 18 August 2012, the police did nonetheless  attend
             the scene of the crime.  In all of the circumstances Egypt  is
             able to proved the appellant with protection  to  the  Horvath
             standard.  Mindful of the low standard [of] proof, it has  not
             been  established  that  the  appellant  has   suffered   from
             persecution."

30. Furthermore  and  in  any  event,  Judge  Callow  considered  that  the
    appellant could  relocate on return if necessary.  His findings in this
    regard are set out at paragraph 21 of his determination as follows:

         "21.  The appellant, accompanied  by  her  husband  and  sons,  can
             safely return to live in their home country.  Egypt is a  vast
             country with a large population.  Even if the appellant cannot
             return to  Cairo, she can reasonably be expected  to  relocate
             to another part of Egypt populated by  Christians.   It  would
             not be unduly harsh for the appellant and  her  family  to  be
             returned to Egypt.  She has  certain  qualifications  and  can
             obtain employment. Furthermore she will  be  assisted  by  the
             international Organisation for Migration by way  of  financial
             and practical support on being returned to Egypt."



Basis of Appeal

31. There were essentially two grounds.  The first was that the judge erred
    by finding that there was a sufficiency  of  protection  within  Egypt,
    because he had failed to make reference to the expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Tadros which although referred to in the determination,  had  not  been
    considered.  The second ground was that the judge's conclusion that the
    appellant and her family  could  internally  relocate  had  been   made
    without any findings as to why it would be safe for them to relocate.



Finding of Error of Law

32. As already referred to above, at paragraph 6, following  a  hearing  at
    Field House on 19 June 2013 before Lord Burns and Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson, this Tribunal  found  that  Judge  Callow's  determination  had
    contained an error of law such that the determination must be set aside
    and the decision remade.

33. In setting out the Tribunal's reasons for  finding  an  error  of  law,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson stated as follows:

         "...

         3.    Having  considered  the   evidence   and   content   of   the
             determination in detail we find Judge Callow has erred in  law
             such that the determination must be set aside, which  we   do,
             and remade for the following reasons:

             (i)  There are no adequately reasoned  findings  whether  what
                  the  appellant  has  experienced  and  may  experience  on
                  return, is persecution.  It may only amount to harassment.
                   Clear findings are required in relation to  this  element
                  which have not been made.

             (ii)     In paragraph 19 Judge Callow finds Egypt is  able  to
                  provide the  appellant  with  protection  to  the  Horvath
                  standard but there is no finding they would be willing  to
                  do so to the required standard.

             (iii) In Osman v UK [1998] 29EHRR 245  the  ECtHR  found  that
                  notwithstanding systematic sufficiency of state protection
                  in the receiving state, a claimant may still have a  well-
                  founded fear of  persecution  if  he  can  show  that  its
                  authorities  know  or  ought  to  know  of   circumstances
                  particular to his case giving rise to  his  fear  but  are
                  unlikely  to  provide  the   additional   protection   his
                  particular   circumstances   reasonably   require.     The
                  determination fails to adequately engage with  the  expert
                  evidence in relation to this aspect which stated  that  no
                  provision will be made.

             (iv)     In paragraph  21  it  was  found  that  there  is  an
                  internal flight alternative. The judge erred in failing to
                  give adequate reasons for why this is  so  and  failed  to
                  engage with the expert  report  which  indicates  that  it
                  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
                  relocate internally for the reasons given ..."

34. Following a further directions hearing, this  appeal  was  then  listed
    before me (a transfer order having been made) after the promulgation of
    the country guidance decision in MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013]
    UKUT 611.

The Hearing

35. I heard evidence from the appellant, who gave  her  evidence  with  the
    assistance of an Arabic interpreter who adopted her witness  statements
    which she had previously made.  She was not cross-examined.

36. Although directions had been  given  for  the  service  of  a  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the appellant, this had not been prepared, but  I
    heard  submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  which  I   recorded
    contemporaneously.  As these submissions are contained within my Record
    of Proceedings, I shall not set out below everything which was said  to
    me during the course of the hearing but shall refer only to  such  part
    of  the  submissions  as  are  necessary  for  the  purposes  of   this
    determination. However, I have had regard to everything which was  said
    to me as well as to all the documents contained within the file  before
    reaching my decision.

37. On behalf of the appellant, at  the  outset  Mr  Eaton  submitted  that
    because it had been found in  MS  that  there  was  no  sufficiency  of
    protection within Egypt, the critical issue was  whether  or  not  this
    appellant and her family could internally relocate.  However, Mr Avery,
    on behalf of the respondent, submitted that there was still an issue as
    to whether or not what the appellant and  her  family  had  experienced
    amounted to persecution, rather than just harassment.

38. Mr Avery relied on the refusal letter.   There  had  been  developments
    within Egypt since this family had come to the UK, when Mohammed  Morsi
    had been in power. Since then, he had been ousted and the military  was
    running  the  country,  so  there  was  a  contextual  change  to   the
    background.  Also, the Tribunal now had the assistance of the  guidance
    which had been given in MS.  Although in that  case  the  Tribunal  had
    found that there was inadequate state protection of  Coptic  Christians
    in Egypt, nonetheless there was also a finding that they  were  not  at
    risk of general ill-treatment contrary to Article 3.   In this case  it
    was also apparent that the appellant and her family did not fall within
    the risk categories set out within the head note at paragraph 3.  Also,
    even if they had, as set out at paragraph 6 of the head  note,  it  did
    not necessarily follow that the appellant and her family would  qualify
    as refugees or be entitled to subsidiary   protection, but  this  would
    depend on their showing that they would  not  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative.

39. Having considered a great deal of country evidence, the Tribunal in  MS
    had decided that  most  people  would  have  a  genuine  flight  option
    available to them.  Although at paragraph 7 of the  head  note  it  was
    found that this did not preclude a Coptic Christian in Egypt from being
    able to establish a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment  "in  the
    particular circumstances of their case", it would be  the  respondent's
    submission that in this case the appellant had not established this.

40. It was the respondent's case that the evidence adduced on behalf of the
    appellant did not suggest that she had  been  the  target  of  Islamist
    extremists or anything like that.  Her evidence was strongly suggestive
    that this was a local issue, involving local individuals,  rather  than
    any organised group, and it appeared that the appellant had essentially
    strung together a sequence of unrelated incidents which appeared to her
    to be part of a pattern but in reality there was no  evidence  to  show
    that this was the case.

41. The trigger for the appellant's difficulties at the church appeared  to
    be where a lone individual had thrown bottles. The police did  talk  to
    the individual concerned, although they had  not  been  keen  to  press
    charges.  The country guidance did suggest that there were difficulties
    because of a lack of protection.  However, that was the incident  which
    appeared to have triggered the appellant's difficulties.

42. There were a number of incidents which the  appellant  related  in  her
    evidence which she has attributed as being  part  of  organised  action
    against her, but these incidents were not attributable to that at  all.
    There was an incident when she went to buy vegetables,  when  she  says
    she was shouted at by the person  selling  vegetables  and  accused  of
    being "an infidel".  There was  no  evidence  that  this  incident  was
    related to the other incidents; the theft of a battery  of  the  family
    car was also referred to, but it is difficult to see how that could  be
    related to a pattern of action against the family either.

43. The appellant's son experienced  some  difficulties  at  school;  again
    there was no evidence that this  was  related  to  or  formed  part  of
    organised activity against the family.  While it was accepted that this
    may be evidence of prejudice against the Coptic community  in  general,
    this was not part of any organised activity against her or  her  family
    and also was not persecutory.

44. Although the appellant did have her hair pulled when in  the  locality,
    it was not clear what this was about.

45. None  of  these  incidents  were  suggestive  of  attacks  specifically
    targeted at this family but would be consistent with harassment of  the
    Coptic community in general rather than evidence of persecution.  There
    was no real evidence that any organised group  of  Islamist  extremists
    were responsible.  There had not been mass demonstrations  against  the
    family and no one had been round to the house.

46. It may be that friends  of  the  individual  involved  in  the   bottle
    throwing incident were upset that the  appellant  had  tried  to  bring
    proceedings against him, but although the evidence might suggest  that,
    that was the highest her case could  be put.

47. There were two expert reports produced for this case.   The  first  was
    for the original hearing, but the difficulty with that report  is  that
    the  context  is  now  different.   That  report  also  had  not   been
    particularly helpful.   It  was  very  generalised,  but  there  was  a
    suggestion at page 9 that the fact that the appellant  and  her  family
    had been in the UK might itself  make  them  vulnerable  to  attack  on
    return.  There is, however, no suggestion within MS that  this  is  so,
    and so this speculative suggestion was not supported by  any  evidence.
    The country guidance did not support this suggestion with regard to the
    position of Copts in Egypt.

48. There was another report from Dr  George,  who  gives  his  answers  to
    various  questions which  he  was  asked.   However,  this  report  was
    prepared in June 2013 which was before Morsi  was  ousted  (on  3  July
    2013) and there was no addendum dealing with developments  since  then.
    At paragraph 100, in answer to a specific question  he  was  asked,  he
    says that the family testimony was that  they  had  been   targeted  by
    extreme Muslims.  However, there was no evidence that this was so.

49. It was also the case (and Mr Eaton accepted that this was the position)
    that there was no evidence that  this  appellant  was  a  proselytising
    Christian.

50. At paragraph 105, with regard to the issue  of  relocation,  Dr  George
    made his recommendations on the  basis  that  it  had  not  been  known
    whether the people who targeted the family were local or belonged to  a
    wider            group.            He             says             that
                                        relocation  would  be  more  of  an
    option for people targeted by a local group so he could not  express  a
    view.  However, it was the respondent's case that there was no evidence
    at all that the appellant and her  family  had  been  targeted  by  any
    group, let alone one that was not local.

51. Although Dr George seemed to take the view that Copts could  be at risk
    throughout Europe, this was a general  comment  and  we  now  have  the
    country guidance which was given in MS.

52. Summing up, therefore, (1) there  was  no  evidence  of  any  sustained
    pattern of activity against this family in particular and (2) there was
    no evidence either that "a group" of Islamist extremists were targeting
    this family. What they  had  suffered  essentially  was  no  more  than
    discrimination.

53. In that context, even if they would experience  local  difficulties  on
    return, there was no reason why this family could not relocate.

54. Although the appellant  had  expressed  his  concerns  about  obtaining
    access to any church  elsewhere  in  Egypt  because  of  the  potential
    attitude of local clergy, this was entirely speculative and had no real
    foundation in evidence.

55. It was the respondent's case that the appellant and  her  family  would
    not be at risk in their home area, but even if  they  were,  relocation
    elsewhere in Cairo would be possible and in any event there were  other
    areas  with  large  Coptic  communities,  for  example  Alexandria  and
    southern Egypt. Egypt was a large  country  with  a  large  population.
    Clearly the new government would be likely to crack down on the type of
    people who would carry out any  attacks  and  the  background  evidence
    suggested that there had  been   a  number  of  arrests  following  the
    backlash after the fall of Morsi.



Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

56. Mr Eaton began by reminding the Tribunal that the appellants in MS  had
    been  found to be completely incredible in their accounts and  that  in
    that case the Tribunal had therefore  been   considering  the  risk  to
    Coptic Christians in general, rather than specific cases.  The Tribunal
    (as made clear at head note paragraph 7) did not preclude  findings  in
    individual cases that an applicant could  be at risk.

57. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Eaton accepted that first
    the appellant would have to show that  there  was  a  risk  locally  to
    herself and to her family and secondly, that what happened in 2012 were
    more than just random unrelated incidents.

58. What was considered in MS (with particular reference to paragraph  133-
    136) was whether there had been  a significant change of  circumstances
    since Morsi had gone. It was quite clear that the  Tribunal's  position
    in that case was that at best all the change there was likely to be was
    that there would be a decrease in the level of  hostility  coming  from
    the highest quarters, from out of  government,  and  the  military  was
    unlikely to get itself involved in persecuting Coptic Christians.

59. The Tribunal acknowledged at paragraph 135 that there continued  to  be
    widespread support for Islamist parties and groups and accepted that it
    had always been these groups which had targeted Coptic Christians.

60. Mr Eaton  also  suggested  that  this  Tribunal  should  consider  some
    evidence which post-dated the evidence considered in  MS,  which  would
    suggest that the change  of  government  had  not  made  a  significant
    difference.  He also referred to the last sentence of paragraph 135  to
    the effect that  people  were  more  concerned  with  the  economy  and
    religious issues were put to one side. In other words,  protecting  the
    Coptic community was not likely to be a priority for this government.

61. In summary, the Tribunal was saying it was unlikely that there would be
    state sanctioned persecution of Copts, but there was unlikely to be  an
    increase in the sufficiency of protection.

62. Referring to the new evidence,  Mr  Eaton  referred  to  the  documents
    contained at tab A of his new bundle from pages 74 to 91, which related
    to incidents  which  had  occurred  since   September  2013,  post  MS.
    Obviously, the country guidance decision must  be  followed,  but  this
    evidence showed that similar problems were continuing.

63. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether or not  it  was
    accepted that this evidence showed that although Copts have a difficult
    time and are not always protected, it still failed to demonstrate  that
    they were persecuted per se, Mr Eaton responded that the appellant  had
    always accepted that she did not know exactly who had been  behind  the
    incidents.  However, a number of conclusions could be drawn.  Mr  Eaton
    would  suggest  that  the  difficulties  were  more  serious  than  the
    respondent believed and that it was quite clear  that  the  police  had
    threatened her, because at  paragraph  34  of  her  statement  she  had
    referred to having been  warned by the priest  in  the  church  not  to
    return, this was suggestive of the family being targeted.  Clearly  the
    priest took the situation seriously.  The  church  was  attacked  again
    after the first incident.  It therefore seemed  that  the  priest  must
    have thought that the serious incident when  the  church  was  attacked
    (referred to at paragraph  37)  was  connected  to  this  family.   The
    affront was that it was  this  appellant  who  had  been   the  one  to
    complain.  The police had said that someone cannot complain in this way
    and had threatened her, and  as  a  consequence  she  was  individually
    targeted, because she had had the nerve to stand up to them.  This  was
    important because it indicated that she could  be at risk in  her  home
    area, which is why her priest had told her not to come  to  church  any
    more.

64. Moving on  to  internal  relocation,  Mr  Eaton  suggested  that  there
    continued to be a likelihood of risk elsewhere  in  the  country.   The
    appellant had had the affront to  stand  up  to  people  who  had  been
    attacking her and this also  raised  an  HJ  (Iran)   point.   She  was
    someone who wanted to stand up for herself.  If she was prepared to  do
    this and continued to act in the same way, she would be  at  risk.   In
    answer to a question from the Tribunal as  to  whether  there  was  any
    evidence that someone would be at risk purely because she asserted  her
    rights to practise her  religion  as   a  Coptic  Christian,  Mr  Eaton
    accepted that he could not point to specific evidence that this was so.
     However, he still submitted that she would be likely  to  be  targeted
    elsewhere because of what she had already done and  also  that  because
    she was an assertive person, likely to behave in the same  way  in  the
    future, she might continue to attract similar problems.  Also,  another
    group in another area might have knowledge of the problems she had  had
    in Cairo.

65. In answer to a further question from the Tribunal, as to whether  there
    was evidence that someone who moves to a new  area  would  be  at  risk
    because he or she was assertive of his or her rights  to  practise  her
    religion but without proselytising, Mr Eaton replied that Dr George  at
    paragraph 107 of his report had said that  it  was  difficult  to  live
    anonymously.

66. He could not however point to any evidence that showed that  she  would
    be known to anyone other than a local group.

67. In answer to a further question from the  Tribunal  as  to  why  anyone
    would be interested in this appellant if  she  moved  to  another  area
    within Egypt, Mr Eaton suggested that she had done something which  was
    an affront, sufficient for the priest to ask her not to come to church,
    and "we do not know how well connected" the people who had objected  to
    her were.  It was impossible just to ship the family into a local  area
    without making waves, because the police were unsympathetic, to say the
    least.  If the person in Cairo wanted to  find  this  family  and  were
    still interested, Mr Eaton would suggest that he could  do so, and  she
    is not someone who would want to go into hiding.

68. The only other point Mr Eaton wished to make was in regard to paragraph
    10 of the appellant's new statement, where she  expressed  her  belief,
    following the reaction of her local church, that were she  to  seek  to
    attend elsewhere, she would  find  a  similar  reaction  and  would  be
    refused admission because of the trouble she might bring.    It  seemed
    the local Coptic communities were looking after their own  rather  than
    the Coptic community at large.

69. Although Mr Eaton accepted that the Tribunal effectively was saying  in
    MS that although there was  a level of  harassment  and  discrimination
    faced by all Copts at the moment (see paragraphs 124-126) this did  not
    generally reach the threshold of amounting to persecution, and this was
    supported by Dr George at paragraph 106 of his report,  nonetheless  it
    would be unduly harsh to require this appellant to relocate.  It  would
    be unduly harsh to make someone go to a place where although they would
    not be persecuted, they would be  discriminated  against  and  possibly
    harassed.  In these circumstances, it would be unduly harsh to  require
    this appellant to relocate, because she would be likely to suffer  from
    potential discrimination and harassment in a new area,  and  she  would
    also face the additional problem (as highlighted by Dr  Tadros  in  his
    report, at page 32, tab C), that she would be perceived as having  come
    back from the west.  In other words, if it could  be  shown  that  this
    appellant had been persecuted in her home area, then it would be unduly
    harsh to require her to locate to a place where   she  and  her  family
    would be harassed and discriminated against, even  if  not  persecuted.
    However, other than relying on Janusi, which refers  to  the  right  of
    applicants to have a reasonable life, Mr Eaton could not  rely  on  any
    authority in support of this proposition.



Discussion

70. The starting point for this Tribunal has to be the  guidance  given  in
    MS, which is set out in the headnote as follows:

    "Law


    In relation to a country which is in a state of emergency affecting the
    life of the nation and which takes measures strictly  required  by  the
    exigencies  of  the  situation,  its  ability  to  afford  adequacy  of
    protection under Directive 2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive)  is
    to be assessed by reference to its general securement of  non-derogable
    rights as set out in the ECHR.


    Country guidance


    1.    Notwithstanding that there  is  inadequate  state  protection  of
    Coptic Christians  in  Egypt,  they  are  not  at  a  general  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.


    2.    However, on current evidence there are some  areas  where  Coptic
    Christians will face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3. In general these will be (a) areas  outside  the
    large cities; (b) where radical Islamists have a strong  foothold;  and
    (c) there have been  recent  attacks  on  Coptic  Christians  or  their
    churches, businesses or properties.


    3.    On the evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  following  are
    particular risk categories in the sense that those falling within  them
    will generally be able to show a real risk of persecution or  treatment
    contrary to Article 3, at least in their home area:


    (i)            converts to Coptic Christianity;
    (ii)            persons   who   are   involved   in   construction   or
    reconstruction/repair of churches that have  been  the  target  for  an
    attack or attacks;
    (iii)        those accused of proselytising  where  the  accusation  is
    serious and not casual;
    (iv)        those accused of being physically or  emotionally  involved
    with a Muslim woman, where the accusation is  made  seriously  and  not
    casually.


    4.    Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in general at  real  risk
    of  persecution  or  ill-treatment,  although  they  face  difficulties
    additional to other women, in the form of sometimes being the target of
    disappearances, forced abduction and forced conversion.


    5.    However, depending on the particular circumstances of  the  case,
    Coptic Christian women in Egypt aged between 14-25  years  who  lack  a
    male protector, may be at such risk.


    6.    If a claimant is able to establish that in their home  area  they
    fall within one or more of the risk categories identified in 3 (i)-(iv)
    above or that they come from an area where the local Coptic  population
    faces a real risk of persecution, it will not necessarily  follow  that
    they qualify as refugees or as beneficiaries of  subsidiary  protection
    or Article 3 ECHR protection. That will depend on whether they can show
    they would not have a viable internal relocation alternative.  In  such
    cases there will be need for a fact-specific assessment but, in general
    terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists  are  not  strong  would
    appear to be a viable option.


    7.    None of the above necessarily precludes  a  Coptic  Christian  in
    Egypt from being able to establish a real risk of persecution  or  ill-
    treatment in the particular circumstances of their case, e.g.  if  such
    an individual has been the target of attacks because he  or  she  is  a
    Coptic Christian."

71.   As Mr Eaton acknowledged, the appellant would first have to show that
    she  would  be  at  risk  on   return   in   her   local   home   area.
    Notwithstanding the (very limited) further material submitted on behalf
    of the appellant and contained in the new bundle, this  is  not  in  my
    judgement sufficient to allow this Tribunal not to follow the  guidance
    given at paragraph 1 of the head note that in general Coptic Christians
    are not "at general risk of persecution or  ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3".  It is also clear on the evidence before the Tribunal  that
    the appellant and her family do not fall  within  the  particular  risk
    categories set out within paragraph 3 of the head note.  They  are  not
    converts to Coptic Christianity, they are not involved in  construction
    or reconstruction/repair of churches which  have  previously  been  the
    target of an attack, and as Mr Eaton  has  acknowledged,  there  is  no
    evidence that this family has been  or intends  to  become  engaged  in
    proselytising. Nor have any of this family been  accused of having  any
    involvement with a Muslim woman.

72. Mr Eaton relies primarily  on  the  guidance  which  is  summarised  at
    paragraph 7 of the headnote in MS, and argues that this  appellant  can
    establish a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment in the particular
    circumstances of her case because she has been the  target  of  attacks
    because she is a Coptic Christian.    He  submits  that  the  incidents
    that occurred in 2012 are "more than just random unrelated incidents".

73. In my judgement, the appellant has failed to establish this.  I  accept
    to the standard of proof necessary (which  is  the  lower  standard  of
    proof, that is whether this is reasonably likely to have occurred) that
    the incidents to which the appellant has referred in her statement took
    place, but these incidents occurred against a  general  background,  as
    referred to within MS, of an insufficiency  of  state  protection  with
    regard to attacks on Coptic Christians (see paragraph 123 of  MS),  and
    as  the  Tribunal  found  (at  paragraph  124  of   MS)   attacks   and
    discrimination against Coptic Christians are, sadly, nothing new.   The
    Tribunal also noted at paragraph 126, that "discrimination is prevalent
    in  many  areas  of  society"  and  that   "Copts   are   significantly
    underrepresented in  Egypt's  military,  judiciary,  diplomatic  corps,
    academia and almost all electoral bodies".   It  is  therefore,  sadly,
    unsurprising that this appellant and her family have  been  subject  to
    incidents of  harassment,  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  these
    incidents are sufficiently related to amount to a targeted campaign  of
    harassment against them.

74. Even if it was arguable that this appellant would be at risk on  return
    to her home area (which, as I have already  found,  I  do  not  accept)
    there would nonetheless be an internal relocation option  available  to
    her.  Although Mr Eaton submits  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    require this family to relocate to another area  where  they  might  be
    subject  to  harassment  and  discrimination,  although  passably   not
    persecution as such, he accepted that other than  general  reliance  on
    Janusi, he was unable to refer the Tribunal to any authority supporting
    this proposition.  If this submission had substance,  it  would  follow
    that internal relocation could never  be  considered  in  circumstances
    where although an applicant would not suffer from  persecution  in  the
    new  location,  he  or   she   might   still   suffer   harassment   or
    discrimination.  In the absence of express authority that this is so, I
    do not consider this proposition to be arguable.

75. The highest that Mr Eaton was able to put the case of the appellant and
    her family was that because she had been warned by the  priest  in  her
    church not to return, this would suggest  that  her  family  was  being
    specifically  targeted,  because  he  must  have  taken  the  situation
    sufficiently seriously to request the appellant not to  return  to  the
    church.  However, I do not consider that  this  would  follow  at  all.
    There was a localised incident which occurred at the  church,  and  the
    fact that the priest wanted to avoid further trouble by  excluding  the
    appellant does not indicate any more than he was worried  that  in  the
    immediate aftermath of the original incident, her presence might invite
    further attacks from that local person or local persons  who  had  been
    involved before.  There is not, in my judgement, any evidence at all of
    a concerted campaign against this family, let alone any involvement  of
    anyone outside the immediate locality.

76. It is also argued on behalf of the appellant  that  because  she  is  a
    person who is prepared to stand up and  be  counted  when  she  or  her
    church is attacked, that would put her at risk, but such a  proposition
    does not find support from the guidance given within MS.  When asked by
    the Tribunal as to whether he could point to any evidence that a Coptic
    Christian in Egypt would be at risk because he  or  she  was  a  person
    prepared to assert her rights, Mr Eaton agreed that he could not  point
    to any specific evidence, but maintained as a general proposition  that
    this appellant was still likely to be  targeted  elsewhere  because  of
    what she had already done and  because  she  was  assertive.   She  was
    likely to continue to behave in the same way  and  this  would  attract
    similar problems.

77. Although Mr Eaton referred  to  Dr  George's  view  that  it  would  be
    difficult for a Coptic Christian to live anonymously (at  para  107  of
    his report), I note that he  also  stated  at  para  105  that  it  was
    difficult to say what connections or at what level the people who  were
    said to have targeted the appellant had.  It also does not follow  that
    because she would be known within the  Coptic  community  anyone  would
    know  her  outside  that  community.   It   is   difficult   in   those
    circumstances to see how it can realistically be argued that  she  will
    come to the attention of anyone outside the group of Coptic  Christians
    present in the area to which she relocated and  certainly  not  on  the
    basis of having had local difficulties in the past as described in  her
    witness statements.

78. Mr Eaton also submitted that it seemed that  local  Coptic  communities
    were looking after their  own  rather  than  the  Coptic  community  in
    general, but  I  find  this  an  unattractive  argument.    It  amounts
    effectively to an argument  that  a  Coptic  Christian  should  not  be
    returned to Egypt because the Coptic Church cannot be  relied  upon  to
    look after members of its own flock, but other than the  evidence  that
    in the appellant's specific case she was asked not  to  return  to  the
    church by her priest, there  is  no  other  evidence  to  support  this
    proposition.  It is also unsupported within the guidance given in MS.

79. Accordingly therefore my findings can be summarised as follows.  First,
    the appellant and her family would not be at risk  of  persecution  (or
    serious harm for a non-convention reason) on return to their home  area
    but secondly, even if they were, they could safely  relocate  to  other
    parts of Egypt where there are large Coptic Christian communities,  and
    it would not be unduly harsh to require them to do so.

80. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed and I will so find.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

This appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.



Signed:                                 Date: 30 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
