
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01965/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2016                       |On 8 April 2016                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                    [B H]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated 30 November 2015 dismissing the appellant's asylum  appeal.
    The appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose date of  birth  became
    the subject of some dispute during the course of the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal to which we refer below.

2.   On 23 June 2009 he attempted to board a flight to  Luton  from  Charles
    de  Gaulle  Airport  with  six  other  individuals,  all  using  stolen
    passports and counterfeit immigration stamps.  He was released.  On  11
    July 2009 he entered the United Kingdom at Prestwick  Airport  claiming
    to have no passport.  However, the bio data page from his passport  was
    found on the  aircraft  having  been  ripped  out.   It  was  a  stolen
    passport.  It appears that his date of birth was recorded at this stage
    as 1 January 1996.  He claimed asylum but that claim was refused  on  7
    October 2009.    On 17 March 2014 the respondent refused to grant leave
    to remain and ordered him to be removed to Afghanistan.

3.   It has been accepted throughout by the respondent  that  the  appellant
    is a national of Afghanistan.  In the decision letter of 9 October 2009
    the appellant's date of  birth  was  given  as  1  January  1996.   The
    respondent rejected his claims for asylum finding  him  to  have  given
    inconsistent and  incredible  accounts  of  his  reasons  for  claiming
    asylum.  But,  since  he  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom   as   an
    unaccompanied minor and in line with current  policy,  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain for three years until 9 October 2012.

4.   On 2 October 2012 he made an application for further  leave  to  remain
    which was the subject of the decision of 17 March 2014.  At that stage,
    it appears to have been again accepted that  the  appellant's  date  of
    birth was 1 January 1996 and, accordingly, he was at the  date  of  the
    decision 18 years of age.

5.   His position at that time was that he had  a  fear  of  persecution  in
    Afghanistan because of the history which he related.   His  father  had
    been kidnapped by the Taliban.  The family house had been set  on  fire
    as a result  of  which  his  younger  brother  [F]  had  been  injured.
    Thereafter the appellant's uncle assisted the younger brother  to  flee
    to the United Kingdom.  In 2009  the  appellant  and  his  father  were
    attacked.  One of the attackers was said to have been wearing a  police
    uniform.  The father was kidnapped and held for a ransom  of  $100,000.
    Thereafter further demands were made  for  money  and  the  appellant's
    father made arrangements for the appellant to  leave  Afghanistan.   He
    eventually arrived in the United Kingdom in July of 2009 and was placed
    in the care of South Ayrshire Social Services.  He was interviewed on 3
    September 2009 in relation to his asylum  claim  which  the  respondent
    refused.

6.   In about June 2011 the appellant's  younger  brother  [F]  entered  the
    United Kingdom aged 10.  He also applied for asylum.

The Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

7.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant but considered that he  had
    given inconsistent accounts about the nature of the threat faced by his
    family in  Afghanistan.   Further,  significant  discrepancies  in  the
    accounts given by the appellant and his uncle [Mr F],  in  relation  to
    the whereabouts of the appellant's parents and what happened  to  them,
    existed.  The judge considered that  [Mr  F]  had  "connived  with  the
    appellant and/or the appellant's family in  Afghanistan  to  present  a
    false claim" in relation to  the  respect  in  which  the  Taliban  had
    targeted his family.  She found that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his
    uncle were witnesses of truth upon whom any reliance could  be  placed.
    She considered that the appellant could be safely  returned  to  Kabul.
    She rejected an Article 8 claim on the basis of the appellant's  family
    life with his  younger  brother.   That  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was not [F]'s parent nor had he any  parental  responsibility
    for him.  The appellant was an adult who had not lived with his younger
    brother in the United Kingdom.  She found that  Article  8(1)  was  not
    engaged in respect of family life.  In respect of private life  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had established private life in the  United
    Kingdom.  He had lived here for six years, attended school  and  had  a
    network of friends and extended family, including his uncle.   However,
    he had no right  to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom,  did  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   On  balance,   the   judge
    considered that it was proportionate to remove him and the appeal under
    Article 8 was dismissed.

8.   An issue arose during the cross-examination of  the  appellant  by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer in relation to a statement contained  in
    the report of an independent social worker, Christine Brown, instructed
    by the appellant's representatives.  At paragraph 3.1 of her report  it
    is narrated that during her meeting with him  the  appellant  indicated
    that he was born on 11 September 1994.  It  then  proceeds  to  narrate
    that he was thus "almost 11 years of age" when he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2002 rather than "13 as  recorded".   Plainly,  had  he
    been born on 11 September 1994 he would have been 14 upon entering  the
    United Kingdom not 11.  It was pointed out to the appellant  in  cross-
    examination  by  the  respondent's  representative  that  he  had  told
    Christine Brown that he had been born on  11  September  1994  and  was
    asked why he had said that.  The appellant reasserted that that was his
    actual date of birth but the date of 1 January 1996 had been  given  to
    him by  the  United  Kingdom  authorities.   At  paragraph  26  of  the
    determination the judge narrates that she put it to the appellant  that
    he was not in fact a minor and, on the basis that he was born in  1994,
    that meant that he was now 21 and not 19.

9.   After the hearing  the  Tribunal  Judge  received  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors  dated  13  November  2015  enclosing  an  email
    received from the social worker Christine  Brown  confirming  that  the
    date of 1994 was a typing error and that, in fact,  the  appellant  had
    told her that he had been born in 1998.  However,  the  judge  was  not
    prepared to accept the late filed  evidence.   She  observed  that  the
    social worker had not attended the Tribunal to  be  cross-examined  and
    that the evidence before the Tribunal from the  appellant  himself  was
    clear and unequivocal that his date of birth  was  11  September  1994.
    She found that when off guard he had given the social worker his actual
    date of birth which he had subsequently accepted to be correct in cross-
    examination by the respondent's representative.  She found as a  matter
    of fact that the appellant's date of birth was 11  September  1994  and
    that the appellant had lied about his age  on  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He was accordingly 15 years of age on  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

10.  The judge then went on to  assess  the  substance  of  the  appellant's
    claim and, as narrated above, found the appellant to be incredible in a
    number of important respects.

The Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

11.  Before us Ms Loughran submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    materially erred in law.  She had failed  to  have  regard  to  clearly
    relevant evidence in respect of the social worker's explanation  as  to
    the typing error contained  in  her  report.   In  addition  there  was
    irrationality in finding that his date of birth was 11  September  1994
    when his evidence as recorded by the judge at  paragraph  27  was  that
    when he spoke to the social worker he was not paying attention  to  the
    year mentioned, he had "a wrong  interpreter".   The  failure  to  have
    proper regard to this material had important consequences in  assessing
    credibility since the Tribunal Judge found  that  he  had  deliberately
    deceived the authorities on arrival in the United Kingdom  and  it  was
    deliberately carried out in order to gain an advantage.

12.  Ms Loughran argued that the First-tier Tribunal also  materially  erred
    in law in failing  to  have  proper  regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's younger brother [F].  At paragraph 41 the judge had  stated
    that the younger brother had been granted asylum based  solely  on  his
    young age on arrival and not because anything he had said about  events
    in Afghanistan had been accepted.  Accordingly, the Tribunal had  given
    no consideration at all  to  the  brother's  evidence.   That  evidence
    supported the appellant's account both in its detail and because of the
    presence  of  injuries  which  themselves  supported  the   appellant's
    account.   That  evidence  was  of  direct  relevance  and  the   judge
    materially erred in law in failing to have regard to it.

13.  Ms Loughran  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the suitability requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules set out in S-LTR in  particular.   It  appeared  that  the  judge
    proceeded on 1.6. of that Rule and concluded that the presence  of  the
    applicant in the UK was not conducive to the public good because of his
    conduct, character or associations making it  undesirable  for  him  to
    remain.  However, the only evidence in relation to this matter  related
    to a conviction for driving whilst uninsured, two  cautions  for  theft
    and common assault and three abduction  notices  in  respect  of  young
    girls.  There was evidence from DC Wood which demonstrated  that  these
    matters  were  of  no  materiality  since  the  circumstances  of   the
    abductions demonstrated that  the  appellant  had  been  found  in  the
    company of young girls  in  his  support  unit.   No  unlawfulness  was
    involved in that and it was clear that the appellant had  not  breached
    any of the abduction notices served upon him.

14.  Mr Whitwell for  the  respondent  in  addressing  ground  of  appeal  1
    pointed out that it was three weeks after the hearing  that  the  judge
    received information  in  relation  to  the  social  work  report.   No
    application to adjourn the case when  the  point  arose  during  cross-
    examination was made and it was difficult to see what option the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had at the stage when this matter was  raised.   In
    any event, it was  not  simply  the  question  of  age  which  affected
    credibility as was clear from the  approach  of  the  Tribunal  to  the
    substance of the appellant's claim which is dealt with in paragraph  38
    onwards.   His  asylum  claim   had   been   dismissed   due   to   the
    inconsistencies of the account given by the appellant himself  and  the
    discrepancies in the account given by the appellant  when  compared  to
    that of his uncle, Mr Faqiri.  Furthermore, the appellant had a history
    of deception in the use of false passports in order to  gain  entry  to
    the United Kingdom.  In the circumstances, it could not  be  said  that
    the issue of the appellant's age could be said to be a material  factor
    in the decision.  However, it was conceded by Mr Whitwell that,  if  we
    considered this issue to be of materiality, then the decision could not
    stand and would require to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, he did accept that the issue as to the age  of  the  appellant
    both at the time of his entry into the United Kingdom in  2009  and  at
    the time of his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal might be relevant
    to the assessment of his credibility.

Discussion

15.  The matter of the appellant's age appears to have been raised  for  the
    first time during cross-examination of the appellant.  The terms of the
    social worker's report at paragraph 3.1, in which she stated  that  the
    appellant himself had indicated that he was born on 11  September  1994
    and the answers to questions put to him, both in cross-examination  and
    by the judge herself, led the judge to the conclusion that a  different
    date of birth was the correct one, namely 11  September  1994.   It  is
    also apparent that that finding was considered to be one of  importance
    in relation to the appellant's credibility  as  a  witness  before  the
    Tribunal.  At paragraph 37 she states in terms that what she terms  the
    appellant's deceit about age impacts on his credibility.

16.  We accept that thereafter the  Tribunal  proceeded  to  deal  with  the
    substance of the appellant's claim  and,  for  the  reasons  which  are
    given, his account was not  accepted.   Nevertheless,  because  of  the
    impact that the judge found the deceit in relation to age to have  upon
    his credibility,  we  consider  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in
    refusing to consider the late evidence of the social worker.    Looking
    at the terms of the social worker's original report, the very fact that
    she states therein that the appellant must have been almost  11  rather
    than 13 on the basis of the information he  had  given  her,  indicates
    that the date of 1994 might well be an error on the part of the  social
    worker.  Having regard to the fact that this evidence was given through
    an interpreter and was  itself  of  a  somewhat  confusing  nature,  we
    consider that the conclusion that the appellant deliberately lied about
    his age previously and unwittingly  revealed  his  actual  age  to  the
    social worker and accepted it was such during the  exchange  in  cross-
    examination,  should  not  have  been  reached   without   giving   the
    appellant's advisers an opportunity to advance  the  explanation  which
    was proffered and for that to be considered.

17.  In addition, we consider that the  judge's  conclusion  on  credibility
    generally was influenced  by  that  conclusion  and  must  have  had  a
    material part to play in the assessment of the appellant's  credibility
    generally.

18.  The explanation of the social worker was tendered some weeks  prior  to
    the promulgation of the decision and the judge states at  paragraph  36
    that she was not prepared to accept the  late  filed  evidence  on  the
    basis that the social worker did not attend the appeal hearing and  her
    evidence had not been subject to cross-examination and  no  application
    was made at the time to submit  late  evidence.   The  judge  does  not
    appear to have balanced these considerations against the cogency of the
    explanation tendered by the social worker or its  potential  effect  on
    the decision under appeal (see R (on the application of  Azkhosravi)  v
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2001] EWCA Civ 977).

19.  At the date on which the evidence was received  the  decision  had  not
    been promulgated and it was open to the judge to  accept  the  evidence
    advanced.  She could have called upon the  respondent  to  provide  any
    comments upon it.   The  failure  to  do  so,  appears  to  us  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case to be an error of law  which  has
    resulted in material unfairness.  Her finding of deceit in this respect
    was clearly material to the findings on credibility.  For these reasons
    we consider that this ground of appeal is well-founded and the decision
    cannot stand.

20.  In the circumstances, it is not necessary for us to give any  views  in
    relation to the other grounds of appeal which are advanced.   We  shall
    allow this appeal and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

