
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01696/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 November 2015                              |On 5 November 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                Suleman Omer
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Suleman Omer, date of birth  26.6.84,  claims  to  be  a
    citizen of Eritrea. The Secretary of State asserts that he is Sudanese.



 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey promulgated 27.5.15, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  9.1.15,  to  refuse  his  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims.  The Judge  heard  the
    appeal on 15.5.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.6.15. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission  to  appeal  on
    11.8.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 3.11.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. There was no attendance of any legal representative on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. I put the case back to  11:00  for  the  appellant  and  the
    Tribunal  administration  to  try  to  make  contact  with  the  listed
    representative Mr David Forbes, company director  of  Lifeline  Options
    Community Interest Company, but no one  answered  the  phone  when  the
    number given was called several times.  I  note  that  Aman  Solicitors
    represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal. It is  not  clear
    from the file when Lifeline Options came on the scene but the appellant
    told me that he had changed representation after the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, when his then solicitors declined to  act  further
    for him.

 6. There  was  no  explanation  for  absence  of  representation,  and  no
    communication from Lifeline Options and I am not satisfied in any event
    that David Forbes is an authorised legal  representative.  Although  we
    waited to see if anyone  was  coming  and  may  have  been  delayed  in
    traffic, no one attended. The appellant was accompanied by a friend, Mr
    Nazer Hamed, who said that he could translate  for  the  appellant  and
    sought to assist the appellant in making representations on  the  error
    of law issues. In the circumstances, I considered that it  was  in  the
    public interest to proceed to hear at least the error of  law  part  of
    the appeal. I confirmed that the appellant was aware of the two  simple
    issues raised in the application for permission to appeal.

Error of Law

 7. For the reasons set out below I find no material error of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  as  to  require
    the decision of Judge Pacey to be set aside.

 8. The grounds of appeal make two principle assertions of  error  of  law.
    First, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take account of the
    language used by the appellant  -  Tigre  -  asserting  that  it  is  a
    language  not  spoken  in  Sudan  but  only  in  Eritrea.  In  granting
    permission to appeal, Judge Coker  considered  it  arguable  that  this
    issue should have been taken into account in  reaching  the  conclusion
    that the appellant is of  Sudanese  nationality  and  not  Eritrean  as
    claimed.

 9. However, there is no merit at all in this ground. It  is  correct  that
    the appellant was interviewed and had an interpreter in Tigre. However,
    as the refusal decision explains, supported by the  objective  evidence
    in the  respondent's  bundle  at  E1,  Tigre,  which  is  different  to
    Tigrinya, is a semitic language of the Tigre  people  of  north-western
    Eritrea and smaller areas of neighbouring Sudan. It is thus  spoken  in
    both Eritrea and Sudan, particularly in the border areas. I  also  note
    that when asked at Q9 what languages he spoke, the  appellant  answered
    "Little Tigrinya; good Arabic; little Hedareb,  and  little  Saho."  It
    follows  that  this  issue  cannot  assist  in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant is Eritrean or Sudanese and thus there no  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

10. The second issue is that the judge failed  to  accurately  reflect  the
    appellant's evidence of his locality of origin. It is  clear  from  the
    papers that the appellant claimed to be from the village of  Taletasher
    in the vicinity of Tesseney in the Gash Baska  region  of  Eritrea,  an
    area close to the Sudanese border. In granting  permission  to  appeal,
    Judge Coker  considered  it  arguable  that  the  judge  conflated  the
    appellant's village with the nearby town when concluding that he  would
    have known town notable places if he worshipped there. "It  is  unclear
    what the First-tier Tribunal judge meant by  "those  of  Islamic  faith
    take religious observance very seriously" and  how  that  affected  his
    conclusions."

11. I agree that the observation about  taking  religious  observance  very
    seriously was inappropriate, as the appellant had not stated how  often
    he attended the mosque in Teseney, and it did  not  necessarily  follow
    that he  attended  the  mosque  in  Teseney  regularly  or  frequently.
    However, taken in the overall context of the evidence this  observation
    was not crucial to any issue. When asked about his religion  at  Q89-93
    of the interview and in particular as to his local place of worship the
    appellant stated it was the  Grand  Mosque  of  Teseney,  in  the  town
    centre. He was able to describe its structure, colour, and  that  there
    are trees outside the building. He did not suggest  that  he  regularly
    worshipped in Taletasher but clearly he must have been  there  numerous
    times, if his factual account is correct. Regardless of  how  often  he
    attended the mosque, the general point being made by the judge is still
    valid; on his account he should be able  to  answer  general  questions
    about Teseney. However, the appellant was in difficulties in  interview
    answering further questions about Teseney, stating that as he was not a
    regular visitor he was unable to describe any tourist attractions.  The
    grounds claim that  the  village  was  an  hour's  drive  from  Teseney
    suggesting that it was not unreasonable for the appellant not to have a
    tourist-office level of knowledge of the town.  Teseney  is  only  45Km
    from the Sudanese border and  Taletasher  is  between  the  border  and
    Teseney. Thus it cannot be an hour's drive away, as the  border  itself
    is less than an hour's drive. The refusal decision  suggests  that  the
    appellant may have gained his rather limited knowledge of Teseney  from
    publically available information and/or travelled in the  past  between
    Teseney and Sudan, whilst  living  in  Sudan,  the  ease  of  which  he
    referred to during his asylum interview.

12. Taken as a whole, the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied on a significant
    number of factors in reaching the conclusion that the appellant is from
    Sudan and not Eritrea. For example, the appellant claimed to have  only
    come to the attention of the Eritrean  authorities  in  February  2011.
    However, the copy ID card submitted suggests  that  it  was  issued  in
    Teseney on 24.4.09. Further, the translation  of  the  document  states
    that his address at the date of issue  in  2009  is  in  Gedaref,  East
    Sudan, which is close to the border with Eritrea, giving the lie to his
    claim to have first left Eritrea in 2011. This is  also  the  place  in
    Sudan where the appellant claims to have been born. For  those  reasons
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave little weight  to  the  Eritrean  ID
    card, the original of which was not produced.

13. In all the circumstances, I find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's findings leading  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is
    Sudanese and not Eritrean as claimed. In  the  light  of  the  evidence
    taken as  a  whole,  the  conclusion  is  entirely  understandable  and
    justified by cogent reasoning.

Conclusions:

14. For the reasons set out herein, I find that the making of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity  direction.  No  submissions  were  made  on  the  issue.  In  the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable in this case and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
