
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/01002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     EL
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Lane, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant  has  made  an  asylum  application  and  I  make  an
         anonymity order pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Tribunal  or  a  Court
         directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
         publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
         original appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst others, all
         parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise
         to contempt of court proceedings.

      2. In a decision promulgated on 2 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Gurung-Thapa dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum  and  human
         rights grounds.  The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  and  her
         elder daughter had been  subjected  to  female  genital  mutilation
         (FGM) in Nigeria and her younger daughter is at real risk of FGM if
         the family return to the Appellant's home area or Lagos, where  her
         husband (and her children's father) is from.   The  judge  accepted
         the SSHD's contention that the family could reasonably relocate  to
         the capital city of Nigeria, Abuja, where she found there would  be
         no real risk of FGM being carried out.  The Judge provided detailed
         and  comprehensive  reasons  for   this.    The   Judge   expressly
         considered: the size and geography  of  Nigeria  and  the  distance
         between Abuja and Lagos (para 46); that the  family  would  not  be
         sought out in Abuja by other family members intent on carrying  out
         FGM (para 47); there was no real risk that  the  appellant's  twins
         would be at real  risk  in  Abuja  city  (paras  49  and  50);  the
         appellant and her husband were highly educated and would be able to
         find suitable employment in Abuja (paras 51-52).

      3. Mr Lane focussed his submissions on the judge's failure to consider
         the reasonableness of relocation  for  this  particular  family  in
         light of the likely discrimination they would face in Abuja as 'non-
         indigines'.  He pointed to information contained within the Nigeria
         COI report dated 14 June 2013 to support his submission that ethnic
         discrimination was pervasive and those who move to another area  in
         Nigeria frequently encounter discrimination, such that  they  might
         be compelled to return to their  home  area.   He  argued  that  it
         followed that the Judge had erred in law in failing to consider the
         reasonableness of expecting the family to relocate in light of this
         evidence.

      4. This submission faces two insurmountable hurdles such  that  in  my
         judgment it cannot be said that the judge has materially  erred  in
         law.

      5. First, Mr Lane conceded that there was no evidence to  support  the
         submission available to the judge and that the submission  was  not
         even made before the judge.  This is  a  case  in  which  the  SSHD
         clearly raised Abuja as a suitable area for internal relocation for
         the  family  within  the  decision  letter  refusing  asylum.   The
         appellant and her  representatives  therefore  had  notice  of  the
         issue.  The appellant's  witness  statements  raises  a  number  of
         reasons why she did not  consider  that  Abuja  would  be  safe  or
         reasonable  for  the  family.   This   did   not   include   ethnic
         discrimination.  Her witness statements are silent on  this  as  is
         the skeleton argument provided to the  judge.   The  focus  of  the
         evidence and the submissions was upon the practice of killing twins
         in Abuja and the Judge was entitled to reject this evidence for the
         reasons she provided.  Indeed,  Mr  Lane  accepted  that  the  very
         extract that he relied upon within the COI report was  not  in  the
         appellant's bundle before the Judge.

      6. The judge properly directed herself to the relevant  test  and  was
         entitled to conclude that it would be reasonable for the family  to
         relocate to Abuja for the reasons provided.  It cannot properly  be
         said that the judge erred in law in failing to address evidence and
         submissions, which were not before her.

      7. Secondly, the evidence that is available sets out in general  terms
         the prevalence of ethnic discrimination in Nigeria.  There  was  no
         evidence that the  ethnic  profile  of  Abuja  is  such  that  this
         particular family would be discriminated and if so to  what  extent
         bearing in mind their education and employment history.  There  was
         and  is  very  little  to  support  the  nature   and   extent   of
         discrimination in Abuja and its likely impact upon this  particular
         family.

      8. I am satisfied that the decision under appeal contains no  material
         error of law and the judge has  adequately  reasoned  her  decision
         that relocation to Abuja for this particular family would  be  safe
         and reasonable.

Decision

      9. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law.

     10. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
8 October 2015
