
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01409/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SAYED HAMDI HINDI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saunton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Ti of Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co,
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been brought by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of Judge Martins a Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  who
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1  September  2015  allowed  the
    appeal  of  the  above  named,  now  named  as   respondent   in   this
    determination. The Secretary of State had refused his application to be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee. The respondent is
    a male and claimed to be a citizen of Syria. The  appellant  (Secretary
    of State) did not accept, for reasons set out  in  her  notice  of  the
    decision, that the respondent is from Syria.  It was her view  that  if
    the respondent is found to be from Syria, then  he  would  qualify  for
    refugee status.

 2. The respondent appeared before the First Tier Tribunal  and  gave  oral
    evidence. He said that he was born in  Syria  on  28  August  1996.  He
    claimed asylum in the UK on 21 October 2013, having  travelled  through
    various countries in Europe. The appellant made the decision to  refuse
    to grant him asylum on 15 January 2015.

 3. At the hearing before the First Tier Tribunal  the  respondent  adopted
    his written witness statement and he was cross examined.  The  evidence
    that the respondent gave before the First Tier in  examination-in-chief
    as well as in cross examination is set out in detail  in  the  decision
    made by Judge Martin. The written determination  consists  of  14  type
    written pages. Judge Martin allowed the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  as
    well as on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge Parkes, a Judge of the  First  Tier  Tribunal  on  18
    November 2015. The permission was granted in the following  terms:  "It
    is arguable that the Judge's analysis of the evidence of the  Appellant
    and his previous accounts is inadequate to explain why that evidence is
    accepted and acceptable. On that basis the  grounds  are  arguable  and
    permission is granted."

 5. At the hearing before me I raised the point as to whether the grant  of
    permission to appeal was  valid  in  that  it  did  not  say  that  the
    determination is arguably in material error of law  -  that  being  the
    only basis upon which permission to appeal is and should be granted. Mr
    Staunton for the respondent said that he was in agreement with me  that
    the decision granting permission is flawed and left the  matter  in  my
    hands. I told the parties that I would proceed on the  basis  that  the
    appeal before me is a valid appeal and I would deal with the grounds on
    their merits.

 6. Mr Staunton said that he had only one point that he wished to raise and
    that was in relation to the reasons given for the decision. He drew  my
    attention to paragraphs 56 and 57 of the  determination  and  submitted
    that the reasons given were inadequate.

 7. Mr Ti of counsel asked me to consider  his  written  skeleton  argument
    which he had filed and copied to the appellant well  in  time  for  the
    hearing of this appeal. He said that it is settled law that reasons  do
    not have to be detailed as long as reasons given  address  and  resolve
    the key issues. In his view that is what the Judge  had  done  in  this
    appeal. The Judge  had  taken  due  account  of  discrepancies  in  the
    statements made or attributed to the respondent and  had  at  the  same
    time, in their appraisal quite properly taken account of the respondent
    having been a minor at the relevant time. The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    take the view that the discrepancies did not go  to  the  core  of  the
    issue and that in any  event  the  respondent  had  given  satisfactory
    explanations for his statements.

 8. Mr Staunton made no further submissions.

 9. I reserved my decision which I now give with the following reasons.

10. Having looked at the relevant paragraphs in the determination of  Judge
    Martin and also having considered the whole  of  the  determination,  I
    find no substance in the argument  that  the  reasons  given  by  Judge
    Martin were inadequate. He was perfectly entitled to take positive view
    of the demeanour of the respondent in giving evidence and to state that
    he had given his evidence in  a  straightforward  and  helpful  manner.
    After subjecting all the relevant evidence to  scrutiny  and  analysis,
    Judge Martin, in my respectful view, made findings which are adequately
    reasoned.

11. Accordingly, this appeal brought by the Secretary of State is dismissed
    as the decision of Judge Martin does not have a material error of law.




    K Drabu CBE
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
    8 February 2016
