
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01613/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2015                            |On 12 February 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott, instructed by Ison Harrison, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AAA, was born in 1979 and is a male  citizen  of  Libya.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2014 and applied for asylum.
     By a decision dated 16 January 2015, the respondent refused  to  grant
    the appellant asylum and made a decision to remove him from the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 of the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  removal
    decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 April  2015,  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of  appeal.   The  first  ground  concerns  the
    challenge  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's evidence.  At [21] of the refusal  letter,  the  respondent
    had made this concession:

         I have considered your account  of  your  harassment  at  work  and
         whether to accept these aspects of your claim.   It  is  considered
         that you met  parts  (i),  (ii)  and  (v).   However  it  has  been
         concluded that you have not provided a coherent account of  certain
         aspects of your claim.  Therefore you have not met the criteria for
         part (iii) of paragraph 339L.  In addition your  failure  to  claim
         asylum straight away at London Heathrow on arrival  has  meant  you
         have not met the criteria for part (iv).  Paragraph 339L.  Although
         you have not met these criteria I have considered that it would  be
         nevertheless  appropriate  to  accept  this  part  of  your  claim.
         Therefore your account of your problems with the harassment at your
         work is accepted.

 3. At [28], Judge Shimmin wrote:

         The respondent accepts that the appellant is a Libyan national.  It
         is  also  accepted  that  he   was   in   the   employment   of   [
              ] and that he made complaints against them.

         I could not be satisfied even to the lower standard on the evidence
         before me that the balance of the appellant's account was  truthful
         [sic] for the following principal reasons.

 4. At [40], the judge wrote

         Weighing all the evidence for what it is worth and  considering  it
         cumulatively in the light of the challenges to it by the respondent
         I find the appellant has failed to prove to the  required  standard
         of reasonable likelihood that any of the facts he alleges are  true
         apart from his claim to be of Libyan nationality and to  have  made
         complaints to his employer.

 5. Under the heading "Evidence" the judge set out the particulars  of  the
    appellant's account.  Amongst the complaints which  the  appellant  had
    made to  his  company  were  complaints  regarding  problems  with  its
    organisational structure and supply  chain.   These  were  professional
    matters linked to the appellant's  discharge  of  his  duties  for  the
    company separate from those difficulties, the appellant claims to  have
    suffered harassment at work.  At [19], the judge noted that the account
    included a claim that,

         The appellant suffered harassment at work.  He  was  threatened  by
         someone from the Administration Department in May 2014 and was told
         that he did not belong in the company and  that  he  needed  to  be
         'kicked from the window.'

 6. Very soon after that, in June 2014, the appellant claimed that  he  was
    chased by men in cars including an individual holding a gun.

 7. The "complaints to his employer" which the judge found  the  respondent
    accepted as a true part of the  account  related  to  the  first  in  a
    sequence of events according to the appellant which may have led to the
    serious incident of June 2014 which, in  turn,  led  to  the  appellant
    leaving Libya  to  seek  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  first
    consequence of the complaints about the organisation of the company had
    been the harassment which the judge described at  [19].   It  is  clear
    that the judge did  not  accept  that  that  harassment  had  occurred.
    However, as can be seen from the passage of  the  refusal  letter  [21]
    which I have  quoted  above,  the  respondent  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant had suffered harassment.   Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the  respondent
    before the Upper Tribunal,  told  me  that,  according  the  record  of
    proceedings on his file, there had been no attempt  by  the  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier Tribunal to withdraw that concession.  It
    follows that Judge Shimmin has wrongly proceeded on the basis  that  he
    was required to make a finding of fact  regarding  the  allegations  of
    harassment when there was no need for him to do so.  At [39], the judge
    noted that,

         Whilst individually any one of the adverse credibility points might
         not, on its own, persuade me that the appellant was  an  incredible
         witness, when I consider the various points cumulatively, I come to
         the conclusion the appellant is not credible.

 8.  In  what  appears  to  have  been  a  finely-balanced  assessment   of
    credibility, the error made by  the  judge  as  regards  the  claim  of
    harassment may have distorted that  assessment.   Accordingly,  I  find
    that the  decision  should  be  set  aside.   Because  the  credibility
    assessment was cumulative, the only safe and proper course of action is
    for all the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside
    also.  There will need to be a new fact-finding exercise before a Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal following which that Tribunal  will  re-make
    the decision.

 9. The other grounds concern the weight  placed  by  the  judge  upon  the
    screening interview of the appellant and also the weight he  has  given
    to Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  I have to say I find those grounds to be
    less persuasive.  In any event, the decision must be set aside for  the
    reasons which I have given above.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2 April 2015  is
    set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal
    should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Shimmin)  for
    that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 20 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


