
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01053/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Date sent                  |
|On 2 July 2013                              |On 4 July 2013             |
|                                            |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MISS EUNICE ANKRAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr V Makrol a
           solicitor acting pro bono
          For the Respondent: Mr P Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 20 December  1967.
      Both she and the respondent have been given permission to  appeal  the
      determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge J Simpson. She had appealed
      against the respondent's decision of 9  January  2013  to  refuse  her
      leave to remain in the UK following the refusal of asylum.  The  judge
      allowed her appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds but decided  that
      she was not entitled to  the  benefit  of  the  respondent's  "legacy"
      scheme.


   2. At an earlier hearing before me the representatives were  confused  as
      to who had been granted permission to appeal. It turned out  that  the
      respondent had been granted permission to appeal but  the  appellant's
      in time application for permission to appeal had not been  decided.  I
      granted permission to appeal to the appellant. In this determination I
      will refer to the original claimant as the appellant and the Secretary
      of State as the respondent.


   3. The appellant entered the UK in June  1995  and  claimed  asylum.  Her
      application was refused in March 1996  and  her  appeal  against  this
      decision was dismissed in January 1998. Removal directions were  given
      but the appellant was  not  removed.  The  next  contact  between  the
      appellant and the respondent was in September 2009. Through solicitors
      she made a claim for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  legacy
      scheme. I will need to return to the history of  this  claim  in  more
      detail.


   4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision of 9  January
      2013 and the judge heard her appeal on 7 March 2013. Both parties were
      represented, the appellant by Mr Makrol. The appellant  gave  evidence
      as did her partner  and  three  friends.  It  was  conceded  that  the
      appellant was not pursuing her asylum claim.


   5. The judge decided that the appellant was not entitled to  leave  under
      the long residence provisions of the Immigration Rules,  a  conclusion
      which is not now disputed. In relation to the Article  8  grounds,  he
      found that the appellant had established a private and family life  in
      this country. The family life was largely with her partner  with  whom
      he concluded the appellant had established a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship which started in 2007. Her partner was a British  citizen
      who worked and supported her.  The  judge  found  the  appellant,  her
      partner and the  three  friends  who  gave  evidence  to  be  credible
      witnesses. The judge considered the Razgar tests, finding that all but
      the last of the questions were answered in the  affirmative  and  that
      the decision turned on proportionality. He weighed in the balance  the
      factors which favoured the appellant against  "the  need  to  maintain
      effective immigration control" and "the public interest  is  always  a
      high hurdle for any appellant to  overcome".  He  found  that  if  the
      appellant  returned  to  Ghana  she  was  likely  to  succeed  in   an
      application for entry clearance to settle with her partner/husband  in
      the UK. They had for sometime intended to marry but were unable to  do
      so because the respondent held  the  appellant's  passport  which  she
      needed to produce if the marriage was to be arranged.


   6.  The  judge  addressed  the  appellant's  grounds  under  the   legacy
      provisions in paragraph 7 (d) of the determination before reaching the
      final conclusion in paragraph 11 that she  was  not  entitled  to  the
      benefit of these.


   7. The respondent's grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred  in  law
      by failing to give any or adequate reasons for his findings which  led
      to the Article 8 conclusion. They allege that the appellant had failed
      to produce evidence demonstrating her subsisting relationship  with  a
      British citizen or that they had lived together for  the  period  they
      claimed. There was a lack of documentary evidence in support  such  as
      joint bills or tenancy agreements. The  appellant  had  not  tried  to
      obtain her passport from the respondent in order to  marry.  There  is
      reference to "conflicting  evidence".  It  is  also  argued  that  any
      private or family life rights would have  been  established  during  a
      period when the appellant's precarious immigration status  was  known.
      The appellant had ties to Ghana  including  children  there.  She  had
      shown a disregard for the immigration law. The judge is said  to  have
      pre-empted the outcome of an entry clearance application  from  abroad
      without evidence to support his conclusion.


   8. Mr Nath confirmed that, whilst the respondent was represented  at  the
      hearing before the judge, the grounds of appeal which accompanied  the
      application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal would  have
      been prepared by somebody who had the determination but  not  all  the
      papers before the judge at the hearing. This may explain why important
      elements of the grounds are no  doubt  unintentionally  misleading  or
      misconceived. For example the  appellant's  representatives  submitted
      five substantial bundles (A to  E)  which  include  a  great  deal  of
      corroborative  evidence.  This  includes  copies  of  the  appellant's
      partner's latest and previous passports showing that  he  has  been  a
      British citizen since at least October 2002. There are  utility  bills
      in the appellant's name for the address where she is living  with  her
      partner. There are other utility  bills  in  his  name  for  the  same
      address. Whilst I accept that there are  no  utility  bills  in  their
      joint names the existence of bills in each of their names for the same
      address assists them. There is a tenancy agreement in his name for the
      same address. There are payslips for the  appellant's  partner  giving
      the same address. There is a letter from her church stating  that  the
      appellant lives at this address. Witnesses gave evidence and  provided
      statements or letters saying that the appellant and her partner  lived
      together at this address. The allegation that  "no  attempt  has  been
      made to request permission and documents from the respondent to marry"
      takes no account of the letter from the appellant  to  the  respondent
      dated 21 March 2012 at page 40 of bundle A with  which  she  sent  her
      passport to the respondent who had asked for it. She asked for  it  to
      be returned. I asked Mr Nath to point me to any "conflicting evidence"
      but he was not able to do so.


   9. The judge found the appellant, her partner, and the  witnesses  to  be
      credible. The respondent's grounds do not question this conclusion. It
      is arguable that on this basis alone the judge was entitled  to  reach
      his findings of fact. However, I find  that  there  was  corroborative
      documentary evidence before the judge which supported his findings.  I
      find that the judge was entitled to reach his  findings  of  fact  and
      that in this regard there is no error of law.


  10. I find that the judge did have in mind and take into account the  fact
      that the appellant has had no right to be in this country for most  of
      her time  here.  This  appears  from  his  findings  relating  to  her
      immigration history in paragraph 8 and what he said about  maintenance
      of immigration control and the public interest.


  11. Having reached the conclusion that the appellant was in a genuine  and
      settled relationship with her partner it was appropriate for the judge
      to consider whether she should be required to return to Ghana in order
      to make an entry clearance application from there. I find that on  the
      totality of the evidence before him it was open to the judge  to  come
      to the conclusion not that an application was  bound  to  succeed  but
      that it was "likely to be successful".


  12. The judge could have set out his reasoning in relation to the  Article
      8 grounds at greater  length  and  in  more  detail.  However,  having
      examined these in the light of  the  evidence  before  him,  oral  and
      documentary, I find that he reached conclusions open to  him  on  that
      evidence and that there is no error of law.


  13. The judge dealt with the appellant's grounds under the  legacy  scheme
      in paragraph 8 (d) of the determination in which he said;  "Mr  Makrol
      argues that the legacy provisions applied to the appellant.  This  was
      first raised in the letter of September 2009 asserting her  claim  had
      not been concluded as there remained an extent human rights claim.  Mr
      Makrol produced a number of documents regarding the legacy scheme  and
      based his argument on a category referred to in  one  of  his  bundles
      [24] of "asylum applications which had been refused but  there  is  no
      indication that the appellant has  left  the  UK".  In  answer  to  my
      question he contended that any asylum seeker who had been refused  and
      whose rights of appeal were exhausted, irrespective of  how  long  ago
      that occurred, and who had since gone to ground to avoid removal,  had
      an expectation that leave would be granted once the legacy system came
      into being. I reject that submission." Nothing more is said about this
      aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim  until  the  final  conclusion  in
      paragraph 11 rejecting it.


  14. I find that the judge erred in law in his consideration of the  legacy
      scheme grounds. Whilst this may have been Mr Makrol's  answer  to  one
      question from the judge the judge failed to  address  the  appellant's
      lengthy and detailed skeleton argument and the substantial  bundle  of
      documents in support. They have not had proper consideration.


  15. In the refusal letter dated 9 January 2013 the respondent referred  to
      the legacy scheme and said; "You have stated that you have applied for
      a  consideration  under  Legacy  (sic),  however  legacy  is  not   an
      application and  can  not  be  applied  for.  Furthermore  this  is  a
      Pardeepan case and therefore carries a right of appeal."


  16. On 22 September 2009 the appellant's  then  solicitors  wrote  to  the
      respondent outlining her situation and asking that her case should  be
      "treated/considered  under  the  Legacy  case  directive".   Mr   Nath
      questioned whether there was any evidence that this  letter  had  been
      received by the respondent. I find that it was. There  is  a  recorded
      delivery tracking number on the letter and a written confirmation from
      Royal Mail that a letter with this tracking number was delivered on 25
      September 2009. The date is significant because, after 14 October 2009
      any new submissions or applications had to be made in person  and,  it
      appears, in Liverpool.


  17. The appellant  or  her  solicitors  wrote  chase  up  letters  to  the
      respondent in 2010. In early 2011 she went to her MP, Mr  David  Lamy,
      who wrote to the respondent. The respondent replied on 9 February 2011
      and said "As Miss Ankrah has now contacted us to request that  she  be
      granted leave under the "Legacy" scheme, her file has  been  forwarded
      to the appropriate casework unit for consideration of this request.  I
      can assure you that she will be notified of the final decision as soon
      as possible, but at this time I cannot give a firm  indication  as  to
      when this will be."


  18.  The respondent wrote a further letter in response to an  e-mail  from
      Mr David Lamy of 12 July 2011 which appears to have  been  sent  on  5
      October 2011. This said that there had been an earlier  letter  of  11
      May stating that the case would be referred to the Case Assurance  and
      Audit Unit to be concluded and that "this unit has been established to
      deal with these cases". It also said; "We have reviewed Miss  Ankrah's
      case and the review considered the original decision made on her  case
      on whether she had any outstanding applications or representations for
      leave to remain in the UK. Following the review, it  was  deemed  that
      the original decision made on Miss Ankrah's case should remain extant.
      As it stands she has no basis of  stay  in  the  UK  and  should  make
      arrangements to leave the country as soon as possible."


  19. The appellant wrote to the  respondent  on  28  October  2011  and  31
      January  2012  disputing   this   conclusion   and   with   additional
      representations. The respondent replied in a  letter  of  17  February
      2012 stating that the appellant's case "has now  been  allocated  from
      CRD to CAAU. CAAU will resolve cases by  either  removing  individuals
      from the United Kingdom or granting them leave to remain in accordance
      with existing law and policy." It goes on to refer to the  appellant's
      solicitors letter of 31 January 2012 and her claim under "Legacy"  but
      adds  that  the  respondent  has  no  record  of  outstanding  further
      submissions.


  20. The appellant or her  solicitors  submitted  further  letters  to  the
      respondent on 1 March 2012, 11 June 2012 and 26 September 2012 to  the
      effect that representations had been made but had not been considered.
      On 5 October 2012 the respondent replied stating; "Given  the  content
      of your letter it is accepted that further investigation  is  merited.
      We will aim to review your client's case and provide a response within
      six months."


  21. The next step by the respondent was the refusal letter  of  9  January
      2013 which reached the conclusion I have already set out.


  22. The question of  whether  the  appellant  succeeds  under  the  legacy
      provisions as well as  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds  is  not
      academic. I am informed that if the appeal is  allowed  on  Article  8
      human rights grounds the appellant will be granted 30 months leave.  I
      am also informed that if she had succeeded under the legacy provisions
      in force at the time of her application she would have  been  entitled
      to indefinite leave.


  23. I find that the appellant made an in time application under the legacy
      provisions which should have been but has not been properly considered
      by the respondent.


  24. In relation to the judge's decision to allow the appeal on  Article  8
      human rights grounds I find that he did not err in law  and  I  uphold
      his decision.


  25. In relation to the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal in  relation
      to the legacy provisions I find that the judge erred in law and I  set
      aside his decision. I substitute my decision that, in relation to  the
      application under the legacy provisions, the respondent's decision was
      not in accordance with the law  and  I  allow  her  appealed  to  this
      extent. The appellant application must be properly considered  by  the
      respondent and a fresh decision reached.









      ..........................................
            Signed                                             Date 3 July
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

