
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/01144/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                     T B
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Azani of Counsel
For the respondent:    M H Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 28 September 1978.  He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of  First-tier
    Judge Chohan dated  14  July  2014  refusing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 9 January 2015 refusing him asylum and
    humanitarian protection and to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on
    5 August 2015 stating that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Judge
    failed to make relevant findings as to the letter from the lawyer  from
    Sri Lanka which relates to an arrest warrant in proceedings against the
    appellant  as  the  truth  or  falsity  of  such  a  document  must  be
    significantly relevant to  the  appellant's  case  notwithstanding  the
    Judge's adverse findings as to his overall credibility.

The first-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The Judge in his determination made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise.

    [15] "There are some serious  credibility  issues  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claim. It is the appellant's claim that he returned to  Sri
    Lanka on 19 July 2007 because he could not  get  hold  of  his  parents
    whilst in this country. On arrival at the airport, it is claimed,  that
    he was detained and questioned for a period of two hours.  However,  he
    was then released without any action being taken against  him.  I  find
    that somewhat odd that upon release the appellant took a taxi to travel
    to Galle and when the taxi was stopped, the appellant was arrested  and
    detained by CID officers. I find it odd because had the appellant  been
    genuinely of adverse interest of the Sri Lankan authorities then  I  do
    not find it credible that he would have been released at  the  airport.
    It is not clear how the  CID  officers  knew  that  the  appellant  was
    travelling in a particular taxi.  Clearly,  based  on  the  appellant's
    account, the CID officers knew that the appellant had  arrived  in  Sri
    Lanka and again it begs the question as to  why  they  simply  did  not
    approach him when he had been detained at the airport.  In  short,  the
    appellant's account does not make any sense.

    [16] The case GJ and others (post-Civil War: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) refers. In support of his case,  the  appellant
    has submitted an arrest warrant which a lawyer in Sri Lanka has managed
    to obtain and send to the appellant. I note  that  the  arrest  warrant
    posted dates the appellant's return to Sri Lanka and was  issued  after
    his return to the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, it does not  take  away
    from the fact that the authorities had the appellant  in  detention  at
    the airport, and to release him without any action simply does not make
    any sense.

    [17] The appellant claims that he was helped by an  officer  to  escape
    from  custody.  25  lakh  rupees  were  paid  to  the  officer  by  the
    appellant's father-in-law.  I  find  that  quite  incredible.  Firstly,
    according to the appellant's account he had received  information  that
    he and his parents were to be killed by the authorities.  In  light  of
    that, I find it incredible that an officer would assist  the  appellant
    to escape irrespective of the payment  of  a  bribe.  Secondly,  again,
    according to the appellant's account his parents had  been  accused  of
    supporting the LTTE and not the appellant himself. In light of that,  I
    find it incredible that the appellant made  no  effort  to  assist  his
    parents in  securing  release  from  custody.  Of  course,  it  is  the
    appellant's explanation that because he had  a  visa  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom he had been assisted by the officer.  Nevertheless,  the
    fact that his parents had been accused as above and  faced  death,  the
    appellant having made no effort to assist  them  I  find  to  be  quite
    incredible.

    [18] there are many  inconsistencies  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    journey to the  airport  after  he  was  released.  During  his  asylum
    interview, at question 69, the appellant stated that  "only  the  three
    people that took me to the airport and they drop  me  and  went  away".
    However, it questions 17, the appellant went on to state "I  never  had
    the passport they had the ticket and the  passport.  Only  once  I  was
    inside and it was sorted they left".

    [19] clearly, the answers given to the question 69 and 70 of the Asylum
    interview are inconsistent. In order to explain that,  in  his  witness
    statement at paragraph 25, the appellant states "three men escorted  me
    to the airport. They had my passport and ticket. They did not just drop
    me outside the airport. That is not what I  meant  by  my  response  to
    question 69. As I explained at question  70  they  had  control  of  my
    passport and only left once everything was sorted. This escorted me  as
    far as the immigration checks and ensured I was not detained".

    [20] The above is at odds with the letter from the appellant's  father-
    in-law, in the appellant's bundle at page 41-42. In  that  letter,  the
    appellant's father-in-law states "I went to the airport with money  and
    everything at the airport. He collected the money  and  everything  and
    informed that he cannot show TB". It can be seen that during his asylum
    interview, the appellant did not mention that his father-in-law went to
    the airport. During his oral evidence, the appellant stated that his in-
    laws were not at the airport and  that  everything  had  been  arranged
    prior to the arrival, even the passport. These inconsistencies  further
    damaged the appellant's credibility.

    [22] it could be seen from Mr Mason's medical report that  he  has  not
    ruled out the possibility of the scars on the appellant  was  inflicted
    by other means than is claimed by the appellant. When one considers the
    appellant's claim as a whole and  the  inconsistencies  as  highlighted
    above, it can only be concluded that  the  scars  were  not  caused  as
    claimed by the appellant.... Even if I were to be wrong in arriving  at
    that conclusion, and the scars were  caused  deliberately  by  a  third
    party then based on the appellant's lack of credibility,  I  find  they
    were not caused by the Sri Lankan authorities.

    [26] considering the appellant's account as a whole,  I  find  that  it
    lacks credibility. Reasons have been set out above. In light of that, I
    place little weight on the arrest warrant which I find has simply  been
    produced through a  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  in  order  to  enhance  the
    appellant's claim. The appellant simply does not wish to return to  Sri
    Lanka and is here for reasons other men seeking refugee status.

    The Judge also noted that the appellant's wife came to Sri Lanka  three
    years later had very little  knowledge  about  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim. It was claimed that  the  authorities  visited  the  appellant's
    father-in-law and wife. The Judge find it incredible  bearing  in  mind
    that the appellant is wanted by the  authorities,  that  they  took  no
    action against his father-in-law and his wife.

    The Judge considered the delay in claiming asylum with  other  evidence
    in respect of the appellant's appeal. In answer to the Judges  question
    the appellant answered that he knew three or four years from  the  year
    2007 that he could claim asylum but failed to do so. According  to  the
    appellant's oral evidence, at some point he did seek  legal  advice  in
    respect and was silent as he had no funds he showed  no  interest.  The
    bottom line is that the appellant knew about asylum many years ago  but
    failed to  claim.  Indeed,  he  did  not  claim  asylum  until  it  was
    encountered by chance in March 2013. The appellant has not put  forward
    a satisfactory explanation for not claiming asylum sooner.

    The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal and found that the appellant
    could be returned to Sri Lanka and  he  would  face  no  real  risk  of
    persecution, serious harm oral treatment. He found that the Sri  Lankan
    authorities never had any adverse interest in the  appellant  and  upon
    return they will have no interest in him. He  noted  that  the  country
    guidance case of  GJ  states  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  only
    identify Tamil activists in the diaspora are who were working for Tamil
    separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  State.  There  is
    nothing before me to suggest that the appellant is a  Tamil  separatist
    or that the Sri Lankan authorities have any adverse interest in him.

The grounds of appeal

 4. The appellant in his grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
    summarise. In Ground 1 it  is  argued  that  at  paragraph  26  of  the
    determination, the Judge asserts "considering the  appellant's  account
    as a whole, I find it lacks credibility.  Reasons  have  been  set  out
    above in light of that, please little weight on the arrest for it which
    I find has simply been produced through a lawyer in Sri Lanka in  order
    to enhance the appellant's claim".

 5. It is clear from this reasoning that the Judge has failed  to  consider
    the arrest warrant in the round, instead of reaching  the  decision  as
    the appellant's general credibility, before then going on  to  consider
    the weight attributable to the warrant. Further and alternatively,  the
    stark conclusion that the warrant has simply been produced by a  lawyer
    in Sri Lanka in order  to  enhance  the  appellant's  claim  is  wholly
    unreasoned and un-evidenced.  As  an  aside,  it  is  not  possible  to
    decipher whether the Judge is here  suggesting  that  the  warrant  was
    falsely procured or produced by the Mr Latif U Gamage, the Attorney  at
    Law who attest to having obtained the court documents in his letter  of
    20 January 2015.

 6. Ground 2 states that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider  or  make
    clear findings in respect of the items of corroborative  evidence.  The
    Judge has made no findings at all in  respect  of  the  letter  of  the
    Attorney at Law dated 20 January 2015. In  that  letter,  the  attorney
    attests to having appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant  before  Galle
    Magistrate's Court. He attests to having obtained certificate copies of
    case number D2408/12 which pertains to the appellant. He  confirms  his
    professional fees charged for assisting  the  appellant,  and  confirms
    these content of his letter to be used in support  of  the  appellant's
    asylum appeal in the United Kingdom.

 7. The Judges lack of reasons for either dismissing the letter, or placing
    limited weight on it amounts to a material error of law. Indeed, it  is
    unclear whether the letter has been considered at all. In MK  (duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) it was held that  it  is
    the duty to explain the Tribunal's assessment of the  more  fundamental
    pieces of evidence and to provide reasons for choosing to give (as  the
    case may be) no, little, moderate or  substantial  weight  thereto.  In
    this case  the  evidence  of  the  attorney,  who  attested  to  having
    previously represented the appellant and having obtained copies of  the
    court file which included the extant arrest warrant, is at  the  centre
    of the request for protection because of risk attendant upon  detention
    in Sri Lanka recognised in the headnote (4) of GJ.

 8. At the hearing the appellant said he does not seek to rely on the third
    ground of appeal.

 9. The fourth ground of appeal states  that  the  Judge  erred  in  making
    adverse credibility findings  on  matters  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing and in misrepresenting the appellant's evidence.

10. Paragraph 17 of the determination the Judge  avers  "according  to  the
    appellant's account his parents had been accused of supporting the LTTE
    and not the appellant himself". In light of that, I find it  incredible
    that the appellant made no effort to assist  his  parents  in  securing
    release from custody". The appellant's evidence was clear that  he  too
    was accused of supporting the LTTE which is evident from  paragraph  20
    of the appellant's witness statement where the appellant said that  all
    of them including his parents were accused of assisting the LTTE.

11. The respondent in her rule 24 response stated the following.  There  is
    no material error at paragraph 26 of the determination. The  Judge  has
    clearly considered the arrest warrant and  a  letter  from  the  lawyer
    however, it is a matter for the Judge as to the weight he places on the
    evidence before him. The appellant was  found  not  to  be  a  credible
    witness and it was open to the Judge to find  that  the  documents  had
    been produced in order to enhance the appellant's claim,  therefore  it
    can be inferred that the Judge  does  not  find  the  documents  to  be
    genuine. The Judge looked at all the evidence in the  round  in  making
    the adverse credibility findings and there is no material error.

Decision as to whether there is an error of law.

12. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of Immigration Judge
    Cohan and have taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    documents provided by the appellant's representatives.

13. The main complaint about the determination is that the  Judge  did  not
    adequately consider the appellant's evidence which was  a  letter  from
    the appellants Attorney from  Sri  Lanka  who  confirms  the  documents
    provided by the appellant, were produced from the Magistrate's Court in
    Sri Lanka respect of the appellant's  case.  The  appellant's  position
    appears to be that as the documents have been provided by a  registered
    attorney from Sri  Lanka,  the  documentation  should  be  accepted  as
    genuine. and that the appeal turns upon, largely on the credibility  of
    documentation submitted from Sri Lanka and if those had been considered
    properly, the Judge would have reached a different conclusion.

14. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his conclusion
    based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.
    He implicitly found that the letter from the attorney in Sri Lanka  was
    not credible and  had  been  produced  to  enhance  his  asylum  claim.
    Therefore, the Judge did consider the letter  and  found  that  he  can
    place little weight on the arrest warrant. It cannot therefore be  said
    that the Judge did not take into account the  letter.  The  appellant's
    quarrel is that he was not correct in placing  little  weight  on  this
    evidence. It is a matter for  the  Judge  to  decide  what  weight  any
    particular piece of evidence deserves. Therefore, on the evidence,  the
    Judge was entitled to place very little weight on the letter by the Sri
    Lankan attorney that an arrest warrant was issued against the appellant
    after he left the country to come to the United Kingdom.

15. The grounds of appeal state that "in the attorney's letter, he  attests
    to having appeared on behalf of the appellant before Galle Magistrate's
    Court. He attests to having obtained certificate copies of case  number
    D2408/12 which pertains to the appellant". I note here that  there  was
    no credible evidence before the Judge that if the  arrest  warrant  was
    issued after the appellant left the United Kingdom,  the  police  would
    not have been able to execute the warrant.  There  was  no  explanation
    from the attorney as to how the matter reached the  Magistrates  Court,
    without execution of the warrant and especially given that  the  police
    could not arrested the appellant as he was in the United Kingdom.

16. The Judge made many detailed adverse credibility findings  against  the
    appellant in respect of which there cannot be any possible  error.  The
    Judge did not misinterpret the evidence as to whether  the  authorities
    perceived the appellant was also being  involved  in  giving  the  LTTE
    support. The Judge took into account the appellant's  evidence  at  the
    Asylum  interview  that  he,  personally,  had  not  been  accused   of
    supporting the LTTE but in his statement he said that  the  authorities
    accused the whole family of supporting the LTTE.

17. The appellant's evidence was  that  it  was  the  appellant's  father's
    conduct which was the catalyst for the authorities' adverse interest in
    the appellant's father. It  was  also  his  evidence  that  his  father
    travelled from Galle to Vavuniya accompanied by a man called  Siva  and
    his two friends who happened to be Tamils but  could  speak  Sinhalese.
    According to the  appellant's  evidence,  these  friends  who  came  to
    Vavuniya at the end of August  2006,  went  to  see  a  fortress  which
    happened to be next to a Navy base. The appellant's evidence  was  that
    his father's friends took photographs of the fortress and this  is  how
    the  appellant's  father  came  to  the  adverse   attention   of   the
    authorities. In his witness statement, the appellant said that the  Sri
    Lankan authorities suspected the entire family but did not say why.

18. If, as the appellant says, that his entire  family  were  suspected  of
    assisting the LTTE, he has not credibly explained what was his  conduct
    which attracted the adverse interest of the authorities.

19. The Judge was entitled not to find credible that the appellant who  was
    questioned at the airport for about two hours,  on  arrival,  would  be
    released  at  the  airport  by  the  authorities  but  arrested  whilst
    travelling in a taxi to Galle. The Judge  found  that  the  authorities
    would not have done this, if they genuinely suspected the appellant  of
    assisting the LTTE or if he was wanted by  them.  These  are  perfectly
    reasoned and sustainable findings.

20. If the appellant had assisted the LTTE when he was in Sri Lanka, it  is
    not credible that he would have returned to Sri Lanka when he  was  not
    able to make contact with his parents living in  a  safe  country,  the
    United Kingdom. This also does not accord with the appellant's evidence
    and which the Judge found that the appellant did nothing to assist  his
    parents, in any event but instead returned to the United Kingdom. There
    would therefore have been no purpose in the appellant returning to  Sri
    Lanka because he could not contact his parents.

21. Therefore, even if the Judge's stated in  his  determination  that  the
    appellant's evidence was that the authorities did not have an  interest
    in him which was in his statement, it is not a material error. It  also
    does not accord  with  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  was  never
    individually suspected by the authorities for assisting the LTTE but it
    was his father's actions which invited the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities.

22. The Judge took into account the country guidance case which stated that
    low-level LTTE supporters do not attract the adverse attention  of  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka. It  was  also  stated  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government's objective now  is  to  identify  Tamil  activists  in  the
    diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and  to  destabilise  the
    unitary Sri Lankan State. There was no evidence before the  Judge  that
    the appellant is a Tamil separatist. Even according to the  appellant's
    own evidence, it was his father who brought his friends to the area and
    not him. The Judge found that the appellant was not a Tamil  separatist
    and the appellant has  not  disputed  this.  The  Judge  was  therefore
    entitled to find that the appellant could return to Sri Lanka  and  did
    not have the necessary profile that the authorities were looking for.

23. On the evidence in this appeal, I find that the differently constituted
    Tribunal would not come to a different conclusion. In PJ v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 Fulford LJ held that
    there was no general principle that the involvement of lawyers  creates
    a rebuttable presumption that such documents are to be accepted  to  be
    reliable. I do not understand PJ to be an authority for the proposition
    that if an appellant seeks to rely upon court documents from Sri  Lanka
    which were obtained and provided by lawyers,  there  is  a  presumption
    that there are genuine. The documents must be considered in  the  round
    which the Judge has done.

24. I find that the grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel  with  the
    Judge's findings. I find that the Judge's reasoning is  understandable,
    and not perverse. I find that the grounds of appeal and no more than  a
    disagreement with the Judges findings of fact and the conclusions  that
    he drew from such findings.

25. For each of these reasons given by the Judge in  his  determination  he
    was not satisfied, even to the lowest  standard,  that  the  events  of
    which the appellant speaks are credible.

26. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         15.      It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls  used  the
         words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
         which we have used  above.  The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants
         attention, because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not
         to overturn a judgment at first instance unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original Judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings.

27. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's determination for why he reached his conclusions. I  find  that
    no error of law has been established in Judge's determination.  I  find
    that he was entitled to conclude that the appellant is not entitled  to
    be recognised as a refugee or to be granted humanitarian protection  in
    this country. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


      Dated this 13th day of December 2015
Signed by,

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana
