
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01250/2013
                                                               AA/01642/2013
                                                               AA/01639/2013
                                                               AA/01645/2013
                                                               AA/01647/2013
                                                               AA/01640/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th January 2014                          |On 25th March 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   H A M I
                                  M G M K A
                                  S G M K A
                                  W G M K A
                                  R G M K A
                                  B G M K A
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Warren instructed by Seraphus Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On 7 November 2013 it was conceded by the Secretary of  State  that
        First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  had  erred  in   law   in   his
        determination dismissing the appeals of this family unit,  composed
        of a mother and her four children, promulgated following a  hearing
        in Manchester on 30th May 2013. The concession  was  based  upon  a
        lack of clarity in the Judge's findings and a failure to assess the
        risk on return as a result of the conclusions set out in  paragraph
        40 of the determination, with reference to paragraph 52,  in  which
        it was not clear whether the Judge was saying he  did  not  believe
        that the First Appellant's  husband  was  involved  in  a  coup  or
        supported it whereas paragraph 40 contained a specific  finding  of
        involvement.


     2. The determination was set aside with adverse credibility and  other
        findings of fact set  out  in  the  determination  being  preserved
        findings.



Background


     3. The appellants are a mother and her five children,  three  of  whom
        are girls. The years of their births are 1973,  2001,  2003,  2003,
        2007 and 2011 respectively.


     4. Miss Warren submitted that the preserved findings are those set out
        at paragraph 29, 30, and 40 of the  determination  of  Judge  Levin
        which are as follows:


              29. I find that there was an attempted coup in Sudan  on  22nd
   November                2012 to overthrow  the  Sudanese  Government.  In
   making that finding                   I have had regard to  paragraph  13
   of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter                   in   which   the
   Respondent    cites    two    articles    in    the     Sudan     Tribune
   dated  22nd  November  2012  and   4th   December   2012   stating   that
     Sudan's National Intelligence Security  Service  (NISS)  had  announced
          that they had  foiled  a  plot  to  destabilise  security  led  by
   unidentified                 opposition figures on 22nd November 2012.  I
   am also  satisfied  that                 arrests  of  both  civilian  and
   military individuals suspected of being                 involved  in  the
   plot   were   made   by   NISS    having    regard    to    the    report
   thereof   in   the   Sudan   Tribune   dated    22nd    November    2012.
     Furthermore, and  having  regard  to  the  report  dated  4th  December
     2012 which states that there had been  '  a  wave  of  new  arrests  in
   relation                to the putative putsch' and also having regard to
   the background                        information which  shows  that  the
   authorities in Sudan frequently               arrest and detain political
   opponents, then I am also satisfied  that                there  had  been
   widespread arrests by the Sudanese authorities  and                    in
   particular by  the NISS of those  suspected  of  being  involved  in  the
     failed coup.


              30. I find that the background information upon Sudan  clearly
   indicates               that the Sudanese authorities employ torture  and
   other forms of                   severe punishment against detainees.  In
   such circumstances I find                 that a person who is  suspected
   by the  Sudanese  authorities  of  being                involved  in  the
   attempted coup on 22nd November 2012 would be at                real risk
   of being arrested, detained and tortured.


              40. Firstly, there is strong circumstantial evidence that  the
   first                   Appellant's husband was  involved  in  the  plot,
   evidenced by the fact                 that the  first  Appellant  herself
   accepted that her husband was                      involved therein,  and
   for this reason I do not accept Miss  Smith's                 alternative
   explanation   that   he   was   not    involved    in    it.     Secondly
   given the first Appellants evidence that a friend  of  her  husband  with
          whom he had been associating regularly during the  period  leading
          up to the plot had been arrested, and also  given  the  background
          information previously referred to which  showed  that  there  had
   been                widespread arrests  of  both  civilian  and  military
   personnel who were               suspected of being involved in the plot,
   and also  having  regard  to  the                  fact  that  the  first
   Appellant's husband would clearly have been aware               of  these
   arrests  given   his   position   as   [removed   following   making   of
   anonymity direction], then I do not accept that he  would  have  believed
          that he had nothing to fear, in circumstances where  he  had  been
          associating with one of the plotters and where he sympathised with
                  their aims.  Even if I  were  to  accept  that  the  first
   Appellant's                      husband's mother had  recently  suffered
   an amputation of her leg and                   that  he  would  therefore
   wish to see her, I still do not find it credible                that  the
   first   Appellant   would   have   exposed   himself,   his   wife    and
   five children to what he must have been aware was a  real  risk  of  both
          himself and his family being detained at the airport upon arrival,
   and                 the inevitable detention and torture  that  he  would
   suffer.


     5. The reference to the first Appellant as male and to him being aware
        of the risk is obviously an error as the husband is not a party  to
        these proceedings. Also, the error of law finding  does  not  limit
        the preserved findings to these  three  paragraphs.   The  findings
        relating to citizenship of this family [27], the first  Appellant's
        husband's  employment  [28],  the  fact  the  first  Appellant  has
        suffered type 3 FGM  and  the  analysis  of  the  medical  evidence
        provided in support of the same [31 -32],  the  acceptance  of  the
        first Appellant's claim that both her own family and her  husband's
        family want her daughters to be circumcised [33], the  finding  the
        first Appellant's evidence that the reason why their daughters  had
        not  been  circumcised  to  date  was  because  her   husband   was
        fundamentally opposed to the practice and  had  prevented  it  from
        happening is credible, and that the risk to the  first  Appellant's
        daughters facing FGM is entirely dependent upon the credibility  of
        the claim that her husband was arrested and  detained  at  Khartoum
        Airport when returning to Sudan from Turkey on 17th  December  2012
        and that she had not seen him since [34], are also preserved.


     6. There are also a number of adverse credibility findings relating to
        the claim the first Appellant and the  five  children  returned  to
        Sudan with the first Appellant's husband and the children's father,
        notwithstanding his involvement in the  failed  coup.  Judge  Levin
        accepted the submission that  the  first  Appellant's  husband  was
        aware of the coup in light of his employment  referred  to  in  the
        determination [36] together with  the  first  Appellant's  evidence
        that she discussed the attempted coup with her  husband  and  asked
        his views upon it.


     7. It was further found that the first Appellant clearly believed that
        her husband was involved in the coup [38].


     8. It was found not  credible  that  even  if  the  first  Appellant's
        husband had wanted to see his mother that he would have  taken  his
        wife and children with him to Sudan and thereby exposed them to the
        risk of arrest and detention in circumstances  where  she  and  the
        children already had visas to visit the United Kingdom. It was  not
        found credible that the first Appellant returned to Sudan with  her
        husband  and  her  five  children  on   17th   December   2012   in
        circumstances which evidentially indicate that he had been involved
        in the failed coup on 22nd November 2012 [41].


     9. It is further found that the claim the first  Appellant's  passport
        and those of the children were returned after she had been detained
        for questioning for five hours at the  airport  in  Sudan  was  not
        credible, especially those passports contained  visit  visas  valid
        for the United Kingdom and therefore the Sudanese  security  forces
        would have been aware that there was such a visa  in  the  passport
        had they been in possession of them for the four or five  hours  it
        is alleged.  It was found inconsistent for the authorities to  have
        imposed upon the first Appellant a condition of  residence  at  her
        parent's home in order  to  restrict  her  movements  yet  to  have
        returned their passports affording them an  ability  to  leave  the
        country and travel to the United Kingdom. It was not found credible
        that  the  Sudanese  security  services  would  return  the  family
        passports in the circumstances alleged [42].


    10. Judge Levin also found the first Appellant's account of her ability
        to depart through Khartoum International Airport on  24th  December
        2012 with her five  children  using  their  own  passports  without
        attracting adverse attention to lack credibility; even taking  into
        account the claim an agent was used to facilitate  their  departure
        and that they were travelling on diplomatic  passports.  The  first
        Appellant's own evidence was that they had  been  photographed  and
        fingerprinted on arrival at  Khartoum  Airport  and  therefore  her
        claim she was able to leave without any problems was  found  to  be
        more incredible [43].


    11. The claim that on the  evening  of  18th  December  2012,  the  day
        following her husband's arrest, her husband's brother together with
        her husband's parents and her parents decided the first  Appellants
        three daughters had to be circumcised  and  made  arrangements  for
        this to happen on 28th December 2012 was found not to  be  credible
        as it was  not  found  credible  that  they  would  prioritise  the
        circumcision over and above the welfare of  the  first  Appellant's
        husband. It was found this element  of  the  claim  was  fabricated
        [44].



Discussion



    12. There are two elements to this claim the first of which is that the
        first Appellant and the children are at risk of  persecution  as  a
        result of an imputed adverse political opinion  due  to  the  first
        Appellants husband  having  been  arrested  in  Sudan  due  to  his
        involvement in a failed coup which took place on 22nd November 2012
        and, secondly, as a result of the risk to her daughters  from  both
        families of being subjected to FGM.


    13. In relation to  failed  asylum  seekers,  in  HGMO  (Relocation  to
        Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006]  UKAIT  00062  the  Tribunal  found  that
        neither involuntary returnees nor failed asylum seekers nor persons
        of military age (including draft evaders and deserters) are as such
        at real risk on return to Khartoum which is a finding not  affected
        by the decision in AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-  relocation)  Sudan  CG
        [2009] UKAIT 00056.


    14. Following the error of law hearing a further bundle of evidence has
        been provided, albeit that it was not seen by Mr Harrison until the
        day of the hearing.  He  was,  however,  given  time  to  read  the
        material and did  not  make  application  for  the  hearing  to  be
        adjourned to allow for further consideration of the  evidence.  The
        evidence contained within the bundle, which was filed out of  time,
        was admitted in the interests of justice. That evidence includes  a
        further witness statement from the first Appellant stating that her
        sister arranged for a lawyer, by the  name  of  Mr  Grashi  Mhmouad
        Salih, to represent her husband.  She confirms an issue  raised  at
        the error of law hearing regarding  BBC  press  reports  indicating
        that some of  those  involved  in  the  coup  have  been  released,
        although she asserts that her husband is still in prison. There  is
        a statement and  other  documents  from  the  lawyer  in  which  he
        confirms  his  instructions  on  behalf  of  the  first  Appellants
        husband, that some defendants who were arrested have benefited from
        an amnesty issued by the President and been released, but that some
        remain  in  detention  including  the  first  Appellant's   husband
        awaiting a court hearing date.  The documents  indicate  the  first
        Appellant's husband is detained at Kober Prison in Khartoum North.


    15. There is also a country  expert  report  dated  20th  January  2014
        prepared by Peter Verney.  This  is  a  report  prepared  at  short
        notice and following an interview with the first Appellant  at  her
        home. Mr Verney confirms that he has seen the  documents  from  the
        lawyer but is unable to verify beyond doubt that it was  issued  by
        that particular lawyer due to the shortage of time. Due to the time
        available he was also unable  to  confirm  independently  that  the
        first Appellant's husband was  detained  although  his  profile  is
        similar to those known to have been involved in the coup [16].


    16. Mr Verney confirms that not all detainees involved in the coup have
        been freed and that those that were freed were mainly released  for
        publicity purposes [17] He also states that due to the limited time
        available he is unable to establish independently whether the first
        Appellants husband is still in prison, he does  not  know  if  such
        corroboration would be possible, and that the most reliable  source
        of evidence appears to be the Sudanese lawyer acting for the  first
        Appellant's husband [21].


    17. Mr Verney notes the reference in the  lawyer's  letter,  and  first
        Appellant's statement, of the possible transfer of her  husband  to
        the El Fasher prison, North Darfur, which he states is ominous  and
        consistent with the regimes known treatment of political  detainees
        [21]  and  which  indicates  likely  long-term   incarceration   in
        challenging conditions as the prison  has  been  used  for  holding
        political dissidents since the regime came to power [23].


    18. The report also refers to the NISS and their ill-treatment of those
        who come to their adverse attention and to the fact  their  victims
        have neither protection nor the likelihood of legal redress.


    19. Mr Verney's conclusions are as follows:


              20. [HAMI] appears to have become a target of serious  adverse
                  attention by the Sudanese authorities  by  reason  of  her
   husband's               alleged involvement in a coup plot.


              21. In this case the appellant  gave  responses  in  interview
   which I regard                   as indicative of the likely authenticity
   of her account. Her statement                 gives an account of  events
   which is essentially in  line  with  the                        available
   evidence.


              22. She would be taken for interrogation  on  arrival  by  the
   security                     forces, which interview  all  such  returned
   asylum seekers.


              23. The fact of her having applied for asylum will be held  up
   as evidence                  of disloyalty to Sudan,  which  would  leave
   her liable to charges  of                   defamation  and  serve  as  a
   pretext for persecutory acts.


              24. Relocation inside Sudan is not a safe or realistic option.


    20. The Respondent has provided copies of the application for the visit
        visas to the United  Kingdom  made  to  the  Consulate  General  in
        Istanbul. They relate to the applications for  each  family  member
        and have been submitted as they state that  the  first  Appellant's
        husband will be travelling with them.


    21.  Having  considered  the  evidence  in  the  round,   the   adverse
        credibility  findings  recorded  by  Judge  Levin   regarding   the
        plausibility of the claim that the first Appellant's husband  would
        have put her and his children at risk of ill-treatment by returning
        them to Sudan just because he wished  to  visit  his  mother,  when
        information of the failed coup would have been known to  him  as  a
        result of the  particular  nature  of  his  employment  within  the
        Sudanese hierarchy, are sustainable findings.  It is possible  that
        when the application of  the  visit  visas  was  made  it  was  the
        intention of all the family to travel to  the  United  Kingdom.   I
        find that it has not been established  on  the  evidence  that  the
        first Appellant and the  children  returned  to  Sudan  where  they
        suffered ill-treatment.  This element of the  claim  has  not  been
        substantiated.


    22. The fact the first Appellant and the children  did  not  return  to
        Sudan but travelled to the United Kingdom does not, per se,  create
        a risk on return but as Judge Levin identified, the credibility  of
        the claim that her  husband  has  been  arrested  and  detained  is
        relevant to the assessment of risk.


    23. The report of Mr Verney quite properly contains its own  statements
        regarding the limited weight that can be given  to  the  report  in
        light of the lack of time that he had to complete his instructions.
         He specifically states that the best source  of  evidence  is  the
        statement from the advocate and there  was  no  application  by  Mr
        Harrison for an adjournment to allow further enquiries to  be  made
        in light of the late service of this evidence.   Having  considered
        the evidence in the round, and the preserved findings, and applying
        the lower standard applicable to appeals of this nature I find  the
        first Appellant  has  substantiated  her  claim  that  her  husband
        returned to Sudan where he was detained and where he  is  currently
        being held by the authorities.  This  is  in  accordance  with  the
        finding in paragraph 40 of Judge Levin's determination.


    24. There are two consequences of this finding the first  of  which  is
        that if the family are now returned they will  return  without  the
        protection of the first Appellant's husband who is said to strongly
        oppose the wish of the extended family to subject the  three  girls
        to FGM. The second consequence is that the first Appellant will  be
        returned as the wife of a person who is being held as he is thought
        to hold views adverse to the interests of  the  government  and  to
        pose a threat to them. They may be returned using their  diplomatic
        passports which will clearly identify a status not held by ordinary
        failed asylum seekers being returned on emergency travel  documents
        or ordinary Sudanese passports.


    25. It is not disputed that the first Appellant will be  questioned  on
        arrival and may be detained for additional questioning to ascertain
        whether she was involved in the coup plot or to  obtain  additional
        intelligence or information to be used against her husband.  It  is
        not established that the children will  be  detained  as  they  are
        clearly too young but if their mother is detained it is likely they
        will be released into the custody of extended family members.


    26. If the first Appellant is suspected of being involved in a plot she
        is likely to be subjected to detention and treatment sufficient  to
        breach her Article 3 rights at the hands of the NISS, based upon Mr
        Verney's report and the country  material,  even  if  it  is  later
        established that she has no such adverse opinion or profile.


    27. If the children are released  into  the  custody  of  the  extended
        family  this  will  mean  they  will  effectively  be  denied   the
        protection of both their mother  and  father.  It  is  a  preserved
        finding that their mother has type 3 FGM which is the most  serious
        form thereof and which involved the removal of part or all  of  the
        labia minora with  the  labia  majora  having  been  sewn  together
        covering the urethra and  vagina.   Expert  evidence  from  medical
        professionals confirms  that  the  first  Appellant  had  been  de-
        infibulated when she got married although evidence of the  FGM  she
        suffered is still present.


    28. In relation to the issue of FGM: in FM (FGM) Sudan CG (2007)  UKAIT
        00060 the Tribunal found that significant action is being taken  in
        Sudan, both within government and by NGOs, to combat  the  practice
        of female genital mutilation in all its forms. Legal sanctions are,
        however, unlikely to be applied where a woman has been subjected by
        her family to FGM. There is in general no  real  risk  of  a  woman
        being subjected to FGM at the instigation of persons  who  are  not
        family members.  As  a  general  matter,  the  risk  of  FGM  being
        inflicted on an unmarried woman will depend on the attitude of  her
        family, most particularly her parents but  including  her  extended
        family. A woman who comes from an educated family and/or  a  family
        of high social status is as such less likely to  experience  family
        pressure to submit to FGM. It is, however, not possible to say that
        such a background will automatically lead to a finding that she  is
        not at real risk.  The risk of FGM  from  extended  family  members
        will depend  on  a  variety  of  factors,  including  the  age  and
        vulnerability of the woman concerned, the attitude and  whereabouts
        of her parents and the location and "reach" of the extended family.
        If a woman's parents are opposed to FGM, they will normally be in a
        position to ensure that she does not marry  a  man  who  (or  whose
        family) is in favour of it, regardless of  the  attitude  of  other
        relatives of the woman concerned.


    29. The risk of  FGM  from  extended  family  members  appears  on  the
        evidence to be a 'real risk'.  The three female children are of  an
        age where such acts are undertaken and if their mother  and  father
        are in detention the children will be extremely vulnerable, more so
        if those family  members  are  responsible  for  the  care  of  the
        children.


    30. I find on the evidence that the first Appellant  has  substantiated
        the claim that there is a real risk to the  three  female  children
        being subjected to FGM if returned to Sudan without the  protection
        of their parents.  I find this claim to be  substantiated  even  if
        the first Appellant is released after a relatively short period  of
        detention and resumes care of the  children,  as  the  evidence  is
        clearly that their father's presence  and  opposition  has  perhaps
        been the determinative factor, when combined  with  their  mother's
        opposition, in preventing this happening to date.


    31. If the three female children are entitled to refugee status on this
        basis their siblings are entitled to remain on  the  basis  of  the
        close family connection and the fact those children cannot be  left
        in the United Kingdom on their own. Their mother is  their  primary
        career and so she too must succeed in line, on section 55/Article 8
        grounds if nothing else, although I have noted authority indicating
        that it is arguable that the fear of  ones  female  children  being
        subjected to FGM on return may amount to persecution - see  FM(FGM)
        Sudan CG 2007  UKAIT  00060  in  which  it  was  said,  in  similar
        circumstances that "Given the first appellant's abhorrence of  FGM,
        any infliction of it upon either of  her  daughters  is,  we  find,
        reasonably likely to have so profound  an  effect  upon  the  first
        appellant as to amount to the  infliction  on  her  of  persecutory
        harm". The  Respondent  will  have  to  consider  this  issue  when
        determining the nature of the leave the first Appellant is entitled
        to as this was not an issue specifically addressed before me.


    32. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal is in respect  of  each
        appellant. The three female children and possibly their mother  are
        entitled to be recognised as refugees. The two  male  children  are
        entitled to remain in line with the leave granted to  their  mother
        as they too are dependent upon her as their primary carer and it is
        not in the best interests of any of the children for  the  siblings
        to be separated.

Decision

    33. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I remake the
        decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    34. I continue the anonymity order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure     (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 20th March 2014





