
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01178/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 18 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR RLY
                      (anonymity directioN MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lobo  which  appears  to
         have been promulgated on 4 July 2014, (although there is  no  clear
         indication of when it was promulgated on the face of  the  copy  of
         the determination that is in the bundle before us).  The appeal  is
         brought with the permission of Judge Macleman in the Upper Tribunal
         granted on 6 October 2014. We shall refer to the  parties  as  "the
         Secretary of State" and "the appellant" to avoid confusion.

      2. This case has a history, in that the decision under appeal was  the
         second determination to be made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
         original determination of  the  appeal  had  been  adverse  to  the
         appellant, but that determination was quashed and  the  matter  was
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. This  time
         the Tribunal allowed the appeal.

      3.  The  determination  is  relatively  short.  It  only  runs  to  27
         paragraphs. The  main  ground  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State
         challenges it is that there is an inadequacy  of  reasoning  and  a
         failure to engage with the country guidance case of  GJ  Sri  Lanka
         [2013] UKUT 00319 as approved by the  subsequent  decision  of  the
         Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  It is fair to say that there is no
         reference  to  either  of  those  cases  on   the   face   of   the
         determination, but for reasons that we will explain in due  course,
         it is quite clear to  us  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  the
         country guidance well in mind.

      4. The salient passages are paragraphs 23 and 24 of the determination.
         Paragraph 23 contains  the  Tribunal's  key  fact-findings.  It  is
         important to bear in mind that the first four facts that were found
         by the Tribunal and listed in paragraph 23 were matters  that  were
         accepted by the Secretary of State in the original  decision  under
         challenge.  These were parts of the appellant's own  account.   The
         Secretary of State agreed that he was arrested on 15  January  2012
         because weapons were found in a storeroom in a shop which he  owned
         and from which he traded; that he was blindfolded after his  arrest
         when he arrived at the Palligoda police station; that he  was  then
         driven from the police  station  to  another  place  where  he  was
         detained; and that he was arrested, blindfolded and transported  to
         that place.

      5. The appellant's account up to that juncture was consistent and that
         was the reason why the Secretary of State accepted it as  truthful.
         What the Secretary of State did not accept  was  the  alleged  ill-
         treatment after he was taken from the police station, to which  the
         appellant had testified. However, on the face of the  determination
         at paragraph 23 the Tribunal found that the  appellant  did  suffer
         such ill-treatment consisting of being made to stand on ice,  being
         hung upside down by his toes and being beaten with  batons  two  or
         three times a week.  Notwithstanding  the  absence  of  any  scars,
         there was  an  Ayurveda  medical  certificate  from  an  indigenous
         traditional orthopaedic physician, Dr Ranasinghe,  which  evidenced
         that the appellant received medical treatment for severe contusions
         to his face, spinal area, and legs.

      6. The Tribunal also made the findings that the appellant was released
         from detention on 18 February 2012 as a result of a bribe that  had
         been paid to the police by his uncle on condition that he  reported
         regularly, and that he did  report  on  two  occasions  between  18
         February and 4 March 2012 but  he  did  not  report  from  4  March
         onwards until the date when he left Sri Lanka on  22  April.   Most
         importantly, the Tribunal noted that information was obtained  from
         a Sri Lankan attorney-at-law, Mr Iman, which confirmed that a  case
         had been filed against the appellant on terrorism charges  relating
         to the possession of weapons and that an arrest warrant was  issued
         on 19 February 2013 because the appellant did not appear on 28  May
         2012.

      7. Pausing there, that evidence about the arrest warrant  is  entirely
         consistent with the fact that  when  the  appellant  was  initially
         arrested, it was because weapons were found in  a  storeroom  in  a
         shop which he owned and from which he  traded  (all  of  which  the
         Secretary of State  accepted).  It  is  also  consistent  with  his
         ceasing to report to the authorities, which the Tribunal had  found
         as a fact. Therefore the appellant's  account  is  both  inherently
         plausible and consistent from beginning to end.

      8. In paragraph 24 the First-tier Tribunal reached the conclusion that
         the appellant had persuaded it to the requisite  standard  that  he
         had suffered ill-treatment in Sri Lanka, and  that  it  was  highly
         probable that he would receive further  ill-treatment  if  he  were
         returned to Sri Lanka, in a manner which would engage  the  Refugee
         Convention.  The reasons  given  for  reaching  that  decision  are
         brief.  The Tribunal states that it has taken into account the  low
         standard of proof, and the consistency of the appellant's  account,
         which has been accepted by the respondent on a number  of  matters.
         Then it states as follows:

             "There is no plausible reason why the appellant's  account  of
             ill-treatment  should  not  be  accepted,  nor  is  there  any
             plausible reason, when looked at in the round, why the medical
             evidence and the evidence of the Sri Lankan attorney, Mr Iman,
             should not  be  accepted  as  confirming  and  supporting  the
             appellant's consistent account of ill-treatment."

      9. That is effectively all the reasoning  given  for  those  findings,
         because in paragraph 25 the Tribunal  goes  on  to  say:  "For  the
         reasons stated above, I find that the appellant has discharged  the
         burden of proof to establish that he is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
         asylum."

     10. The question for us is  whether  in  context  of  the  prior  fact-
         findings made in paragraph  23  that  reasoning  is  sufficient  to
         sustain that conclusion or whether there  is  an  insufficiency  of
         reasoning such as to amount to a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         determination.

     11. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Tufan sought to persuade  us
         that the reasoning is deficient.  He accepted that reasons need not
         be extensive if they make sense, but he submitted that there is  no
         link  between  the  fact-findings  and  the  conclusions  that  the
         Tribunal has drawn from them. As to the  fact-findings  themselves,
         there was no real explanation given by the Tribunal as to  why  the
         appellant's evidence of ill-treatment and that he was at risk if he
         returned to Sri Lanka in future had been accepted.

     12. We disagree. It is clear from reading paragraph 24 in  the  context
         of paragraph 23, that what the Tribunal is  saying,  (albeit  in  a
         slightly elliptical way) is that it is accepting the appellant as a
         witness of truth, bearing in mind the fact that his account of what
         had happened to him in Sri Lanka was accepted to be consistent  and
         truthful even by the respondent, at least as  regards  its  salient
         early features, and because there was no reason to  disbelieve  the
         rest of that account; but more to the point, also because there was
         independent evidence to support his account  in  the  form  of  the
         medical evidence from the doctor and the evidence of the  attorney.
         The Tribunal found that there was "no reason for it to reject" that
         other evidence,  i.e.  that  it  had  no  basis  for  doubting  its
         veracity, despite the absence of scarring.  If  that  evidence  was
         accepted as truthful, as it was because the Tribunal found no  good
         reason  to  doubt  it,  then  it  provided  important   independent
         corroboration of the appellant's evidence.

     13. It is the evidence  of  the  attorney  in  particular  that  is  of
         importance in this case, because of the country guidance.  In GJ it
         is made clear that among those who are held  to  be  at  particular
         risk of ill-treatment on return to  Sri  Lanka,  as  summarised  in
         paragraph (7)(d) of the headnote, are:

             "A person whose name appears upon a computerised  'stop'  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  'stop'  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

     14. Although the Tribunal made no explicit reference to GJ, its finding
         that an arrest warrant had been issued for the appellant  and  that
         the arrest  warrant  was  on  terrorism  charges  relating  to  the
         possession of weapons, coupled with the finding that there had been
         previous ill-treatment after he had  been  arrested  in  connection
         with the finding of  those  weapons  in  his  shop,  is  more  than
         sufficient to fall within that paragraph  of  the  headnote  in  GJ
         (which accurately reflects what was said in  paragraph  63  of  the
         determination of the Upper Tribunal in that case).

     15. For  those  reasons,  although  we  consider  it  would  have  been
         desirable for the First-tier Tribunal to have elaborated  a  little
         more on its reasoning  and  made  it  explicit  that  the  relevant
         country guidance was being considered and applied, we find that the
         reasoning was sufficient to support the determination, and that  it
         is obvious that the Tribunal was paying due regard to that guidance
         in reaching its conclusions. Neither the  brevity  of  the  reasons
         given nor the failure to make express reference to GJ amount  to  a
         material error of law in this determination. In  consequence,  this
         appeal by the Secretary of State must be dismissed.


    Notice of Decision
    We find no material error of law in the determination.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






    Signed [pic]Date 14th November 2014


    Mrs Justice Andrews
