
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|on 14th July 2014                             |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Ali of hallidayreeves law firm.
For the Respondent: Mr Kingham - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Cope promulgated on 11th April 2014 in which he dismissed, on
        all grounds, the appeal against the removal direction to Iran  that
        accompanied the refusal of the Appellant's claim for asylum.


     2. The Appellant is an Iranian national born in 1991.  There  are  two
        strands to his claim to be entitled to  a  grant  of  international
        protection, the first relating to an alleged risk on the  basis  of
        an actual  or  perceived  adverse  political  profile  relating  to
        activities on behalf of the PJAK, which the Judge did not  find  to
        be credible for reasons set out in  paragraphs  24  to  45  of  the
        determination.  These are conclusions that have not been  shown  to
        be susceptible to any credible legal challenge.


     3. The second head of claim relates to risk arising  from  an  alleged
        conversion from Islam to Christianity.  The  Judge  considered  the
        evidence with the required degree of  care,  including  the  limits
        upon the evidence made available for him to consider. In  paragraph
        51 of the determination,  to  which  Ms  Ali  referred  me  at  the
        hearing, the Judge states:


     51.  I consider it unfortunate to say the least that  Mr  Mazahari  was
   not            able to attend the hearing of the appeal .   I  am  afraid
   that I do               consider it significant that despite the messages
   apparently being             relayed through  Mrs  Langley  that  he  was
   indeed attending, and that            he was on his way to North Shields,
   he failed to arrive.  Of even             more concern to me is that  not
   only was there no explanation on the          day as to why  he  had  not
   attended,  but  [there]   has   been   none                  subsequently
   forthcoming.


     4. This witness, in his witness statement, claimed  to  have  met  the
        Appellant in Greece when he was  acting  as  a  church  worker  and
        claimed the Appellant attended church and had regular contact  with
        him.  In paragraph 52 of the determination the Judge  records  that
        he was unable to place any weight on the statement of this  witness
        as his absence without any explanation cast  an  adverse  light  on
        that part of the Appellant's claim regarding  Christianity,  namely
        that he was interested in the Christian faith in Greece. The  Judge
        also notes that there was considerable  documentation  relating  to
        the absent witnesses from  Greece  but  no  such  documentation  in
        relation to the Appellant, not even a letter  from  the  church  as
        there was for the witness, confirming his attendance.


     5. The Judge considered the  material  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and set out his analysis of that evidence and  the
        weight that he was prepared  to  attached  to  such  material.   In
        paragraph 80 of the determination the Judge finds:


     80.  In this case I  can  go  further.   Although  I  accept  that  the
   Appellant has           been through a  ceremony  of  public  baptism  at
   Stockton Parish                  Church, and that  he  does  attend  that
   church on a very regular basis,           whilst I do accept that it is a
   possibility I am not satisfied that it is              reasonably  likely
   that his espousal the Christian  faith  is  genuine;  and            that
   consequently  if  he  were  returned  to  Iran  that  he  would  wish  to
   continue with that faith or to give any public expression to it.


     6. The grounds on which permission  to  appeal  was  sought  challenge
        certain specific elements of the determination  but  on  the  whole
        amount to no more than a disagreement with  the  Judge's  findings.
        The grounds contain specific comment upon  paragraph  51  asserting
        that Jobcentre Plus allocate  tightly  regulated  appointments  and
        that  it  would  not  have  been  possible   to   deviate   without
        considerable difficulties to  access  an  alternative  appointment,
        which is the explanation for the failure of the witness to  attend.
        This  is  combined   with   an   assertion   the   Judge   attached
        disproportionate weight to such failure.



Error of law finding


     7. At the hearing Miss Ali accepted that the real nature of the
        challenge being made to the determination was an attempt to try and
        secure for the Appellant a further hearing to allow him the
        opportunity to appear with his witness. Whilst such honesty is to
        be commended, no legal error has been established in the way the
        Judge dealt with this aspect of the case on the day.  The witness
        had filed a witness statement but failed to attend at the time
        appointed for the hearing.  The Judge records in paragraph 7 of the
        determination that the Appellant's representative made enquiries
        and informed the Judge that the witness had told her that he needed
        to go to Jobcentre Plus and to the bank to sort out various
        practical arrangements following a recent grant of immigration
        status for him on 5th March 2014.  The Judge records that at his
        suggestion the representative undertook further enquiries to see
        whether the witness could attend the hearing instead of his
        appointment or complete his business as soon as possible and then
        come to the hearing thereafter, which the Judge was advised he had
        agreed too and on which basis the Judge indicated that he would be
        prepared to be flexible in terms of timing to enable the witness to
        give his evidence after lunch if required [8].


     8. Notwithstanding such an approach, and stated flexibility, when the
        case resumed at 2 PM there was no sign of the witness and nor did
        the representative have any explanation to put forth as to why he
        had not yet arrived. The Appellant's representative indicated that
        she wanted to go ahead with the case by moving to submissions from
        the Presenting Officer, the oral evidence having been otherwise
        concluded before lunch [9].


     9. Not only did the Judge provided ample opportunity for the witness
        to be contacted and provide flexibility within the timetable for
        the hearing, when the witness failed to attend without explanation
        it was the Appellant's own advocate who invited the Judge to
        proceed rather than make an adjournment request for the matter to
        go part heard and return to the Tribunal on a later occasion.
        There is no procedural unfairness in this case as the Judge was
        entitled to proceed as he did on the basis of the invitation from
        the Appellant's own representative and the facts as stated. There
        is still no adequate explanation for why the witness failed to
        attend if he genuinely wished to come along to support the
        Appellant. There is no evidence that the Jobcentre Plus are so
        inflexible with their appointments that alternative arrangements
        could not have been made to allow the witness to attend the hearing
        on the stated date if he genuinely wanted to do so. The fact he did
        not, the fact no adequate explanation was provided, and the fact
        the Appellant's representative invited the Judge to proceed in such
        circumstances, is very relevant.


    10. The grounds on which permission to appeal was sought fail to
        disclose any arguable material legal error in the determination.
        The Judge considered the evidence with the required degree of
        anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for the findings
        that he made, which are within the range of permissible findings on
        the evidence.


    11. If the Appellant has fresh evidence that has come to light, such as
        the documents served upon the Tribunal on the day of the hearing,
        which were not before the Secretary of State when the application
        was made he maybe able to make a fresh claim although this is a
        matter upon which he will need to take proper legal advice.


    12. I find the Appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof
        upon him to the required standard to show that Judge Cope made any
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    13. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 15th July 2014












