
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01150/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 2 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGES DEANS & MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   LING LI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 6 January 2015, who sought
    asylum in the UK.

 2. In her decision dated 6 January 2015, the respondent declined to accept
    that the appellant had been a practising Christian in  China,  or  that
    she  fled  after  the  authorities  interrupted  an  illegal  religious
    gathering; accepted that she had become a Jehovah's Witness in the  UK;
    and held that she would not be at risk of persecution on account of her
    religion if she returned to China.  (The application was  also  refused
    on other grounds, which are no longer live.)

 3. By letter dated 2 April 2015 the  respondent  withdrew  her  concession
    that the appellant is a Jehovah's Witness.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    by a determination, with 2 appendices, promulgated on 11 June 2015.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds dispute the adverse credibility  findings,  beginning  with  an
    alleged error based on a "structural failing" of  reaching  an  adverse
    credibility finding without reference to corroborating  evidence.   The
    grounds further assert that the judge lapsed into  speculation,  failed
    to deal with the appellant's submissions, and  failed  to  engage  with
    proposition (2) at section (8) of written submissions.

 6. Permission to appeal was given on 28 August 2015.  The  judge  granting
    permission was concerned that the FtT  judge  had  not  summarised  the
    evidence heard.  He thought that the judge might have erred by  failing
    to demonstrate that he considered the background evidence before making
    findings of fact, and by seeking corroboration.

 7. The point taken at 8(2) of the written submissions is an  alleged  risk
    on return as a failed asylum seeker.  This argument is not  dealt  with
    in the determination, but it is far-fetched and unsubstantiated, and Mr
    Devlin did not pursue it.  He acknowledged at the outset that the judge
    did set out the appellant's evidence quite fully, in appendix 1 to  the
    determination.  He accepted that it would be difficult to say the judge
    fell into the error of seeking corroboration,  given  the  clear  self-
    direction on that point at paragraph 65.

 8. Mr Devlin presented the argument by reference  to  the  authorities  on
    "structural error" (Mibanga [2005] INLR 377, S  [2007]  Imm  AR  1,  HH
    [2007] EWCA Civ 306, and ND (Togo) [2007] EWCA Civ 1431)  and  took  us
    carefully through the order and format in which the judge set  out  his
    conclusions.  He aimed to  persuade  us  that  the  judge  conclusively
    rejected the appellant's account by way  of  artificial  separation  of
    particular findings, and not on the evidence as a whole.

 9. In view of the decision which we  have  reached,  we  do  not  need  to
    dissect the determination in detail.  It  is  written  in  the  judge's
    usual inimitable and idiosyncratic  style,  but  we  do  not  think  it
    contains an overall structural error.

10. We were  concerned,  as  submissions  developed,  by  three  particular
    passages in the determination.

11. At paragraphs 106 - 108 the judge deals with an  expert  report  by  Dr
    Barker, Professor  Emeritus  of  Sociology  at  the  London  School  of
    Economics.  He says that when writing her report Dr Barker:

         "[107] ... then believed that the respondent had conceded that  the
         appellant was a  Jehovah's  Witness  [and  so]  had  no  reason  to
         critically  assess  the  appellant's  related  claims  and  broadly
         accepted them per report section C (pages 23-28).   Dr  Barker  was
         not asked to provide a revised  report  after  the  respondent  had
         withdrawn that concession.  In any event, it is the  duty  of  this
         Tribunal to decide whether or not the  appellant's  various  claims
         are credible.

         [108] I have previously found that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
         provide reliable evidence that she was a Christian in China  or  in
         the UK ... "

12. Some  of  the  report  does  trespass  into  the  Tribunal's  field  of
    credibility, arguing points which are for a judge and  not  an  expert.
    However, it is wrong to suggest that the report contained  no  critical
    assessment of the claims.  That is  the  purpose  of  section  C.   Not
    everything said there is outside the expert area.  There  is  pertinent
    comment on why the  division  of  Christianity  between  Catholics  and
    Protestants might not be prominent in China, and  why  the  distinction
    between Trinitarians and non-Trinitarians might be more obvious to  the
    appellant.

13. We are also concerned that the statement, "I have previously found that
    the appellant has  failed  to  provide  reliable  evidence",  at  least
    suggests an error of reaching a negative conclusion,  then  looking  to
    see if other evidence might displace it.

14. At paragraph 78 the judge comments on the absence of evidence from  the
    appellant's husband.  That is a matter which a judge  might  reasonably
    treat as adverse to credibility, but he goes on:

         "... those circumstances indicate (prima facie) that he declined to
         provide such corroboration because it would be dishonest for him to
         do so and such dishonesty would be discovered if he attempted to do
         so."

15. At paragraphs 115-116 the judge takes that approach further.  He  finds
    it particularly significant (emphasised thus, by bold type, italics and
    underlining) that the appellant failed to provide evidence from pastors
    or members of  the  Kingdom  Hall  to  support  her  claims  of  weekly
    attendance.  He  explains  why  he  does  not  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation of the absence of such evidence.   No  criticism  has  been
    made of his reasoning to that point, but he continues:

         "The absence of such evidence raises the presumption that  (if  the
         appellant had asked them) Kingdom Hall  pastors  or  members  would
         have declined to provide evidence to support the appellant's claims
         ... because it would have been dishonest to provide such  evidence.
         That is a rebuttable presumption.   But  that  presumption  remains
         sound because the appellant has failed to provide reliable evidence
         which rebuts it."

16. Mr Devlin said that there is no authority for  a  presumption  of  that
    nature.  We indicated that we were not aware  of  any  such  authority.
    Nor was Mrs O'Brien.

17. A Rule 24 response for the respondent submits as  follows:  this  is  a
    very lengthy and comprehensive determination,  giving  cogent  reasons,
    and clearly holistic; a particular observation by the  judge  which  is
    criticised in the grounds,  paragraph  83,  based  on  the  appellant's
    incentives to make a false  claim,  played  no  material  part  in  the
    overall assessment and was in any event a finding open  to  the  judge;
    the findings based on absence of evidence were  also  sustainable;  the
    judge provided "a plethora of reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim"; the grounds are only re-argument.

18. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the Rule 24 response hit  the  nail  on  the
    head, and that there were numerous well-made adverse credibility points
    in the determination.  Properly read,  it  did  not  separate  out  its
    conclusions and approached the case as a whole.  The expert report  was
    not focussed on the credibility of the appellant but on risk on return,
    predicated on accepting the appellant was telling the truth.  While the
    passages from the determination which we have  quoted  above  might  be
    overstated, they did not taint the  determination  as  a  whole.   They
    could safely be read out, and the same outcome  would  inevitably  have
    been reached.

19. We reserved our determination.

20. We  find  that  the  determination  falls  down  at  the  three  places
    mentioned.   Paragraph 108 reads as  if  conclusions  were  reached  in
    isolation from the report.  The determination does  contain  many  well
    made adverse credibility points, and that particular failure might  not
    have been enough for  it  to  be  set  aside,  but  paragraphs  78  and
    especially 116 go more seriously wrong.   Failure  to  produce  obvious
    evidence is often a good reason  for  finding  that  an  appellant  has
    failed to establish her case to the necessary standard, but it  is  not
    proof positive that she is lying.  There is  no  legal  presumption  as
    stated by the judge.  He is so emphatic in making and in founding  upon
    this error that we do not think the determination can safely stand.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    Tribunal chosen to  reconsider  the  case  are  not  to  include  Judge
    D'Ambrosio.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           4 November 2015
