
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01214/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 9 May 2013                                 |On 14 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Muhammad Imtiaz

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Rahman and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This appeal was last before me on 12 October 2012, following  which  on
    the  following  day  I  prepared  a  document  entitled  "Decision  and
    Directions" which was sent to the parties around the end of October.  I
    noted in this Decision that this appeal  had  an  unfortunate  history,
    which I set out.

 2. I summarised the appellant's claim and also the unfortunate chronology,
    including the fact that on previous occasions the  respondent  had  not
    been represented and so  neither  had  the  appellant's  evidence  been
    properly tested, nor had the respondent's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim been properly argued.

 3. I do not propose in this determination to repeat what  I  have  already
    set out, but I rely  upon  all  the  matters  set  out  in  my  earlier
    Decision.

 4. In my earlier Decision, while I expressed my  reservations  as  to  the
    findings of fact which had been made  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    claim by First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell,  particularly  because  the
    respondent did not make arguments which could have been  made  and  did
    not present evidence which might have  been  available,  nonetheless  I
    considered that these findings could not  properly  be  set  aside.   I
    repeat what I wrote at paragraph 47 of this Decision:

         "This is essentially a reviewing Tribunal; findings of fact made by
         the First-tier Tribunal should not be interfered with unless it can
         be shown that these findings  are  not  sustainable  because  of  a
         material error of law.  While it is  possible  (or  even  probable)
         that had the respondent's case been put more  effectively  (and  in
         particular had the records of all interviews  referred  to  in  the
         reasons for refusal been put  before  the  Tribunal,  and  had  the
         respondent been represented so that the appellant could  be  cross-
         examined effectively)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  might  have  been
         persuaded to make different credibility findings, on the  basis  of
         the material before him, the findings of fact which [the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge] made were open to him, and it  is  accordingly  not
         appropriate for this Tribunal to interfere with them, and certainly
         not so late in the day."

 5. Accordingly, at paragraph 48, I found as follows:

         "It follows that for the purposes of this  appeal,  I  must  accept
         that the facts have been found as follows.  The appellant  came  to
         this country in 2006, together with his wife, who was  pregnant  at
         the time (their first child being born only a  few  months  later).
         They came because they were frightened that  if  they  stayed  they
         would be at risk because of the matters set out in the  appellant's
         statement.  In September 2010, one of his  brothers-in-law  managed
         to arrange for a First Information Report to  be  initiated,  which
         contained false allegations that the appellant and his brother  had
         caused injury by firing a gun at him.  The appellant has been  told
         by a lawyer that it is not safe for him to return now."

 6. Then, at paragraph 49, I found that "for present purposes, I am obliged
    to and do accept that the  appellant's  account  of  what  occurred  in
    Pakistan is truthful, and that his brothers-in-law are still, some four
    years later, conspiring together to cause him harm".

 7. I found that Judge Russell (the First-tier Tribunal Judge)  's  finding
    that the appellant would not be at risk on  return  was  unsustainable,
    essentially because he had failed to make clear findings as to  whether
    the appellant could safely  relocate  internally.   I  found  that  the
    finding that internal relocation would be reasonable  was  sustainable.
    I also made a finding, at paragraph  52,  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's evidence, this appellant would be at risk on return to  his
    home area.  It followed that this Tribunal now needed to consider  only
    whether or not this appellant could safely relocate internally.

 8. To this end, I gave permission to both parties  were  to  make  further
    submissions and to adduce further background evidence directed  to  the
    issue of whether or not a First Information Report dishonestly obtained
    would be likely to be enforced anywhere in Pakistan.  I  also  directed
    that these submissions should address the issue of whether and to  what
    extent the initiation of a First Information Report would  require  the
    involvement of the  police  or  other  independent  government  agency,
    rather than just a complaint being made, and further whether,  if  this
    report was acted on outside the appellant's home area, there would be a
    real possibility that in consequence this appellant would  suffer  such
    serious harm that his Article 3 rights would be engaged.

 9. Following the service of this decision,  together  with  the  direction
    which were contained within this document, the  appellant's  solicitors
    filed with the Tribunal (and, I have been told,  sent  a  copy  to  the
    respondent) an expert report.  However, nothing was received on  behalf
    of the respondent.

10. Accordingly, On 25 March 2013, I gave further  directions,  which  were
    also served on the parties.  The parties were advised that this  appeal
    would be relisted for further oral submissions on 9 May  2013,  and  at
    paragraph 3, the following direction was made:

         "If the respondent still wishes to contest this appeal, in light of
         the further evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant, she must
         file with the Tribunal and serve on the respondent by no later than
         Friday,  12  April  2013,  a  skeleton  argument  setting  out  the
         submissions which will be relied upon at the hearing."

11. No such skeleton argument was filed with the Tribunal or served on  the
    respondent, either by Friday 12 April or by the date of the hearing.



The Hearing

12. At the hearing, I heard submissions which were made on behalf  of  both
    parties.   I  recorded  these  contemporaneously  in  the   Record   of
    Proceedings, and shall not repeat them word-for-word, but  shall  refer
    below only to such of  these  submissions  as  are  necessary  for  the
    purposes of  this  determination.   I  have,  however,  had  regard  to
    everything which was said to me during the course of this  hearing,  as
    well as to all the documents contained within the file.

13. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Martin  apologised  that  she  was  not
    prepared properly to argue this appeal on behalf of the respondent.  Mr
    Nath, who had represented the respondent before me on 12 October  2012,
    was unavailable to continue this case at this hearing.  He was  not  in
    the office on this day.  When the Tribunal observed that the notice  of
    hearing had been sent out to the parties on 4  April  2013,  some  five
    weeks ago, Ms Martin informed the Tribunal that she personally had only
    received the papers the previous day.  She also informed  the  Tribunal
    that neither my Decision and Directions, which had  been  sent  to  the
    parties at around the end of October 2012, nor my subsequent directions
    dated 25 March 2013, nor the expert report which had been served by the
    appellant, were contained within the respondent's file,  and  that  she
    had not seen any  of  these  documents.   She  applied  for  a  further
    adjournment, of two weeks, and undertook to  ensure  that  if  such  an
    adjournment  were  granted,  the  directions  which  the  Tribunal  had
    previously made would be complied with.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Gilbert opposed this  application.   The
    respondent had had adequate time in which to prepare for this  hearing,
    and as the Tribunal had already noted,  following  the  hearing  on  12
    October 2012, the respondent's earlier failure to produce evidence  for
    the purposes of this appeal had been raised.  Mr  Gilbert  also  relied
    upon the guidance given in the Rules.

15. I referred the parties to the relevant Rule dealing with adjournment of
    appeals, which is Rule  21  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, which provides as follows:

         "Adjournment of appeals

         This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum

         21(1)    Where a party applies for an adjournment of a  hearing  of
                an appeal, he must-

                (a)    if practicable, notify all other parties of the
                    application;

                (b)    show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and



                (c)    produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon in
                    support of the application.

           (2)    The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an  appeal  on
                the application of a party, unless satisfied that the appeal
                cannot otherwise be justly determined.

           (3)    The Tribunal must not, in particular, adjourn  a  hearing
                on the application of a party in order to  allow  the  party
                more time to produce evidence, unless satisfied that-

                (a)    the evidence relates to a matter in dispute in the
                    appeal;

                (b)    it would be unjust to determine the appeal without
                    permitting the party a further opportunity to produce
                    the evidence; and

                (c)    where the party has failed to comply with directions
                    for the production of the evidence, he has provided a
                    satisfactory explanation for that failure."

16. In response  to  a  question  from  the  Tribunal  as  to  whether  the
    respondent could provide a satisfactory explanation  for  the  apparent
    failure to comply with the directions which had been  given  previously
    for the production of evidence, Ms Martin submitted that the respondent
    did, or could, comply with other requirements set out within  Rule  21.
    In particular, it was likely that there would be evidence available  to
    contradict  what  was  contained  within  the  expert  report  and  the
    respondent wished to have the  opportunity  to  submit  such  evidence.
    However, Ms  Martin  accepted  that  the  respondent  did  not  have  a
    satisfactory explanation for her failure to comply with the  directions
    which had previously been given for  the  production  of  the  evidence
    which it was now hoped could be adduced.

17. When considering the adjournment request, I first consider  whether  or
    not there is a proper basis to conclude that the  documents  which  are
    not within the respondent's file could  somehow  not  have  been  sent.
    There is no basis upon which I can so find.  All  the  documents  which
    were sent by the Tribunal were received by the appellant's  solicitors,
    and there is no reason to doubt that these  documents  would  not  have
    been sent at the same time to the respondent.   These  are  my  earlier
    Decision and Directions and the further directions given  on  25  March
    2013.  Also, the appellant's expert report was properly filed with  the
    Tribunal, and I have no reason to doubt Mr Gilbert's statement  to  the
    Tribunal, on instructions, that this document was also  served  on  the
    respondent.  Also, very regrettably, I have to take account of the fact
    that this Tribunal  has  frequent  experience  of  the  respondent  not
    complying with directions which have been made and not  being  able  to
    locate documents which have been sent to the respondent in the  various
    files which are  provided  to  the  respondent's  Presenting  Officers.
    Accordingly, I considered the adjournment request on the basis that the
    respondent  was  properly  served  with  all  the  documents  to  which
    reference has been made above, and I so find.

18. I take account of the respondent's previous  conduct  in  this  appeal,
    which has been criticised already.  As  the  relevant  Rule  states  in
    terms that the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing on  the  application
    of a party in order to allow that party more time to  produce  evidence
    unless  satisfied  that  that  party  has   provided   a   satisfactory
    explanation for a previous failure to comply with  directions  for  the
    production of that evidence, there is no proper basis upon  which  this
    application  for  an  adjournment  could  be  granted.   I  accordingly
    informed the parties that the hearing would proceed.

19. Notwithstanding the direction that  I  had  previously  made  that  the
    respondent, if she wished to contest the appeal in light of the further
    evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant (being the expert report)
    must file with the Tribunal and  serve  on  the  appellant  a  skeleton
    argument, Mr Gilbert very properly did not object to Ms  Martin  making
    submissions with regard to the  expert  report,  founded  upon  country
    information which was already before the Tribunal.

20. Ms Martin having informed the Tribunal  that  she  would  be  available
    during the afternoon, I agreed to rise from this appeal  and  reconvene
    at 2pm, in order to allow her the opportunity to consider the  material
    she had not seen before the hearing and prepare her submissions.

21. As already indicated, I do not intend in this determination to set  out
    word-for-word the submissions which were made to  me.   However,  I  do
    record that Ms Martin accepted on  behalf  of  the  respondent  at  the
    outset that if the appellant relocated within  Pakistan,  he  would  be
    required to disclose his computerised  national  identity  card  (CNIC)
    number to any landlord, or in respect of any other official transaction
    which was carried out.  She accepted, in those circumstances,  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect this appellant to relocate without at
    least disclosing this number to some of the people with whom  he  would
    have to deal.

22. I accept  that  there  is  an  abundance  of  evidence  that  there  is
    considerable  corruption  within  the  Pakistan  police,  and  for  the
    purposes of this determination I also accept that there is at  least  a
    real possibility that the appellant's brothers-in-law, on the basis  of
    the findings of fact which have already been made, have  been  able  to
    bribe police officers within their locality.  Accordingly,  I  have  to
    consider  whether,  by  registering  within  another  locality   within
    Pakistan, this appellant would incur a real risk that  his  whereabouts
    would become known to his brothers-in-law, who wish him harm.



Respondent's Submissions

23. Ms Martin relied on the COI Report of 7 December 2012.  Although  every
    individual needed an individually numbered CNIC, and at  32.03  of  the
    COI Report the various documents required for the obtaining of  a  CNIC
    were set out,  there was no evidence that any public record was kept of
    a CNIC number.  Also, the respondent would rely on  what  was  said  at
    12.05, with regard to FIRs:

         "In a response to information request, date 4 November 2010, on the
         subject of First Information Reports, the Immigration  and  Refugee
         Board of  Canada  ...  reported  that,  in  correspondence  with  a
         representative of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) on
         8 October 2010, the HRCP representative stated '... while police in
         one area of Pakistan can become aware of an FIR against someone  in
         another area of the country,  they  generally  do  not  unless  the
         police in the original jurisdiction call attention to a  particular
         FIR as, for example,  in  a  case  that  is  particularly  serious,
         politicised, or subject to public attention or that requires police
         to more actively search for a suspect.' "

24. It was also important to note that there were four police forces within
    Pakistan, which were all independent entities.  There was  no  evidence
    that CNIC numbers were in the public domain.

25. Although the expert at paragraph 61 of her report  claims  that  it  is
    "highly likely that the police on the basis of the  FIR  or  those  who
    were after him would easily get  information  about  [the  appellant's]
    whereabouts in Pakistan through the NADRA",  it  was  the  respondent's
    submission that they could only do so if they had the  CNIC  number  in
    the first place.  In this case, the Tribunal should also note that when
    the appellant had moved to a village 80 miles  away,  even  though  his
    brother-in-law was then said to be "out to get him", and he had a  CNIC
    number, he did not experience any problems.  There was  no  reason  why
    the appellant should not again be able to relocate.

26. The appellant had been safe on two occasions in Pakistan, once for  two
    months and once for three months, and both times he would  have  had  a
    CNIC number and the police had always had links  with  the  appellant's
    brothers-in-law.

27. The Tribunal should also note that it is  now  seven  years  since  the
    appellant had left Pakistan, so if they were not bothered to  look  for
    him when he was in the country, there is no reason why they  should  be
    more interested in him now.

28. The Tribunal should also accept that there was no evidence  to  suggest
    that Karachi and other cities were now so dangerous as  to  warrant  an
    Article 15(c) argument.  Also, the appellant did not  necessarily  have
    to relocate to a major city.  There were a number of areas in  Pakistan
    where he could relocate to, such as a rural  area  or  a  smaller  city
    within the larger provinces.

29. In this case, any danger to the appellant would depend on  the  ability
    of his brothers-in-law to locate him.



Appellant's Submissions

30. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Gilbert relied upon  the  expert  report
    provided by Mrs Uzma Moeen, which addressed the questions of whether an
    FIR could be used to track someone down and  whether  this  would  give
    rise to a risk of imprisonment  even  if  it  was  false.   Mr  Gilbert
    submitted that there was evidence that  an  FIR  would  be  enforceable
    elsewhere in Pakistan, and so the real  question  was  whether  another
    police authority  would  know  of  the  existence  of  this  FIR.   The
    authorities were now bound to keep records  of  all  tenants  in  their
    localities (see para 58 of the report)  so  in  effect,  the  appellant
    would be at risk of discovery  through  the  operations  of  a  corrupt
    police force in Rawalpindi.  Whether or not the database  is  available
    publicly, it would be sufficient if it was  available  to  the  police,
    because there were dishonest police officers  involved.   Evidence  was
    given within the expert report of corruption within Pakistan.

31. The Tribunal should assess the risk to the appellant first on the basis
    that a finding exists that the appellant would be at risk in  his  home
    area.  That is that his brothers-in-law had a present intention  to  do
    him harm, and so  any  finding  as  to  the  availability  of  internal
    relocation must be consistent with that finding.  Next, with regard  to
    the appellant's previous history, during  the  earlier  periods  relied
    upon by the respondent, the  appellant  had  been  in  hiding  and  the
    evidence was that there had not been an FIR put out until  2010,  which
    post-dated these periods.  Therefore, the means of discovery  would  be
    more effective now.

32. Even if the appellant was to be taken into custody by  a  police  force
    outside  Rawalpindi,  there  remained  a  real  risk  of  mistreatment.
    Although there were various  anti-corruption  measures  in  force,  the
    expert had said at paragraphs 40-50  of  her  report  that  these  were
    ineffective.

33. In reply, Ms Martin referred the Tribunal to paragraph 12.06 of the COI
    Report, which said that there did not appear to be a national system to
    track FIRs.



Discussion

34. On the basis of the findings of fact which I have already accepted, and
    in light of Ms Moeen's expert report, I must first consider whether  or
    not there is a real likelihood that, if the appellant were to  relocate
    within Pakistan, the FIR would come to the attention of the authorities
    where he was.  It is argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that,  for
    reasons set out within the expert report, he would.  Before considering
    exactly what is said  within  this  report,  I  refer  to  the  country
    guidance decision in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216, where at paragraph 265 the Tribunal  found
    as follows:

         "As regards safety, we reject Mr Fripp's submission  that  wherever
         the appellant sought to move in Pakistan  the  authorities  or  her
         husband's family would track her down.  Mr Fripp has  properly  not
         suggested that someone in her position would be on any  centralised
         database and we can find no evidence to suggest that.   As  regards
         her  husband   and   his   family,   we   take   account   of   the
         interconnectedness of families in Pakistan.  Equally,  however,  we
         bear in mind the evidence indicating that (at least in the  private
         sector)   centres/refuges   generally    keep    their    locations
         confidential.  We consider that it is of material  importance  that
         Pakistan is a very large country geographically  and  has  a  large
         population, estimated in July 2008 as nearly 173,000,000, and  that
         there is no evidence to suggest that the state agencies either at a
         federal or provincial level hold sophisticated nationwide databases
         on their citizenry.  Whilst it appears that in some instances local
         police are told the names of women residing temporarily in  centres
         or refuges for  women,  victims  of  domestic  violence,  there  is
         insufficient evidence to show that this leads  to  persons  outside
         the local areas being able to access that information."

35. The Tribunal in KA did not have the benefit of Ms Moeen's  report,  but
    having read this report extremely  carefully,  together  with  the  COI
    Report of December 2012, I note that Ms Moeen does not in fact  say  in
    terms that because a tenant will have to give a landlord his  CNIC  and
    will have to verify this, this information would then  be  provided  to
    the local police, or that this  information  is  then  put  on  NADRA's
    database.  It is also clear from  the  COI  Report  that  there  is  no
    centralised database for FIRs.  I set out the  extract  from  paragraph
    12.06 of this COI Report:

         "On the same subject, the IRB recorded that in correspondence  with
         a Lahore-based lawyer on 6 October 2010, the lawyer stated:

             'There is no national system to track FIRs, and  there  is  no
             systematic coordination between various  police  organisations
             at inter-provincial level or inter-organisation level.  Police
             officers in one district will not be able to  know  about  the
             FIRs  registered  elsewhere  unless  a  circular   is   issued
             intimating them of offence and suspects.  So, unless police is
             really after the accused, and get orders to search  and  seize
             in other districts or provinces, the  accused  may  remain  at
             large.'"

36. It is notable that nowhere in her report does  Ms  Moeen  suggest  that
    local police would send information regarding tenants  who  have  moved
    into their locality, or their addresses,  to  NADRA.   Unless  they  do
    this, there is no basis upon which police in another area could get  to
    know that someone for whom they were looking could be  located.   There
    is absolutely no evidence provided by Ms Moeen (and  she  does  not  in
    fact suggest that this is the case) that any central record is kept  of
    these addresses, let alone that they are stored on  NADRA.   There  has
    been no evidence put before me to suggest that there is.

37. Although it was Mr Gilbert's submission that this was  in  effect  what
    the report said, on a close analysis it does  not.   If  Ms  Moeen  had
    wished to say (on the basis of evidence to which she was able to refer)
    either that FIRs are placed on a national  database  (contrary  to  the
    evidence referred at paragraph 12.06 of the COI) or  that  there  is  a
    national database in which addresses are collated with CNICs, she could
    have said so.  The fact that she did not is significant, because  there
    is no evidence that either is the case.  In  these  circumstances,  the
    appellant has not satisfied me even to the lower standard of proof that
    there is a realistic possibility that if he relocated elsewhere  within
    Pakistan, his whereabouts would come to the attention of his  brothers-
    in-law.

38. Even though I accept that the appellant would on a number of  occasions
    have to give his national identity card details, I do not find (because
    there is no evidence to this effect) that  these  details  would  as  a
    result be placed on any national computer to which other police  forces
    would have access.  So even if his brothers-in-law were to be  assisted
    by corrupt police in the appellant's home area, there is no  sufficient
    basis on which I could find, even to the lower standard of proof,  that
    there is a reasonable likelihood that these police officers would  ever
    be notified of the appellant's presence elsewhere in  Pakistan,  and  I
    find that they would not.  I accordingly find that he could safely  re-
    locate.

39. As Judge Russell's finding that it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to re-locate if he could do so safely is not the  subject  of
    this appeal (and there is no basis upon which  this  finding  could  be
    challenged), unless it is unsafe for the appellant  to  re-locate,  his
    appeal cannot succeed.  It follows  that  as  I  have  found  that  the
    appellant could safely re-locate, his appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

I set aside the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Russell  as
containing a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.






Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
