
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01736/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th April 2016                        |On 21st April 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    D Q Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bircumshaw of Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Kershaw of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 14th April 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Chinese national born [ ] 1980.  The  Appellant
    appealed against refusal of his asylum application, but before the FTT,
    confirmed that he wished to withdraw his asylum appeal,  and  the  only
    issue to be decided by the FTT  related  to  the  Appellant's  wish  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, based upon his family life.

 3. In brief, the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  since  February
    2003.  He met his wife, also a Chinese  citizen,  in  June  2008.   The
    couple have two children, the eldest born on 31st  May  2009,  and  the
    younger child born on 25th December 2011.  Both children were  born  in
    the United Kingdom but are not British citizens.  The FTT was  informed
    that the Appellant's wife and children had been  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 12th June 2015.

 4. The FTT heard evidence from the Appellant, and  accepted  that  he  had
    established family life in the United Kingdom.  The FTT concluded  that
    notwithstanding that the Appellant's  wife  and  children  had  limited
    leave to remain, it would not, in the circumstances, be unreasonable to
    expect the family to return to China.  The FTT therefore concluded that
    the Respondent's decision to refuse  the  Appellant's  application  for
    leave to remain was proportionate and did not breach Article 8, and his
    appeal was dismissed.  The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds may be summarised below.

 5. Firstly it was contended that the FTT had erred  when  considering  the
    best interests of the children, by not considering the actual situation
    that the children would find themselves in.  This was  because  it  had
    been made clear to the FTT that if the Appellant's appeal was  refused,
    his wife and the children would  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    therefore the family would be separated.  The Appellant would be unable
    to apply for entry clearance to the United Kingdom from China,  because
    his wife is not a British citizen, and does not  have  settled  status,
    neither has she been granted refugee status or humanitarian protection.



 6. Secondly the FTT had erred by finding that the  immigration  status  of
    the Appellant's wife and children was  precarious.   It  was  contended
    that this was wrong, as the wife and  children  had  limited  leave  to
    remain, and would be entitled to settlement in due course.

 7. Thirdly the FTT had erred by not considering and making  findings  upon
    the submission made that the  Respondent  had  acted  irrationally,  in
    refusing to join the Appellant's case with that of his family.  If  his
    case had been joined, it was submitted that he would have been  granted
    limited leave to remain.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but subsequently granted on
    16th July 2015 following a renewed application.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mr Mills provided the Tribunal and Mr Bircumshaw with the  Respondent's
    Asylum Policy Instruction dated May 2014, which  gave  guidance  as  to
    when applications should be considered as a dependant.   Mr  Mills  had
    been unable to obtain the policy in force prior to May  2014,  but  did
    not believe that policy to be significantly different.

11. In relation to the ground  contending  that  the  Respondent  had  been
    irrational in failing to join the  Appellant  as  a  dependant  in  the
    application made by his family, Mr Bircumshaw stated  that  he  was  no
    longer pursuing this, and he abandoned this ground, accepting that  the
    Respondent had not breached her own policy.

12. Mr Bircumshaw relied upon the remaining grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  I was asked  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's  case  could  be  distinguished  from  cases  such  as   EV
    (Philippines) as in this case  the  Appellant's  family  had  leave  to
    remain.  Mr Bircumshaw submitted that the FTT had erred by  failing  to
    consider the practicality of the  situation,  which  was  that  if  the
    Appellant was not granted leave to remain, he would have to  return  to
    China, and his wife and children would remain in the United Kingdom and
    the family would be separated.

13. Notwithstanding the decision in AM Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  Mr
    Bircumshaw argued that the immigration status of the  Appellant's  wife
    and children should not be regarded as precarious, as it was clear that
    they were following a route which would lead to  settlement  once  they
    had acquired six years' residence.

14. Mr Mills did not address me in relation to the Respondent's refusal  to
    join the Appellant as a dependant in the claim made by his  family,  as
    Mr Bircumshaw had abandoned this ground.

15. In relation to the meaning of precarious, Mr Mills placed reliance upon
    AM Malawi, and in particular  paragraphs  4  and  5  of  the  headnote,
    contending that it was clear that the Appellant's wife and children had
    a precarious immigration status  and  the  FTT  had  not  erred  in  so
    finding.  Mr Mills added that the FTT  could  have  gone  further,  and
    found that both the Appellant and his wife were in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully when they met and formed a relationship.

16. Mr Mills submitted that the FTT had not erred in considering  the  best
    interests of the children, and had been correct to note that neither of
    the children were  British  citizens,  and  neither  had  seven  years'
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom prior  to  the  applications
    being made.  The FTT was entitled to take into account the young age of
    the children and was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  weight  to  be
    attached to immigration control, outweighed the weight to  be  attached
    to the wishes of the family to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   I  was
    asked to find no error of law in the FTT decision.





Conclusions and Reasons

17. It is only necessary for me to consider two of the grounds  of  appeal,
    the third having been abandoned.

18. I do not find that the FTT erred when considering the best interests of
    the children and I do not accept that the FTT  declined  to  take  into
    account the practicality of the situation.

19. The FTT referred to appropriate case  law  when  considering  the  best
    interests of the children in paragraphs 32, 34, 38  and  40.   The  FTT
    applied the guidance  given  in  that  case  law,  and  considered  the
    relevant factors when considering the best interests of  the  children,
    as is demonstrated by paragraphs 41 and 42.

20. The FTT noted that the children were born in the  United  Kingdom,  and
    took into account their ages, and that they were at an extremely  early
    stage of their education,  and  that  there  would  be  no  significant
    linguistic difficulties, and only  limited  difficulty  in  integrating
    into life in China, a country of which both their parents are citizens.



21. The FTT concluded at paragraph 44 that it would not be unreasonable  to
    expect the family to return to China.  The FTT  was  therefore  finding
    that the best interests of the children would be to remain  with  their
    parents.

22. The FTT was well-aware that the Appellant's wife had  stated  that  she
    and the children would remain in the United Kingdom  if  the  Appellant
    lost his appeal, and therefore there  would  be  a  separation  of  the
    family.  In my view the FTT correctly pointed out in paragraph 36  that
    this was a matter of choice.   The  FTT  considered  all  the  relevant
    factors in relation to the best interests of  the  children,  and  took
    these into account  as  a  primary  consideration,  but  not  the  only
    consideration.  The FTT also took into account that significant  weight
    must be attached to the importance of maintaining effective immigration
    control.   The  FTT  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not
    disproportionate, and that was a decision that was open to the  FTT  to
    make on the evidence provided.  I do not find that the FTT has made any
    irrational or perverse findings, nor do I find that the FTT  has  given
    weight to any immaterial matter, or failed to  take  into  account  any
    material factor.

23. This ground of appeal, amounts to a disagreement with the decision made
    by the FTT, but does not disclose any error of law.

24. Dealing with  the  second  ground,  I  find  that  the  FTT  cannot  be
    criticised for making the point that  the  immigration  status  of  the
    Appellant's wife and children is precarious.  For ease of  reference  I
    set out below paragraph 4 of the headnote to AM Malawi;

         "(4) Those who at any given  date  held  a  precarious  immigration
             status must have held at that date an otherwise  lawful  grant
             of leave to enter or to remain.  A person's immigration status
             is 'precarious' if their continued presence in the UK will  be
             dependent upon them obtaining a further grant of leave."

25. The Appellant's wife and children have limited  leave  to  remain,  and
    were therefore dependent upon obtaining a further  grant  of  leave  to
    enable them to stay in the United Kingdom.  The FTT did not err on this
    point.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity order was made  by  the  FTT,  presumably  because  the  appeal
involved consideration of the best interests of minor children.  I  continue
that order pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             13th April 2015

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             13th April 2015
