
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/01167/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 1 August 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          YAMIDA REGINA MODU METTLE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born on 9 October 1965.   She
   entered the UK as a visitor on 27 December 2007, and overstayed.  Removal
   proceedings having been commenced, she sought asylum on 29 January  2012.



2) The appellant based her claim on an alleged incident in April  2007  when
   she was forced into a police vehicle and raped by 7 police officers.  She
   had no problems with the police before or after that attack.

3) The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 25  January  2013.   The
   respondent  did  not  find  the  claim  credible.   The  respondent  also
   considered that even taking the claim at its highest, the  appellant  had
   suffered a random attack; that there were mechanisms in Sierra Leone  for
   making  complaints  against  the  police  and  a  legal  sufficiency   of
   protection; and that, if necessary, the  appellant  could  relocate  from
   Freetown.

4) First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie dismissed the appeal  by  determination
   promulgated on 22 March 2013.  The judge also found the appellant  to  be
   incredible.  He further found that in any event her claim would not  fall
   into a "social group" in terms of the Refugee Convention; and that  given
   the random nature of the attack, the appellant was no  more  at  risk  on
   return than any other woman in Sierra Leone.

5) The appellant sought permission to appeal,  on  rather  lengthy  and  not
   altogether clear grounds, running to 6 paragraphs.  In essence, paragraph
   1 argues against the finding that the  claim  would  not  fall  into  the
   category of a social group.   Paragraph  2  disagrees  with  the  judge's
   finding that the appellant is intelligent enough to have  claimed  asylum
   at an earlier time.  Paragraph 3 complains of the finding that  sums  the
   appellant sent back to Sierra Leone to pay  her  children's  school  fees
   were "significant" in amount.  Paragraph 4  complains  that  the  finding
   that the appellant was not raped is insufficiently reasoned,  so  far  as
   based on the time the appellant took to leave Sierra Leone.  Paragraph  5
   complains that the finding that the appellant was no more  likely  to  be
   raped again on return than any other woman  ignores  detailed  background
   information that rape is still carried out  in  Sierra  Leone,  including
   rapes carried out by the members of the authorities for  which  they  are
   not held to account.

6) On 16 April 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers  refused  permission
   to appeal.  He thought that grounds 2, 3 and 4 were only  minor  quarrels
   with some of the wording used in the credibility assessment, rather  than
   treating the determination as a whole, and that they  did  not  cast  any
   real doubt on the judge's reasoning.  Ground  1  did  not  appear  to  be
   sound, but in any event made no difference because the appellant had  not
   established real risk of serious  harm  on  return.   Although  ground  5
   complained of the conclusion that the appellant was no more at risk  than
   any other woman in Sierra Leone, the ground did nothing to establish that
   was arguably wrong.  The appeal would still have failed even if both  the
   credibility assessment and the Refugee Convention reasoning  were  wrong.
   Reference was made to paragraph 10 of R (Iran) [2005] Imm AR 153.

7) The appellant renewed her application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, on similar  grounds,  disagreeing  also  with  the  views
   expressed by Judge Cruthers.

8) On 13 May 2013 Upper Tribunal Chalkley granted permission, saying:

    I believe that the  grounds  of  application  (here  referring  to  the
    original application to the  First-tier  Tribunal)  do  raise  properly
    arguable issues which may identify errors of law on  the  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in failing to recognise the  appellant  as  a
    member of a particular social group.  I do not believe that  the  other
    challenges have any great merit but I do not seek to limit the grounds.



9) Mr Martin said that the contention in ground 1  was  that  the  appellant
   fell into the social group of  "women  in  fear  of  persecution  by  the
   authorities of Sierra Leone."  The authorities of Shah and  Islam  [1999]
   UKHL 20 and of Fornah were before the First-tier Tribunal,  at  least  by
   indirect reference.  The respondent had put in a copy of FB (Lone Women -
   PSG - Internal Relocation - AA (Uganda) Considered) Sierra  Leone  [2008]
   UKAIT 00090 on the day of the hearing.  Women in Sierra Leone  occupy  an
   inferior  position.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  are   widespread
   instances of corruption, abuse and rape in Sierra Leone.  His  conclusion
   that the appellant's case did not fall into the category of a  particular
   social group was inadequately reasoned or even perverse.  The appellant's
   claim should have been found to be "objectively  credible",  because  the
   judge accepted evidence that such events occur in Sierra Leone.  In terms
   of  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  an  incident  of  past
   persecution should have been  found  probative  of  future  risk,  absent
   indications to the contrary.   The  judge's  conclusions  were  wrong  by
   reference to the background evidence.  On ground 2, Mr Martin said it was
   not irrational to take the appellant's apparent intelligence into account
   in assessing the lateness of her claim, but the thrust of the ground  was
   rather that the reasoning was inadequate.  It was  inconsistent  for  the
   judge to find under section 8 of 2004 Act that  the  appellant's  use  of
   deception on entry and failure to claim at that stage was not adverse  to
   her case, and yet that her later substantial delay was adverse.  A person
   who feared  the  authorities  in  her  own  country  might  similarly  be
   reluctant to approach the authorities in another country.  This  amounted
   to an error either of applying the wrong standard of proof, or of failing
   to approach the evidence in the round.  It was accepted that ground 3 did
   not disclose a matter of much significance to the outcome, but  it  could
   be considered as part of the cumulative error in the  determination.   As
   to ground 4, the judge noted at paragraph 50 the length of time  it  took
   the appellant to leave Sierra Leone (8 months) but that was  not  adverse
   given that the judge accepted the  "external  evidence"  [the  background
   evidence of such incidents].  The claim was  "patently  plausible".   The
   judge took little  account  of  what  the  appellant  actually  said  and
   disbelieved her account only due to her later conduct, matters which  had
   been given too much weight.  As to ground 5 the judge found the attack to
   be  random  but  failed  to  assess  the  risk  of  it  happening  again.
   Mentioning FB, Mr Martin  submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
   expected to return to  Freetown,  because  that  was  the  locus  of  the
   persecution, she could not rely  on  the  authorities,  and  in  all  the
   circumstances to expect her to relocate would be unduly harsh.

10) I asked whether the logic of Mr Martin's argument is that all  women  in
   Sierra Leone are entitled to refugee status.  Mr Martin  said  that  that
   was a point which Judge Scobbie had raised orally  at  the  hearing.   Mr
   Martin's submission  was  that  the  appellant  had  shown  a  reasonable
   likelihood that she might be persecuted again in the same  way,  and  the
   wide extent of that risk was beside the point.

11) Finally, Mr Martin submitted the determination should be set  aside  and
   reversed.

12) Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  in  Fornah  there  was  a  finding  that  a
   particular type of claim, based on FGM, was of the nature of a particular
   social group, but it did not extend to all women in the country.  In Shah
   and Islam it had been found that if a woman complained of  her  husband's
   ill-treatment she would herself become liable  to  persecution  in  which
   authorities connived.  The same is not true  of  Sierra  Leone.   In  any
   event, the issue of whether a particular social  group  existed  in  this
   case was not decisive, because the adverse credibility findings disclosed
   no error of law.  The core allegation  was  a  straightforward  one  with
   little detail, which itself could not be analysed very far.  It was valid
   to examine the appellant's subsequent behaviour.   At  paragraph  38  the
   judge noted that the  appellant  had  gone  to  the  Refugee  Council  in
   December 2011 and said that she was "told that the Home Office would  not
   give her asylum because the war was finished.  The appellant did  not  go
   to the Home Office because she was frightened of being arrested and  sent
   home."  That did not sit well with the claim which she  made  later  only
   after having been detained by Immigration Officials and after having made
   an application for an Emergency Travel Document (which  appears  to  have
   later been withdrawn).  It was unlikely that  the  appellant  would  have
   been given the advice she mentioned by the Refugee  Council  if  she  had
   given them her present account.  I pointed out that this  specific  point
   did not seem to have been made by the judge.  Mr  Mullen  submitted  that
   the judge had looked at the issue of the appellant's credibility  in  the
   context of her conduct and the point now made  was  part  of  that.   The
   judge was entitled to conclude that the  appellant  was  intelligent  and
   aware enough to  have  claimed  asylum  at  an  appropriate  stage,  much
   earlier, if her claim was genuine.  The  fact  that  she  approached  the
   Refugee Council, even although that was late in the day, showed that  she
   was aware of the possibility of claiming asylum in the UK.   She  delayed
   for  another  year  thereafter  and   claimed   only   under   force   of
   circumstances.  The judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  claim  was
   made only because there was no other avenue of remaining in the UK.   The
   proposition now made on her behalf was that she might have been reluctant
   to claim because of fear of the UK authorities.  She did not appear  ever
   to have said that, and it did not fit with her having come to the  UK  to
   gain protection.  It must have been plain to her that the UK  authorities
   are not of the same nature as those in Sierra Leone.  The  appellant  had
   approached the UK authorities to obtain her visa  to  come  here  in  the
   first place.  In terms of SB, a claim such as this could succeed only  if
   the appellant's survival on return would come at a price of falling  into
   destitution, beggary, crime or prostitution.  The appellant had been able
   to fend for herself in the past and there was no reason why she could not
   do so in the future or why she might fall into such a dire situation.  Mr
   Mullen also commented on the absence of medical evidence, either physical
   or psychological, to support the appellant's account.

13) Mr Martin in reply submitted that a medical report in physical  respects
   was not likely to disclose anything useful after such a  lapse  of  time,
   and that the absence of any psychological report was of no  significance.



14) I indicated that I would  attach  no  significance  to  the  absence  of
   medical evidence.  Beyond that, I reserved my determination.

15) In R(Iran) at paragraph 10 the Court of Appeal said:

    Errors of law of which it can be said that  they  would  have  made  no
    difference to the outcome do not matter.


16) That was said in relation to an earlier statutory appellate regime,  but
   it remains valid.

17) Neither representative referred directly to country  guidance  or  other
   authorities.  In FB the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  held  that  the
   Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Uganda) [2008] EWCA  Civ  579  was  not
   authority for a wider proposition that lone women cannot be  returned  to
   Uganda or any  other  specific  country.   Nor  is  it  support  for  the
   proposition that it is unduly harsh to expect lone women to  relocate  to
   the capital city of a country of origin or any other large urban  centre.
   Rather it reaffirms that such relocation must  be  reasonable,  in  other
   words, that it must not have such consequences as  to  be  unduly  harsh.
   "If  survival  comes  to  cost  of   destitution,   beggary,   crime   or
   prostitution, then that is a price too  high."   In  relation  to  Sierra
   Leone  the  AIT  found  no  compelling  evidence  that  outside   support
   mechanisms were the sole means of eliminating such risks on  return.   In
   the case of this particular appellant I see no reason why the  First-tier
   Tribunal might have been bound to conclude that she would  be  unable  to
   survive as a lone woman without suffering such dire consequences, even if
   her claim were to be taken at highest.  Her case was not a good  one,  on
   that point alone.

18) The arguments of error in the credibility assessment did not  amount  to
   much more than the proposition that because  such  incidents  as  alleged
   occur in her country, her allegations must be held as established.   That
   is not so.  There were also arguments of too much or  too  little  weight
   being given to various aspects of the evidence, but the amount of  weight
   to be given is a matter for the judge.    Read fairly and as a whole, the
   determination justifies the adverse conclusion.   Any  other  errors,  if
   they existed, would not matter.

19) I do not think that the judge erred by finding that  the  evidence  does
   not place this claim in a Refugee Convention category  of  social  group,
   but her claim would fail anyway, because the evidence did not  show  that
   she would be at any greater risk than any other woman  in  Sierra  Leone,
   nor  that  every  woman  in  Sierra  Leone  qualifies  for  international
   protection.

20) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                2 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
