
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01101/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 11 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     JA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Bukhari Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She  has  made  an  asylum
         claim and I have made an anonymity direction for this reason.   The
         appellant has appealed against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Siddiqi dated 3  August  2015  in  which  she  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

      2. The  appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  challenge  this
         decision.  At the hearing before me Mr Khan relied the  grounds  of
         appeal.  Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 notice and invited  me
         to dismiss the appeal.  After hearing from both parties I  reserved
         my decision, which I now provide by reference to each  of  the  two
         grounds of appeal relied upon by Mr Khan.

      3. I am satisfied that  the  judge's  decision  is  comprehensive  and
         adequately reasoned.  I do not accept Mr Khan's submission that the
         decision contains contradictions.  The grounds of appeal amount  to
         no more than disagreements with findings  that  were  open  to  the
         judge.

      4. As Mr Khan submitted, the judge accepted much  of  the  appellant's
         account of ill-treatment toward her on the part of her  husband  in
         Pakistan and in the UK.  The judge expressly accepted  the  history
         of abuse but was entitled to find that this  had  ceased  and  they
         were no longer in a relationship.  The judge was entitled  to  find
         that there was no suggestion that her husband acted in  an  abusive
         manner  after  they  separated  at  an   earlier   point   in   the
         relationship.  Having made these findings the judge was entitled to
         conclude that the appellant's fears that the abuse  would  re-start
         once she returned to Pakistan (where her husband is now said to be)
         to be speculative [30].  The judge was entitled to find that  there
         would be no real risk of a repetition of the abuse for the  reasons
         she has provided: they were no longer in a relationship, the  abuse
         had ceased for a lengthy period of time, on occasions in  the  past
         when there was the opportunity for abuse (past separation and  when
         the husband returned to the house to collect his belongings)  there
         was no abuse.

      5. Mr Khan asked me to find that the judge failed to take into account
         that the husband had returned to Pakistan and  this  would  explain
         why there was no further abuse.  He also asked me to note that  the
         reporting of domestic violence to the police is a taboo  matter  in
         Pakistan and the husband and  his  family  would  not  forgive  the
         appellant for this.  If the husband and his family wished to  abuse
         the appellant or take her children  away  from  her  there  was  no
         reason why threats could not be made in  a  variety  of  ways  from
         Pakistan.  There was no such evidence before the judge and she  was
         entitled  to  take  into  account  its   absence   when   assessing
         prospective risk.

      6. In addition, the judge  has  properly  reasoned  why  she  did  not
         consider that the  appellant's  children  were  at  risk  of  being
         removed from her care.  Although the elder  child  had  been  taken
         away many years ago at a very early age, all  three  children  have
         remained with her from birth and even when she was on  her  own  in
         Pakistan  [33].   The  judge  properly  considered  in  detail  the
         family's likely circumstances in Pakistan [35] and was entitled  to
         find that the family would be able to  support  themselves  without
         the support of other family members.  The judge took  into  account
         the best interests of the children and was entitled to the findings
         of fact made in relation to this [45].

      7. The judge did not  expressly  refer  to  KA  and  others  (domestic
         violence-risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216  (IAC).   This
         decision was not provided to her.  It was not provided to me and Mr
         Khan made no mention of it during the course  of  his  submissions.
         It is however a well-known decision and the  judge's  findings  are
         not inconsistent with it.  The  decision  is  referred  to  in  the
         SSHD's decision letter, which the judge clearly took into  account.
         The judge did not consider that this is a family that would have to
         resort to a shelter and as such there was  no  need  to  go  on  to
         consider the circumstances for the family if  this  happened.   Any
         error of law in failing to apply KA is therefore not material.

      8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
9 November 2015

