

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01405/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Sent           |
|On 15th July 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                                     T A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Ms Anthony (of Counsel), instructed by French and Company
             Solicitors.
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. At the outset of the hearing of this appeal, I explored the  parameters
    and grounds generally.  At this juncture, Mr McVeety, on behalf of  the
    Respondent, conceded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (the
    "the FtT") could not be sustained on the basis that there  had  been  a
    failure to give proper effect to the tests formulated  by  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 31.  These tests, in the context of the  present
    appeal, are as follows:


     a) Is the Appellant gay?


     b) Is it clear on the available evidence  that  gay  people  who  live
        openly in Egypt will be persecuted?

     c) In the event of returning to  Egypt,  will  the  Appellant  conduct
        himself as a gay person openly or covertly?

     d) If covertly, why would he chose to do so?

    While the FtT, in tolerably clear terms, supplied affirmative answers to
    the first and second of these questions, no clear finding  was  made  in
    respect of the third and the fourth was not addressed  at  all.  Thus  I
    accepted the Respondent's concession and ruled that the determination of
    the FtT be set aside.


 2. I proceeded to remake the decision.  No further evidence was adduced by
    either party.  Ms Anthony, on behalf of the Appellant,  invited  me  to
    find that, as a matter of probability, the Appellant, in the  event  of
    returning to Egypt, will conduct himself overtly as a  gay  man.   This
    submission  was  based  on,  firstly,  paragraphs  16  and  17  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement.  Furthermore, the record of  proceedings
    confirms that the Appellant also gave oral  testimony  to  this  effect
    before  the  FtT  and  this  was   not   challenged.    Secondly,   the
    determination of the FtT contains  certain  material  findings.   These
    were:

    (a)  While the Appellant was still involved in a heterosexual marriage,
         he concealed from his wife a gay relationship.

         (b) Subsequently, the Appellant began to frequent gay clubs.

         (c) In doing so, he has engaged in gay sexual encounters.

    I accept the submission that the decision of the FtT failed  to  engage
    with the evolution of the Appellant's sexual  identity.   Nor  does  it
    address the evidence of the Appellant, noted above.   Furthermore,  the
    Judge failed to address  this  issue  in  the  context  of  a  specific
    finding, in [48],  that  the  Appellant  "....  is  capable  of  acting
    independently and disregarding the expectations  imposed  upon  him  by
    virtue of  his  background,  upbringing  and  culture".   None  of  the
    aforementioned findings was challenged by the Respondent.


 3.  I  consider  the  evidence  bearing  on  this  discrete  issue  to  be
    sufficiently consistent and persuasive to warrant a  finding  that,  in
    the event of returning to Egypt, the Appellant will,  as  a  matter  of
    probability, conduct himself overtly as a gay man.

 4. Having made this finding, it is necessary to address, and  answer,  the
    second of the HJ  questions.   I  consider  that  the  answer  to  this
    question is provided in the following passage in the  determination  of
    the FtT, at [77]:

        "....  I am satisfied that a person in the Appellant's position may
        be at risk of persecutory treatment if  he  were  to  come  to  the
        attention of the authorities for reasons of his sexuality and could
        face persecutory treatment including  torture  if  he  were  to  be
        detained."

    In common with the other material findings of the  FtT,  there  was  no
    challenge by the Respondent to this discrete finding.  When one  grafts
    onto this the further finding which I have made immediately above,  the
    conclusion that this appeal must succeed follows inexorably.

DECISION

 5. (a)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

    (b)  The appeal is allowed on both asylum and human rights  (Article  3
         ECHR) grounds.



                                               [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 15 July 2014


