
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01900/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 29 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE clive lane


                                   Between

                           Gulbuddin Abdulrahimzai
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hoshi, instructed by Hammersmith & Fulham
                    Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, a Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant,  who  was  born  on  31  May  1997,  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated
    16 December 2013 to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  his  appeal  was
    dismissed. He now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant asserts that he was not given a fair hearing by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He claims that  the  judge  made  disparaging  comments
    regarding the appellant which cast doubt upon the impartiality  of  the
    judge's analysis.  Counsel  who  appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing (Mr Halim) has, following directions issued by  this  Tribunal,
    filed and served a witness statement and  the  judge  in  question  was
    invited (by a letter sent to him by the resident judge at  Field  House
    on 13 February 2015) to offer his  comments.   No  comments  have  been
    forthcoming.

 3. It is unfortunate when circumstances such as these arise.   However,  I
    do not consider it necessary to make findings of  fact  in  respect  of
    what was and was not said at the First-tier Tribunal hearing; it is, in
    my opinion, sufficient  that  both  the  appellant  and   Counsel,  who
    appeared on his behalf before that Tribunal, clearly believed that  the
    judge did not offer them a fair hearing.  It is important that not only
    should any hearing be conducted fairly but that the parties  and  their
    representatives should consider that it was so conducted; as I find  in
    this instance that the appellant and his representative did not believe
    that the hearing was conducted fairly, the only proper course of action
    is for me to set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal should  be  returned  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to consider the  evidence  afresh
    and determine the appeal.  That hearing  shall  take  place  at  Hatton
    Cross on 7 October 2015 at 10 a.m.

Notice of Decision

 4. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for it to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 28 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

