
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01157/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 May 2013                                  |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                  Mr. S. R.
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The secretary of sTate for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Shah
For the Respondent:    Mr. Hayes

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1980.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent on 29 January 2013 to remove as an
    illegal entrant.  He was refused asylum.

 2. His immigration history is that he had previously entered and left  the
    United Kingdom on three occasions in the period 2008 to 2011 with entry
    clearance as a visitor.  Having arrived in September  2012  he  claimed
    asylum on 14 December 2012.  His wife and newborn son were dependent on
    his claim.

 3. The basis of his claim was that he was born and lived  in  Sylhet.   He
    was a businessman.  He was involved with the Bangladesh National  Party
    (BNP) currently in opposition to  the  ruling  Awami  League.   He  was
    publicity secretary for the local branch in Sylhet of a youth branch of
    the BNP.  He joined the party in 2008 and became publicity secretary in
    2009.  He accepted that his activities were low profile and localised.

 4. His problems began in April 2012.  On 17 April  2012  a  prominent  BNP
    politician disappeared along with his driver.   The  Appellant  claimed
    that the Awami League filed two false First Information Reports  (FIRs)
    against him, the first issued on 18 April 2012 alleging his involvement
    in a demonstration, the second issued on 23  April  2012  alleging  his
    involvement in an arson attack on a car.  He  maintained  at  interview
    that he did not do what he was accused of doing in either of the FIRs.

 5. The police came looking for him several times in May and June 2012 both
    at his home and his work place.  He did not stay at his home  at  night
    and moved around during the day.  An arrest warrant was issued  against
    him on 10 July 2012.

 6. He and his family sought entry clearance as visitors on  26  June  2012
    receiving clearance on 10 July 2012.  They could not leave  immediately
    as he had to sort out his business affairs and think what  to  do  with
    his wife who was pregnant.

 7. He had no problems leaving Bangladesh through Dhaka airport on his  own
    passport.  He did not think the authorities had a sophisticated tracing
    system enabling them to identify suspects at the airport.

 8. He did not claim asylum immediately because he was scared  and  thought
    he could be returned.  He also wanted to get  advice  and  see  if  the
    situation improved.  If returned he feared the authorities.   He  could
    not he said in his statement go elsewhere because he is wanted  by  the
    authorities and because he had no friends or relatives  outside  Sylhet
    and could not move around with a wife and baby.

 9. The Respondent in the refusal letter took issue  with  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  There were several inconsistencies in  his  account.   It
    was also not  believed  that  he  would  have  been  targeted  for  his
    political actions as they were low key  and  localised.   He  would  in
    addition not have been able  to  leave  via  the  airport  were  he  of
    interest.  Doubt was placed on the authenticity  of  various  documents
    lodged.  Adverse inference was also drawn  from  delay  in  making  his
    claim.

10. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11 March 2013  before  Judge  of
    the First tier Tribunal Blum,  the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

11. The judge's findings are at paragraphs [28] to [40].  He did  not  find
    significant an inconsistency about how often  the  Appellant  had  been
    sought by the authorities  [28].   He  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated some knowledge of the BNP and this supported his claim  to
    have been a member [29].  The judge also found  "wholly  credible"  the
    aspect of the account about how, having  been  informed  prior  to  the
    first visit from the police that a FIR had been issued, he was able, by
    moving around, to avoid the authorities [30].

12. The judge could find nothing in the background material put before  him
    to indicate that security checks were conducted at airports.   As  such
    he drew "no adverse inference" from the Appellant not being stopped  on
    his exit.   He  found,  further,  that  he  had  reduced  any  risk  by
    travelling from an airport in Dhaka rather than in  Sylhet  [31].   The
    judge also considered as speculation that the authorities, if unable to
    find the Appellant, would turn their attention to family members [32].

13. The judge attached  little  weight  to  certain  of  the  documentation
    produced by the Appellant [33-35].  However he  found  nothing  on  the
    face  of  the  FIRs  and  arrest  warrant  indicating  that  they  were
    unreliable.   Indeed,  the  content  was  not  inconsistent  with   the
    Appellant's account of events when looked at  in  light  of  background
    material [36, 37].

14. While the judge took against the Appellant's credibility, under section
    8 (4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)  Act
    2004 his delay in claiming asylum,  looking  at  the  evidence  in  the
    round, he did "not find the small delay of some two months to undermine
    his account of being pursued by the local police "[38].  The judge also
    considered that the Appellant's evidence had been given in a direct and
    detailed manner, that his account was largely internally and externally
    consistent, and that there had been no attempt at embellishment.  Also,
    that his previous immigration history which included several visits  to
    the UK showed compliance with the Immigration Rules [35].

15. The  judge  summarised  (at  [40])  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    "generally credible account".  He found that the Appellant was involved
    with the party as a publicity secretary, that his activities were  "low
    profile and localised".  Also,  that  he  was  "involved  in  a  street
    protest on 18/04/2012 against the disappearance of Ilia Ali".  As for a
    second protest on 23 April 2012 he "admitted to throwing bricks at  the
    police  during  this  protest.   The  protest   itself   involved   the
    barricading of a public street.  [Further] that two  FIRs  were  issued
    against the Appellant on 18/04/2012 and 23/04/2012.  The Appellant  was
    only one amongst a large number of named individuals".  He went  on  to
    state that he accepted that the  local  police  had  searched  for  the
    Appellant four times at his shops and three times at  his  family  home
    and that an arrest warrant was issued in July 2012.  However,  he  also
    found that the Appellant having experienced no problems leaving through
    Dhaka airport, was not on a wanted list.

16. The judge then proceeded to the question of whether the Appellant faced
    persecution or prosecution.  Noting references in the Country of Origin
    Information Service Report (COIS) he  accepted  "that  the  police  are
    susceptible to political influence" but that there was nothing  in  the
    evidence to indicate the Awami League was behind  the  issuing  of  the
    FIRs.  Having admitted to having been  involved  in  a  violent  street
    protest, while he may have had a political motivation in protesting his
    actions such were "on the face of it criminal in  nature  and  the  FIR
    reflects this" [42].

17. Whilst the second FIR related to an alleged offence on  23  April  2012
    the Appellant was not asked about the allegations contained therein.

18. In going on to consider the criminal justice process  as  a  whole  the
    judge, noting country guidance, concluded  that  prison  conditions  at
    least for ordinary prisoners did not violate Article 3 of ECHR [45].

19. As for his receiving a fair trial  the  judge  having  considered  COIS
    concluded that while there were "shortcomings with  the  judiciary  and
    the trial system" they were not such as to "amount to a threat  to  the
    very existence of the right to a fair trial" for the Appellant.  It was
    noted that he has a lawyer who was able to get the arrest  warrant  for
    him and that the authorities had complied  with  the  rule  of  law  by
    issuing a warrant for him.  The judge found that  he  would  receive  a
    fair trial [46].

20. The judge went on (at [48) to state "on return to Sylhet [he would]  be
    lawfully prosecuted for his involvement  in  a  street  protest...  Any
    evidence against him in respect of either of the FIRs would be  capable
    of being tested in a  court  given  that  he  does  have  access  to  a
    lawyer... and there is no threat  to  the  very  existence  of  a  fair
    trial... If found guilty of any offence  it  will  be  as  an  ordinary
    criminal and that he would not be subject to article 3 ill treatment in
    prison".

21. The judge went on to decide that if he was wrong in concluding that the
    Appellant faced prosecution not persecution  he  could  avoid  risk  by
    internally relocating.

22. He noted the Appellant's position at the hearing that he could not live
    elsewhere than Sylhet because it was "his birthplace  and  he  did  not
    have much contact with other areas". He "did  not  mention  having  any
    fear from the authorities in other parts of the country". He  "did  not
    explain in his statement how the police in another part  of  Bangladesh
    would find out about his problems with the  local  police  in  Sylhet".
    His answers ... suggest he was more concerned  with  the  lack  of  any
    family or friends than with  the  authorities  finding  him  elsewhere"
    [50].

23. Further, no background material was provided about  any  mechanism  "by
    which police and state authorities in another part of Bangladesh  would
    become aware of the arrest warrant  issued  against  the  Appellant  in
    Sylhet".  Whilst it was appreciated that he has a wife and  a  baby  he
    "still has family in Bangladesh who could presumably provide  him  with
    some  financial  assistance".   Further  factors  including   language,
    culture, health, and business experience led the judge to conclude that
    it would not be unduly harsh to expect the  Appellant  to  relocate  if
    necessary.

24. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 8 April 2013.  He stated:

      2. "First tier Tribunal Judge Blum dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the decision of the Respondent to refuse him  international
         protection and to remove him to Bangladesh  by  way  of  directions
         despite finding him generally credible.

      3. It is arguable that having found the Appellant generally  credible,
         the finding that  the  Appellant  feared  prosecution  rather  than
         persecution  was  inconsistent  with  the   general   findings   of
         credibility.  It is also arguable  that  if  the  Appellant  feared
         prosecution the finding that it was still open to him to  relocated
         needs to be considered further.  The determination  arguably  lacks
         clarity amounting to an error of law for the reasons set out in the
         grounds".

24. At the error of law hearing before me Mr. Shah sought, essentially,  to
    rely on the grounds.  The main thrust of his submission  was  that  the
    judge had failed to take full account of the background material before
    him.  Such included references indicating that law enforcement agencies
    were the tool of the authorities and prison conditions had  got  worse.
    Also that low level activists were at risk.  Mr. Shah invited me to set
    aside the determination and remake it by allowing the appeal.

25. In reply Mr. Hayes submitted that the judge had looked properly at  the
    background material including in  respect  of  the  police  and  prison
    conditions.  There was insufficient information to  indicate  that  the
    police were solely a political tool.  There was no good reason  not  to
    follow the country guidance about prison  conditions.   The  conclusion
    about internal relocation, if the judge was wrong in finding that there
    was not a risk of persecution, was sustainable for the  reasons  given.
    He invited me to uphold the determination.

26.  In  considering  this  matter,  as  indicated,  the  judge  found  the
    Appellant's account of being wanted by the authorities in his home area
    to be credible.  The issue is whether he, having also been found to  be
    a low level political oppositionist and to have  admitted  to  criminal
    acts at a political demonstration, faced a  real  risk  of  persecution
    rather than prosecution.

27. Mr. Shah in the grounds and submissions claimed  that  the  judge  made
    contradictory findings and had overlooked  significant  information  in
    the country reports.  In respect of the former (ground 6(a)) there  was
    no contradiction  in  the  judge  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    publicity secretary and was also  low  level.   The  Appellant  in  his
    statement described himself as low level.

28. The grounds  correctly  note  that  the  judge  acknowledged  that  law
    enforcement agencies such as the police are  susceptible  to  political
    influence.  It may well also be that the police would not state in FIRs
    that they prepared them on instructions  of  the  ruling  Awami  League
    Party.  However, I disagree with the comment in the grounds (6(c)) that
    the clear evidence was that "alongside with others he was involved in a
    politically  motivated  case  to  suppress  him".   The  judge,   while
    accepting that the Appellant "may have had a  political  motivation  in
    protesting his actions" [42], was entitled on  the  evidence,  to  find
    that there was nothing to indicate that the Awami League was behind the
    issuance of the FIRs.   He  was  entitled  not  least  because  of  the
    Appellant's own admission, to conclude that his actions  were,  on  the
    face of it, criminal in nature as was reflected in an FIR.

29. Nor do I agree with the assertion that the judge did not  consider  the
    "clear evidence"  of  "repressive  police  action  against  a  peaceful
    demonstration by the BNP..."  The barricading  of  a  public  road  and
    throwing bricks at the police by the Appellant and many  others  hardly
    amounts to a peaceful demonstration.

30. The grounds acknowledge that the judge considered the guidelines on the
    issue of whether prosecution amounts to persecution as set out in Iqbal
    (Muzafar) (Fair Trial - Pre Trial Conditions) [2002] Pakistan CG  UKAIT
    02239.  However, it is claimed that  had  he  properly  considered  the
    country  reports  he  would  have  concluded  that  the  "proper  local
    procedure is not  in  place  to  safe  guard  the  Appellant"  for  the
    "politically motivated"  FIRs  and  for  "alleged  criminal  offences".
    There follow a number of references to  background  material  including
    particularly the COIS report, reporting, inter alia,  abuses,  killings
    and impunity by the authorities.

31. It is clear from his determination that the judge, as he  was  required
    to do, carefully considered the criminal justice process as a whole  in
    the context of the background material  before  him.   He  makes  close
    reference to it at [42], [45] and [46].

32. I do not see that in the skeleton argument before the judge or  in  the
    submissions by the representative at the hearing reference was made  to
    the extracts reproduced in the grounds before me which are mostly COIS.
     Indeed the judge stated specifically that he was not asked to look  at
    anything in the COIS reports  [24].  In  the  circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it to be a fair allegation  that  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of specific references amongst the voluminous material that was
    before him, particularly when it is clear  that  he  did  consider  the
    material with care.

33. I consider that the conclusions he reached about whether the  Appellant
    would receive a fair trial, and having properly considered the  country
    guidance in respect of the possibility of pre-trial detention and  post
    conviction prison, were such that he  was  entitled  to  reach  on  the
    evidence and background material before him.

34. Turning to internal relocation, in the  event  that  he  was  wrong  in
    concluding that the Appellant did not face a real risk  of  persecution
    in his home area from the local police  politically  aligned  with  the
    ruling party, the judge was entitled to find on the background material
    put before him that there was no indication of any mechanism  by  which
    police or state authorities in another part of Bangladesh would  become
    aware of the arrest warrant issued against him in Sylhet.   Also,  that
    having been able to leave the  country  through  Dhaka  airport  openly
    there is no reason to believe that he would be at real  risk  of  being
    detained if returned to the same place and chose to live other than  in
    his home area.  As the Judge noted when the Appellant was  asked  about
    this at his asylum interview he did not mention having  any  fear  from
    the authorities in other parts of  the  country.   Such  was  also  his
    evidence at the hearing [22].

35. The judge applied the correct  test  (per  Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5)  in
    assessing whether internal relocation was appropriate.   He  looked  at
    the circumstances holistically.  While he noted that the Appellant  has
    a wife and baby he also noted factors which included that he has family
    in Bangladesh who could  provide  him  financial  help;  he  knows  the
    language and culture of the country; he has business experience; he and
    his family have no health issues.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude
    that it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the Appellant and
    his family to make use of the internal relocation alternative.

36. The judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds was one he was entitled to reach on the evidence and background
    material before him.

Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
the decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.





Signed                              Date
D Conway
Upper Tribunal Judge
