
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2015                             | On 16 January 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                           mr jegathees nadarajah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom to Sri Lanka was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D Ross ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 27 October 2014.



2.   The appellant claimed to be at risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  as  a
    person of adverse interest to the  authorities.   At  the  hearing,  an
    application was made for an adjournment to obtain further evidence from
    Sri Lanka and a  further  psychiatric  report,  in  the  light  of  the
    identification of psychotic symptoms in an earlier report  obtained  on
    the appellant's behalf.  The judge  refused  the  application,  finding
    that there was no explanation regarding the absence of the evidence now
    sought and that ample time had been given to prepare the  appeal.   The
    appellant's asylum claim was made some eight months before the  hearing
    and the case had already been adjourned  for  further  evidence  to  be
    obtained.  So far as psychiatric  evidence  was  concerned,  the  judge
    noted that two reports had been obtained and that there had been  ample
    time to fully investigate the appellant's mental ill-health.  He  found
    that no adjournment was required and that it would  not  be  unjust  to
    determine the appeal on the basis of the reports already available.

3.   An application was made for permission to appeal.  It was contended  on
    the appellant's behalf that the refusal  to  adjourn  the  hearing  was
    procedurally unfair.  An explanation had been given for the absence  of
    documentary evidence from Sri Lanka.  So far as a  further  report  was
    concerned, the  most  recent  had  revealed  psychotic  symptoms  which
    required   further   exploration   and   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative had not objected to an  adjournment  to  enable  further
    medical evidence to  be  obtained  (although  he  had  objected  to  an
    adjournment to obtain further documents from Sri Lanka).

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 20 November 2014.   In  a  Rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State dated 8 December 2014, the  appeal
    was opposed on the basis that  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    refusing the adjournment and did not err in his overall  assessment  of
    the evidence.

Submissions on error of law

5.   Mr Walker said that the Home Office file revealed that the  psychiatric
    reports before the First-tier Tribunal were non-historic in relation to
    the  appellant's  health  and  circumstances   in   Sri   Lanka.    The
    respondent's concern in this context was that there was a reference  in
    the substantive asylum interview to a suicide attempt by the  appellant
    in Sri Lanka.  The Presenting Officer had not  opposed  an  adjournment
    for the purpose of obtaining  psychiatric  evidence.   The  refusal  to
    grant an adjournment may have led to procedural unfairness, taking into
    account guidance given by the President in Nwaigwe [2014]  UKUT  00418.
    As  the  psychiatric  reports  only  showed  the  position  since   the
    appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom, and as there was no evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal in the light  of  circumstances  in  Sri
    Lanka, before the appellant left, the Secretary of State did not oppose
    the appeal in relation to the refusal to grant the adjournment.

6.   Ms Saifolahi said that a further report would be  sought  from  someone
    other than the author of the second report, to  deal  with  the  points
    raised, following  the  identification  of  psychotic  symptoms.   That
    evidence would need to be taken into account in the overall assessment,
    in the light of J in the Court of Appeal and GJ in the Upper  Tribunal.
    Taking into account paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  issued  by
    the President, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal, should an  error  of  law  be  found,  so  that  a  full
    determination could be made in the light of the  evidence.   Mr  Walker
    said that he did  not  oppose  that  submission,  in  relation  to  the
    appropriate venue.

Conclusion on error of law

7.   Taking into account Mr Walker's careful submissions, I conclude that  a
    material error of law has been shown.  The Presenting Officer  did  not
    oppose the application for an adjournment made at the  hearing.   There
    were two psychiatric reports before the First-tier Tribunal and in  the
    second and most recent, psychotic symptoms were identified.  On medical
    advice, the appellant did not give evidence.

8.   The two reports did not consider or engage with an important aspect  of
    the appellant's case, his claim that he attempted suicide while in  Sri
    Lanka.  This was revealed in  the  substantive  asylum  interview.   In
    these circumstances, and taking into account the respondent's stance at
    the hearing, and with great respect to the very  experienced  judge,  I
    find that the decision to refuse the adjournment amounted to a material
    error.  The appellant was deprived of an opportunity to have  his  case
    argued in the light of psychiatric evidence which bore on an  important
    aspect of his case and the need for further evidence only emerged  with
    the second report prepared on his behalf.

9.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  must  be  re-
    made.  Taking into account the  submissions  from  the  representatives
    regarding venue, and also taking into account the Practice Statement, I
    conclude that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross, to be remade there, before a judge other than Judge  D
    Ross.

10.  The appropriate venue for case management is the Hatton  Cross  Hearing
    Centre  and,  taking  into  account  the  proposal  to  adduce  further
    evidence, it  may  be  appropriate  to  list  the  appeal  for  a  Case
    Management Review hearing.   That will be a  matter  for  a  Designated
    Judge at Hatton Cross.

DECISION

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   The  decision
    will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal, at Hatton Cross,  before  a
    judge other than Judge D Ross.



Signed        Date: 6 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no application  for
anonymity since.  In these circumstances, I make no order  in  this  context
on this occasion.



Signed        Date: 6 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

