
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                             |On 19 April 2016              |
|Prepared on 14 March 2016                    |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    N. G.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  who  entered  the  UK
      lawfully.
   2. On 13 October 2013 the Appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  of  her
      sexuality, asserting that she was a lesbian who faced  persecution  on
      account of her sexuality if she returned to the Philippines,  and  who
      would  through  fear,  feel  unable  to  live  in  an  openly  lesbian
      relationship, which she would otherwise wish to do.
   3. On 19 November 2014 the Respondent refused the asylum claim, and  made
      a decision to remove her. The Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant was genuinely a lesbian as claimed since she  had  described
      herself as bisexual, or, that homosexuality was  criminalised  in  the
      Philippines. Thus, even if there was a risk from the  Appellant's  own
      family, which was disputed, there was no reason  why  she  should  not
      enjoy state  protection  against  criminal  actions,  or  be  able  to
      internally relocate to avoid any individuals that she did not wish  to
      associate with.
   4. The Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard  on  31
      July 2015 and was allowed in a brief decision promulgated on 6  August
      2015 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington.
   5. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal  the  decision  on  31
      August 2015 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on the basis it was
      arguable the Judge had failed to engage with the  evidence  concerning
      the ability of homosexuals to live in safety within  the  Philippines,
      and the relevant jurisprudence, so that arguably neither the issues of
      sufficiency of state protection, nor internal  relocation  were  dealt
      with adequately within the decision, although  they  had  been  argued
      before him. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   6. This is a very brief decision that both parties accept  is  deficient,
      although they disagree about the extent of that deficiency. Mr Kingham
      for the Respondent would plainly have liked to have been in a position
      to argue that the Judge had failed to  engage  with  the  Respondent's
      case upon the credibility of the claim to be a lesbian, as opposed  to
      bisexual. Were it not for the way the grounds of appeal  were  drafted
      that could have been open to him, but the  draftsman  of  the  grounds
      failed to take that point, and so it is not.
   7. The decision does however contain a series of findings of  fact  [32],
      which amount to an acceptance of the Appellant's account, and absent a
      challenge based upon  either  perversity,  or  a  failure  to  provide
      adequate reasons as to why they have been made, they must stand.
   8. In the light of those findings there were two limbs to the Appellant's
      appeal which needed to be considered.  First,  whether  the  Appellant
      currently faced a genuine risk of harm  from  anyone  other  than  her
      mother - since as yet she did not claim to be perceived as  a  lesbian
      beyond her family circle, and her father was  now  deceased,  and  her
      family had expressed the desire to have nothing to do with her. If so,
      whether the risk from the family extended beyond  the  immediate  home
      area. In any event whether there was adequate state protection against
      any criminal action they might undertake, and whether the risk of harm
      they posed could be avoided by internal relocation.
   9. The second limb was whether the Appellant would ordinarily  choose  to
      live an openly lesbian lifestyle, and thus face a future risk of  harm
      from members of the general population in the event that she sought to
      do so, and whether through fear of that risk she would feel unable  to
      do so.
  10. Whilst the Judge has listed as an annexe to his decision a  number  of
      extracts taken from the material placed before him by  the  Appellant,
      there is no analysis of their content to be found in the decision, and
      there is no attempt to analyse the content  of  any  of  the  material
      referred to by the Respondent in the course of her  decision  relevant
      to these issues. Thus, although the Judge did make findings concerning
      the risk to lesbians from the general population and from  members  of
      the  police  force  (without  apparently  distinguishing  between  the
      actions of rogue officers and the attitude of the force as  a  whole),
      the decision fails to offer  an  adequate  analysis  of  the  evidence
      placed before him by both parties upon the issues he had  to  resolve,
      and thus it fails to adequately explain to the parties how he  reached
      his decision.
  11. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  as  requested
      by the Respondent. In the circumstances of the appeal I  am  satisfied
      that this is the correct approach, and I note  Ms  Cleghorn  does  not
      seek to suggest otherwise. In circumstances where it would appear that
      the relevant evidence has not properly been considered  by  the  First
      Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive the
      Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be properly considered by
      the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of
      25 September 2012. Moreover the extent of the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding  objective,  it
      is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of  25  September
      2012. Having reached  that  conclusion,  with  the  agreement  of  the
      parties I make the following directions;
     i) The decision upon the  appeal  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
        remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The findings  of
        fact set out in paragraph 32 of the  decision  are  preserved.  The
        appeal is not to be listed before Judge Heatherington.
    ii) A Tagalog interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 1 April 2016.
    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

  12. The decision promulgated on 6 August 2015 did involve the making of an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
     i) The decision upon the  appeal  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
        remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The findings  of
        fact set out in paragraph 32 of the  decision  are  preserved.  The
        appeal is not to be listed before Judge Heatherington.
    ii) A Tagalog interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 1 April 2016.
    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 14 March 2016

