
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01113/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th December 2016                      |On 5th January 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     L S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Becket Bedford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    M A Hall following a hearing at Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 14th  July
    2016.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen  of  Albania  who  was  born  on  2nd
    February 1979.  The nature of her claim is that she was trafficked into
    the United Kingdom on 1st November 2012.  The Respondent did not accept
    that the Appellant had been kidnapped in 2012, a second time  after  an
    alleged kidnapping in 2008, and the Respondent did not  find  that  the
    account given by  the  Appellant  was  credible,  and  noted  that  the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  claim  asylum  at  the  earliest   possible
    opportunity and could demonstrate no good reason for delay,  such  that
    her claim to being kidnapped  and  trafficked  was  not  accepted  (see
    paragraphs 27 to 38 of the determination).

The Judge's Decision

 3. The judge observed how it was noted in  the  refusal  letter  that  the
    Appellant had been offered a National Referral Mechanism (NRM)  process
    but had refused the referral which the Respondent believed damaged  her
    credibility (see paragraph 29).  It was also noted that  the  Appellant
    did not claim asylum until a year  after  her  escape  (paragraph  46).
    Nevertheless, the judge observed that it was important that  he  viewed
    the Appellant's account of events "in  the  context  of  conditions  in
    Albania" (paragraph 72).  Particularised attention  was  given  to  the
    applicable asylum law provisions herein, especially to  paragraph  339L
    of the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 73).  In addition, the  medical
    report was also referred to (see  paragraphs  75  to  76).   The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had  suffered  mental  health  problems  in
    Albania and had depression for which she was prescribed  some  "tablets
    which seemed to help me and calm me down" (paragraph 79).  However, the
    judge noted that this depression "followed the death of the Appellant's
    father in  a  road  traffic  accident  in  2001.   I  also  accept  the
    Appellant's evidence that  she  felt  depressed  because  she  and  her
    husband were unable to conceive a child" (paragraph  79).   Also  taken
    into account was the medical report from the Mental  Health  Centre  of
    Puke Hospital in Albania, and this  was  a  translated  medical  report
    which was issued on 15th December 2014 at the Appellant's request,  and
    it confirmed the Appellant was admitted to hospital on  2nd  May  2008,
    and discharged on 28th July 2008 (paragraph 80).   However,  the  judge
    went on to say that, "there is no mention in the medical report of  the
    ill-treatment claimed by the Appellant.  I  find  that  had  such  ill-
    treatment occurred, this would  have  been  mentioned  in  the  report"
    (paragraph 81).

 4. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal are summarised into three sections.  First,  that
    the judge took into account information that was not in  the  evidence,
    and in particular a statement dated 15th April 2015, which had not been
    adopted into evidence.  Secondly, that the  Appellant's  mental  health
    condition was misconceived because  although  the  judge  received  the
    medical health report from the Centre of Puke  Hospital  he  "does  not
    accept that the report supports the Appellant's account of  kidnap  and
    rape".  Third, that the consideration  of  the  trafficking  claim  was
    misconceived because the requisite anxious scrutiny was not applied and
    a very selective consideration of the Appellant's claim  to  have  been
    trafficked in 2008 and again in 2012 was undertaken.

 6. On 21st September 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me  on  9th  December  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Bedford,  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Norton, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.   Mr
    Bedford helpfully handed in a detailed and skilfully prepared  skeleton
    argument, together with a typed out clearer copy  of  the  Puke  Centre
    medical report, which appeared at pages D6 to D7  of  the  Home  Office
    bundle, for the consideration of this Tribunal.  Also handed up was the
    Grand Chamber decision of the European Court in the case of RC v Sweden
    (Application No. 41827/07).  In essence Mr Bedford made  the  following
    submissions.

 8. First, if one looks at the Puke Centre medical report the reference  to
    "social background" shows the condition of the Appellant as  one  where
    the "patient has not been able to feed herself, for  twelve  weeks  and
    she has been kept on serum glucose 500 ml, vitamin B1, vitamin B6,  and
    vitamin C".  It is also stated that during the twelfth week of her stay
    in the hospital the Appellant "has  shown  signs  of  improvement,  has
    started to  talk  a  little  with  nurses  and  feed  herself".   This,
    explained Mr Bedford, demonstrates the extent of her acute  and  severe
    mental health condition which could  only  have  been  induced  as  the
    result of having undergone a very traumatic experience.  Indeed, if one
    then looks at the heading "Diagnosis" it is stated that,

         "She was unable to walk, talk or co-operate  with  the  specialist;
         despite our attempts to communicate with her at the  beginning  she
         was not co-operating and showed deep signs of  panic,  symptoms  of
         abnormal bloating, great sweating throughout her body  and  cardiac
         worries ...".

    All of this could not have been the  result  of  a  depression  arising
    either due to the death of her father  in  2001  or  the  inability  of
    herself and her husband to conceive a child.   It  must  have  been  on
    account of the physical ill-treatment,  rape,  and  the  abduction  she
    suffered.

 9. Second, if one looked at the core provision of international asylum law
    as set out at paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, this is  to  the
    effect that, "where aspects of the person's statements are supported by
    documentary or other evidence, those aspects will not need confirmation
    when all of the following conditions are met" (see paragraph 73 of  the
    determination).  The reference to the conditions that have to  be  met,
    in circumstances where there is no documentary or other evidence, is  a
    person's genuine effort to substantiate his or her asylum claim,  or  a
    person's statements which are found to be coherent and plausible, or  a
    person who has attempted to establish  their  claim  "at  the  earliest
    possible time", or a case where "the general credibility of the  person
    has been established".

10. Mr Bedford, in an ingenious argument, submitted  that  the  context  of
    this legal provision was that where  "documentary  or  other  evidence"
    exists, then it is unnecessary to have to show by way of  evidence  any
    of these matters.  Put another way, the absence of any of these matters
    (referred to as "conditions") should not militate  against  the  person
    who has been able to produce "documentary or other evidence".

11. Third, what this then means is that, where a decision  maker  is  faced
    with such a situation, it is improper, as a judicial exercise, for that
    decision maker to choose between various different accounts,  when  the
    evidence that  is  produced  in  the  form  of  "documentary  or  other
    evidence" is such that it points to the  likelihood  of  the  Appellant
    having undergone precisely that kind  of  an  experience  that  she  is
    maintaining occurred in the circumstances of her case when she  was  in
    Albania.  On the lower standard, therefore, the Appellant  should  have
    succeeded.

12. For his part, Mr Norton submitted that the judge  had  written  a  very
    careful determination.  From paragraphs 70 to  74  there  is  a  proper
    analysis of how the judge comes to his findings and conclusions, and he
    does not overlook paragraph 339L which  he  sets  out  in  full.   From
    paragraph 79 to 81 he refers to the very medical report  which  appears
    at D6 to D7 and gives it detailed attention.

13. The judge correctly found that the major mental health  issue  in  2008
    had occurred, and had the judge failed  to  so  recognise  this  mental
    health issue, he could have been criticised for overlooking a  material
    issue of fact, but he did not overlook it.  There is recognition of the
    severe incident that has occurred.  Importantly, however,  this  severe
    incident is not the rape that the Appellant alleges.

14. There is nothing in the report which refers to  physical  mistreatment.
    There are physical symptoms that the report draws attention to  but  no
    reference to physical ill-treatment which must mean that  the  symptoms
    that are referred to could have arisen in any number of other ways.

15. The question before the judge was purely one of the credibility of  the
    Appellant.  The judge decided that the Appellant was not  credible  for
    the reasons that he gave.

16. In reply, Mr Bedford submitted that  the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
    decide what caused the mental health breakdown  once  he  had  credible
    evidence of her mental condition.  The Appellant's case  was  that  she
    had been raped in 2012 and brought to the UK.  The  main  question  was
    whether this claim was capable of belief.  To determine that  question,
    one needs to look only at paragraph 339L which explains how refugee law
    is to be interpreted and applied.  This shows that there is no need  to
    seek out an account that is coherent  and  plausible  in  circumstances
    where a claim is "supported by documentary or other  evidence"  as  was
    the case here.  If the medical report  from  Puke  City  Mental  Health
    Centre referred to a condition whereby the  Appellant  "was  unable  to
    walk, talk or co-operate with the specialist", then this would not have
    been on account of the Appellant having acquired a  depression  because
    of her father's death several years earlier or the inability of herself
    and her husband to conceive a child.   This  condition  was  much  more
    likely to arise as a result of the rape in 2012.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

18. Mr Bedford has argued that paragraph  339L  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    avoids the need to look for a coherent or plausible account on the part
    of the Appellant  where  that  account  can  be  substantiated  through
    "documentary or other evidence".   His  ultimate  submission  has  been
    whether what the Appellant alleges is capable  of  belief.   The  judge
    found that it was not capable of belief on the  basis  of  the  medical
    report because "there is no mention in the medical report of  the  ill-
    treatment claimed  by  the  Appellant"  (paragraph  81).   This  was  a
    conclusion that the judge was entitled to reach.

19. It would be altogether otherwise if the  medical  report  actually  did
    refer to the condition of being "unable to  walk,  talk  or  co-operate
    with the specialist" having been induced on account of a version of ill-
    treatment given by the Appellant, which account was consistent with her
    being unable to walk, talk  or  co-operate,  namely,  an  account  that
    referred to her abduction, rape, and ill-treatment.  The medical report
    makes no such reference.

20. It is in these circumstances a rather large leap  to  say  that,  where
    there are a number of accounts, that the one that the judge should have
    settled upon is the account given by the Appellant.

21. This only follows if, as paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules  makes
    clear, aspects of the person's statements are supported by "documentary
    or other evidence".  The medical evidence did not support an allegation
    of rape or torture.  Second, and in any event, the reading of paragraph
    339L is rather simplistic if it is put in the terms that it  is  by  Mr
    Bedford.

22. A complete reading of paragraph 339L  suggests  that  in  circumstances
    where there is no "documentary or other  evidence"  which  can  be  put
    forward as confirmation of the account,  then  "all  of  the  following
    conditions" are to be met.  There are then five conditions that are set
    out.  These include the Appellant having made a claim "at the  earliest
    possible  time",  as  the   Appellant   having   established   "general
    credibility".  In both these respects, the Appellant was  found  to  be
    wanting.

23. For example, the Appellant delayed for over a year before  she  made  a
    claim.  Furthermore, the Appellant was offered  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism process and she refused the referral, the natural consequence
    of which was that the Respondent found  this  to  be  damaging  to  her
    credibility.  The judge was entitled to take that into account.

24. In short, there were a number of other issues  that  directly  went  to
    damaging this Appellant's credibility, and all of this in  the  context
    where the one piece of medical evidence, namely, the report  from  Puke
    Medical Health Centre, was silent on the issue  of  how  the  Appellant
    came to find herself in the condition that she did.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2017

