
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/01325/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |                         Decision &      |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                      |
|On  12th December 2014            |                         On 12th January |
|                                  |2015                                     |
|                                  |                                         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                             mrs shiyani darifo
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association (Romford Road)
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. There are in fact two appeals in this case: one by each party, but I
       will refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 28th November  1990.
       She arrived in the UK on 30th August 2007 as an unaccompanied minor.
       She applied for asylum on 17th January 2008. On 31st August 2011 she
       married a British citizen. On 17th  December  2012  she  applied  to
       remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her  marriage.  Her  asylum
       application and marriage/ Article 8 ECHR applications  were  refused
       on 27th June 2013, but were not served on the appellant with removal
       directions until 11th February 2014. She appealed on  28th  February
       2014. Her appeal against the  decision  was  allowed  by  Designated
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
       but dismissed on asylum grounds in a  determination  promulgated  on
       the 28th August 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Garratt on 15th September 2014 on  the  basis  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law.  On  12th
       November 2014 I found that Judge Manuell had materially erred in law
       when deciding the appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  and  the  Refugee
       Convention/ Article 3 ECHR. The reasons for this  decision  are  set
       out at Annex A of this determination.

    4. The matter came back before me to re-make the appeal. The  appellant
       has served  a  bundle  of  additional  evidence  which  included  an
       additional witness statement from the appellant, a letter  from  the
       International Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide  and
       an expert report of Dr Suthaharan Nadarajah.

Submissions

    5. At the  start  of  the  hearing  Mr  Walker  informed  me  that  the
       respondent had decided to grant the  appellant  refugee  status  and
       therefore the refusal decision of the 27th June 2013 was  withdrawn.
       Action to issue refugee status papers would be commenced next week.

    6. Mr Walker and Ms Loughton confirmed that they  therefore  asked  for
       permission to withdraw their respective appeals, and it  was  agreed
       that it would appropriate for me to do a very  simply  determination
       in which the matter  was  re-made  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum
       grounds on  the  basis  of  the  respondent's  concession  that  the
       appellant qualified for this status.

Decision

    7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

    9.  The decision is re-made allowing the appeal on asylum grounds,  and
       also on the same facts on human rights grounds.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
13th December 2014

Fee Award

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I  make  no
    fee award as no fee was paid.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
13th December 2014







































Annex A
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 28th November 1990.
        She arrived in the UK on  30th  August  2007  as  an  unaccompanied
        minor. She applied for asylum on 17th January 2008. On 31st  August
        2011 she married a British  citizen.  On  17th  December  2012  she
        applied to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  her  marriage.  Her
        asylum application and marriage/ Article 8 ECHR  applications  were
        refused on 27th June 2013 and served on the appellant with  removal
        directions on 11th February 2014. She  appealed  on  28th  February
        2014. Her appeal against the decision  was  allowed  by  Designated
        Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell on Article 8 ECHR  grounds
        but dismissed on asylum grounds in a determination  promulgated  on
        the 28th August 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Garratt on 15th September 2014 on  the  basis  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in dismissing
       the asylum claim as it was  arguable  that  Judge  Manuell  had  not
       followed guidance in GJ and Others (Post-civil war;  returnees)  Sri
       Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and thus properly assessed risk  in  this
       case in failing to consider expert evidence in that case from Callum
       McRae and the fact that she would be returned in circumstances where
       it was accepted her brother had had been  shot  by  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities as a LTTE suspect. Permission was also  granted  to  the
       Secretary of State who  cross  appealed  on  the  basis  that  Judge
       Manuell had also arguably erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  on
       Article  8  ECHR  grounds  because  he  failed   to   consider   the
       insurmountable obstacles test at paragraph EX 1 of Appendix  FM  and
       did   not  specify  the  factors  at  s.117B  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  were  for  and  against  the
       appellant in consideration of the proportionality of her removal  in
       the context of her family life in the UK.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of law Asylum

    4. Ms Loughton relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal  and  her  skeleton
       argument. In summary these contend as follows.

    5. The appellant was found to be a credible witness.  It  was  accepted
       that her brother Rothanth Lohiththasan had been shot on 2nd  January
       2006 (when he was aged just 15 years) by the Sri  Lankan  army  with
       other unarmed youths on a beach at  Trincomalee  on  suspicion  that
       they were involved with the LTTE. This was  agreed  to  be  a  high-
       profile  killing.  The  appellant  did  not  witness  this  shooting
       herself. The families of the boys had filed a court case against the
       army. They had then all received threatening letters  and  telephone
       calls and were told they must not give evidence,  and  should  leave
       Sri Lanka or be killed. The appellant and her family  all  left  Sri
       Lanka. She became separated from her mother in Egypt.  The  rest  of
       her family travelled to Switzerland and were granted refugee  status
       in 2008. The court case regarding her brother is still  on-going  in
       Sri Lanka.

    6. Judge Manuell appears to accept that the appellant had a valid claim
       for asylum when it was made, and up until the end of the  civil  war
       in May 2009 (paragraph 18). But finds she is not at risk because she
       did not witness the shooting of her brother;  she  had  not  herself
       pursued pro-separatist activities or campaigned about the  death  of
       her brother; and because it would be counter-productive for the  Sri
       Lankan government's image for them to harm the appellant  (paragraph
       19).

    7. Judge Manuell made errors  in  the  consideration  of  risk  in  the
       appellant's case in the following ways.

    8. It was contrary to GJ to find that the Sri Lankan  government  would
       not ill-treat individuals so  as  to  preserve  their  international
       image as it was clearly held that there was a real risk  of  torture
       for those detained by the security services.

    9. Further in GJ the evidence of Callum McRae  was  accepted  as  being
       balanced and such that weight should be given to it  (see  paragraph
       260 of the determination). This evidence states (at  Appendix  H  to
       GJ) that it was very dangerous to be  a  critic  of  the  Sri  Lanka
       government. Consideration should have been given  to  the  risk  the
       appellant faced as a potential  witness  in  the  case  against  the
       government involving her brother given this evidence;  the  category
       of persons at risk identified in GJ  (witness  in  relation  to  war
       crimes) and also given what was said in MP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]
       EWCA Civ 829. At paragraphs 36 to 38 the Court of Appeal  identified
       that there was a potential  further  category  of  persons  at  risk
       (those who may wish to give evidence about war crimes)  in  addition
       to those identified in GJ. This was something that might well happen
       as the appellant would be the only family member in Sri Lanka to  do
       this and at the very least the Sri Lankan government might therefore
       perceive that this was the purpose of her return to Sri Lanka  after
       her long absence.

   10. The evidence of the appellant in her statement (accepted as credible
       by Judge Manuell) was that she had  taken  part  in  anti-government
       demonstrations organised by the Tamil Youth Organisation in  London.
       In accordance with GJ at paragraph 352 these are likely to be  known
       about by the Sri Lankan authorities. It was also  notable  that  the
       appellant would be returned  from  London  a  known  Tamil  diaspora
       hotspot, and the fact of her long residence here would  add  to  her
       being seen as an LTTE member or supporter given her Tamil  ethnicity
       (see evidence at paragraphs 324, 338 and 427 of GJ). The  additional
       matters were also not put in the balance in  consideration  of  risk
       based on the category identified above.

   11. It was also argued that Judge  Manuell  had  fallen  into  error  by
       taking  irrelevant  and  inaccurate  factors   into   account   when
       considering the appellant's asylum  claim.  He  had  held  that  the
       appellant was a married women settled in the UK  who  had  left  Sri
       Lanka behind at paragraph 19. The appellant is not legally "settled"
       in the UK; the respondent clearly does not accept she is entitled to
       remain in the UK on the basis of her marriage to a  British  citizen
       as she is pursuing a cross appeal on this basis and has set  removal
       directions for the appellant's return to Sri Lanka;  and  an  asylum
       claim must always be determined on the  basis  of  the  hypothetical
       return of the appellant in any case.

   12. Mr Toufan relied upon the Rule  24  notice.  This  states  that  the
       appellant was not a witness to her  brother's  shooting  and  not  a
       party to the complaint against the Sri  Lankan  government  and  had
       lived in the UK since 2007. It was therefore open to  Judge  Manuell
       to find that she did not have a profile which would lead her  to  be
       at risk of harm from the Sri Lankan authorities. Mr  Toufan  pointed
       out that Judge Manuell had found that it was the appellant's  family
       who was pursuing an on-going  court  case  against  the  Sri  Lankan
       government and not just the appellant. Judge Manuell had  considered
       GJ at paragraph 21 of his determination and come to  the  conclusion
       that she was not at a real risk of harm. The appellant's case simply
       was not on the same facts as the possible extra  risk  category  set
       out in MP.

   13. I told the parties at the conclusion of the hearing I found an error
       of law in the consideration of the asylum appeal by Judge Manuell.

Conclusion - Error of Law Asylum

   14. On the face of the determination it appears that the finding by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the appellant was entitled to remain in the
       UK on the basis of her family life with her husband had  caused  the
       First-tier Tribunal see risks on return as lesser in the sense  that
       they  were  viewed  as  "academic"  (see   paragraph   17   of   the
       determination). Whilst the First-tier Tribunal acknowledges that  it
       is bound to determine the protection claim,  as  the  appellant  has
       chosen to pursue it, Judge Manuell returns  to  the  fact  that  the
       appellant is "settled in the  United  Kingdom",  "married"  and  has
       "left Sri Lanka behind" when considering risk factors  at  paragraph
       19. I find that immaterial factors have been brought  into  play  in
       the consideration of the asylum claim.

   15. I also find that it could not be said that the Sir Lankan government
       would not subject the appellant to serious harm  to  preserve  their
       good image internationally  as  is  said  at  paragraph  21  of  the
       determination.  Clearly  GJ  does  find  that   in   a   number   of
       circumstances the Sri Lanka government is quite  willing  to  commit
       such acts against those  who  they  regard  as  dangerous  opponents
       without apparent regard to the bad reputation that this creates.

   16. I also find that the First-tier Tribunal did not  properly  consider
       whether the appellant was at risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka  on  the
       basis of her potential to give evidence in the case  or  to  advance
       the case brought by her family against the Sri Lankan government due
       to the extrajudicial execution of her brother as  a  suspected  LTTE
       member or supporter. The fact that she did not actually witness this
       event clearly would not prevent her doing either  of  these  things.
       She is now an adult who could instruct a lawyer to pursue  the  case
       and who has relevant knowledge about  her  brother's  activities  in
       life if not the circumstances of his death.

   17. Such a risk factor would be in line with the thinking  that  such  a
       category might exist, as set out in MP by the  Court  of  Appeal  at
       paragraphs 36 to 38, and the evidence of Mr Callum McRae in  GJ.  It
       was not sufficient to dismiss  this  potential  source  of  risk  by
       saying that it would be contrary to the good image of the Sri Lankan
       government (for the reasons I set out  at  paragraph  14  above)  or
       simply because it was not a factor identified in GJ, particularly as
       some indication that it might have potential as a  risk  factor  was
       noted by the Court of Appeal in MP.

   18. I make clear however that at this stage I do not find that this is a
       risk factor or that there is sufficient evidence in the Callum McRae
       material to find the appellant at risk on this basis: I simply  find
       that this ought to have been explicitly explored; and the fact  that
       as it was not could have materially  affected  the  outcome  of  the
       appeal.

Submissions - Error of Law Article 8 ECHR

   19. Mr Toufan relied upon the grounds of appeal. These argue that  Judge
       Manuell failed to consider whether  the  appellant  could  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8  ECHR
       as  the  first  step  in  considering  the  appeal  on  this  basis.
       Furthermore he fails to consider the issue raised in  paragraph  EX1
       (b) and  EX2  of  "insurmountable  obstacles".  In  accordance  with
       Gulshan (article 8 - new Rules -correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640
       IAC the Immigration Rules must be considered first before Article  8
       ECHR is considered at large.

   20. It is also argued for the Secretary  of  State  that  Judge  Manuell
       erred in not identifying that not all the factors  under  s.117B  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are  supportive  at
       paragraph 25 of his determination. The appellant's family  life  was
       developed whilst she was in  the  UK  unlawfully  so  little  weight
       should be attached to it. The appellant's asylum claim was dismissed
       and whilst she had a valid reason to be in the UK  in  2007  it  was
       speculative that she would have succeeded in her asylum claim  until
       2009 and in any case her residence was not lawful.

   21. Further there was no concession by the presenting officer  that  the
       appellant  should  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR   and   so   the
       proportionality assessment was inadequately argued, and  any  delays
       in the consideration of the appellant's case were  not  material  as
       she had contributed herself to some of them  as  initially  she  had
       said she was happy to  join  her  family  in  Switzerland  and  then
       changed her mind - see paragraphs  12  to  15  of  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter.

   22. Ms Loughton said that she  relied  upon  her  Rule  24  notice;  the
       statement of Ms Gemma Loughran, who had been counsel at the  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal; and her  skeleton  argument.  In  Ms
       Loughran's statement she says that  she  recorded  the  Home  Office
       Presenting  Officer  Mr  Choudary  as  saying  that  "Article  8  is
       difficult to get round" and made no submissions beyond relying  upon
       the refusal letter. In these circumstances the  Secretary  of  State
       should not be allowed to pursue an appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
       reasoning of Judge  Manuell  was  not  sufficient  as  it  had  been
       strongly indicated to him that  everyone  accepted  that  Article  8
       prevented the removal of the appellant.

   23. Ms Loughton argued that the appellant was not unlawfully present  so
       there was no error in the assessment that all factors  under  s.117B
       of the 2002 Act went in the appellant's favour. It  was  clear  that
       Judge Manuell had found the appellant a  genuine  asylum  seeker  at
       paragraph 18  of  the  determination.  She  had  been  on  temporary
       admission at all times.

   24. Ms Loughton also  submitted  that  delay  was  clearly  material  to
       consideration of the Article 8 ECHR claim. The  Secretary  of  State
       had delayed for six years before making  a  decision.  If  a  prompt
       decision had been made within six months the  appellant  would  have
       been granted refugee status or at least discretionary  leave  as  an
       unaccompanied minor asylum seeker. Delay  was  clearly  material  to
       Article 8 ECHR in accordance with EB Kosovo v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  41.
       This added to the legality of the appellant's stay  in  the  UK  and
       also to the finding her removal would  be  disproportionate  to  her
       family life.

   25. At the end of submissions on Article 8 ECHR I indicated that I found
       Judge Manuell had erred in law in consideration of this issue too.

Conclusions -Error of Law Article 8 ECHR

   26. Judge Manuell ought to have first assessed the appellant's Article 8
       ECHR claim against the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
       accordance with Gulshan as the application on  family  life  grounds
       was made after commencement of the new Article 8  Immigration  Rules
       in Appendix FM. He did  not  do  this  in  his  determination.  This
       failure was material as an evaluation  of  the  obstacles,  and  how
       "insurmountable" they may be, to family life continuing in Sri Lanka
       is in any case  a  material  factor  in  the  consideration  of  the
       proportionality of removal of the appellant and is not  set  out  at
       any point in the determination.

   27. The Secretary of State did not concede the appeal  under  Article  8
       ECHR. In these circumstances it was  necessary  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to give a  reasoned  decision  on  the  issue  even  if  no
       submissions beyond reliance on the reasons for refusal  letter  were
       made. I do not find the reasoning on  this  issue  adequate  in  the
       determination. There was no consideration of the  issue  of  whether
       family life could reasonably take place in Sri  Lanka  as  indicated
       above; or the weight to be given to delay by the Secretary of State;
       and the basis on which the appellant was said to be  lawful  present
       (as Judge Manuell finds  by  implication  at  paragraph  25  of  his
       determination when he says all factors at s.117B of the Nationality,
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  are  in  her  favour)  was  not
       explained.



Decision

   28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law in  the  determination  of  the  asylum  and
       article 8 ECHR appeals.

   29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, with only  the
       findings that the appellant is to be seen as a credible  witness  in
       relation  to  all  matters  and  that  all  personal   documentation
       presented by her is also found to be credible preserved.

Directions

1. The appeal will be remade de novo  before  me  on  Friday  12th  December
2014.

2. The estimated length of hearing is 2 hours.

3. Any fresh evidence that the parties wish to adduce should  be  served  in
accordance  with  paragraph  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the Tribunal and the  other  party  at  least  seven
days prior to the hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
12th November 2014


