
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01757/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 24 July 2015                       |                 On 22 September 2015 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           Bertha Mercylin SIMANGO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussein instructed by Fuscobrowne, Sheffield
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ms Bertha Mercylin Simango, was born on 10  August  1986
    and is a female  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   The  appellant  had  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 20 January 2015 refusing the
    appellant asylum and directing the removal of the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) in  a  decision
    dated 21 April 2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  The grant of appeal (Judge P J
    G White) is limited; the judge had found that the appellant was not (as
    she had claimed) a former boyfriend of the deputy director of  the  CIO
    in Zimbabwe and that that individual was not the father of  her  child.
    Granting permission, Judge White stated that he found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was not arguably wrong in  his  assessment  of  the
    evidence and his conclusions.  The grant of appeal is  limited  to  the
    judge's alleged failure "to have adequate regard to the  best  interest
    of the appellant's child"  pursuant  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   In  the  Rule  24  notice,  the
    respondent stated:

         The appellant's child was but 6 months  old  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing, has not yet commenced education and cannot be said to have
         formed a private life  in  the  UK.   The  judge  has  recorded  at
         paragraph 69 that there was no suggestion other than that the child
         would travel with the appellant.  It has not been suggested by  the
         appellant that there are any particular circumstances, e.g.  health
         or  any  other  person  sharing  responsibility  for  the   child's
         upbringing in which it might be considered that the child's Article
         8 rights might be breached.

 2. I consider that that submission, succinctly made,  is  accurate.   This
    was a case in which the refusal letter of the respondent  [61]  clearly
    considered Section 55 as part  of  the  respondent's  analysis  of  the
    grounds for granting discretionary leave to the appellant.  The child's
    youth was noted (the child had not resided in the  United  Kingdom  for
    more than seven years) as was the appellant's  failure  to  demonstrate
    that,

         your child has no social, cultural or family life ties in  Zimbabwe
         because you state that your maternal  grandmother  still  lives  in
         Bulawayo ... additionally it is in the best interests of your child
         to remain with his mother, thereby maintaining a family unit.   ...
         furthermore, you have not raised any medical conditions which might
         warrant consideration by the Secretary of State for  the  grant  of
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom ...

    The judge had regard to all the evidence in the matter as he stated  at
    [35(c)].  At [69], he wrote:

         I record the fact that there is no suggestion other than  that  the
         child would travel with the appellant  and  therefore  that  family
         life would not in any way be disrupted by returning to Zimbabwe.

 3. The judge did not make any formal finding as  to  the  child's  private
    life but it was axiomatic from the fact  that  the  child  was  only  6
    months old that he had developed no private life independent from  that
    which he enjoys with his mother.  Given the particular circumstances in
    this case (the child's youth, lack of any  private  life  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom including educational and social ties and the absence of
    any medical conditions) I consider that the judge's assessment,  albeit
    brief, was adequate.  He was entitled  to  find  that  the  Section  55
    assessment should begin and end with the fact  that  this  child  would
    remain in the care of  his  mother  and  that  the  mother,  having  no
    legitimate reason herself to remain in the United Kingdom, would return
    to Zimbabwe with the child.  Indeed, the grounds  make  no  attempt  to
    identify any evidence before the  judge  which  might  have  led  to  a
    different outcome.  The grounds  simply  state  [10]  that  "the  judge
    failed to apply the test of 'best interests' of the child  which  would
    be best served where the only families he has lived with are residing".
     I am not entirely sure what that statement means but I am  clear  that
    the grounds fail to establish any reason which might lead  me  to  find
    that the judge's assessment of the child's best interests under Section
    55 and his Article 8 ECHR analysis generally is in any way flawed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

