
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01902/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On   17th October 2014                          |On 27th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     S S

                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Turpin and
                    Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the  decision  of  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Andrew who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  the
   18th June 2014, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision to
   refuse him asylum and to remove him to Uganda.

2. The issue in the appeal was the credibility of the appellant's  claim  to
   be gay, to have experienced persecution  in  Uganda  on  account  of  his
   sexual orientation, and to wish to  live  an  openly  gay  lifestyle.  An
   appeal against his original claim for asylum had been dismissed by  Judge
   Alakija in a determination promulgated on the  17th  February  2010.  The
   instant appeal arose from the rejection of  a  fresh  claim  for  asylum,
   which largely turned upon the credibility of evidence that  he  had  been
   living an openly gay life in the UK since the dismissal  of  his  earlier
   appeal.

3. The core of the First-tier Tribunal's reasons for dismissing  the  appeal
   can be found at paragraph 35 of its determination -

    It is all too easy for the Appellant to tell people that he is  gay.  I
    accept that he attends gay meetings and has helped organise gay  events
    but this does not mean that he is gay.  Both  the  earlier  Immigration
    Judge and I have found his claims as to what happened to him in  Uganda
    to be incredible. As I have already indicated  it  is  only  after  the
    Appellant's previous  appeal  failed  that  he  has  started  to  amass
    evidence which he hopes will support his claims of being gay.  For  the
    reasons which I have given I do not find he is [in] the relationship he
    claims with his claimed partner. I am satisfied that the evidence  that
    I have before me has effectively been manufactured for the  hearing  in
    an attempt to show that the Appellant  is,  in  fact,  gay.  I  am  not
    satisfied, even to the lower standard, that he is and would thus be  at
    risk on his return to Uganda.

4. It can be seen from the above that the Tribunal  viewed  the  appellant's
   actions since he lost his appeal in February 2010 as insincere and  self-
   serving. The relationship to which the Tribunal referred at paragraph  35
   was to that which was claimed existed between the appellant and Mr S.  Mr
   S  gave  oral  testimony  at  the  hearing.  The  Tribunal  set  out  its
   conclusions in relation to that testimony at paragraph 29:

    Whilst I accept that no great reliance can or should be placed on  body
    language I have to say that I have never before in  hearing  before  me
    seen such disconnected people as the Appellant and the  witness.  There
    was no eye contact between them. They did not acknowledge  one  another
    in the hearing room. Immediately after he had given  his  evidence  the
    witness left despite an invitation to remain, as I would have  expected
    him to do so. If the appellant  and  the  witness  are  indeed  in  the
    relationship they claim then the outcome of this appeal would be of the
    utmost importance to them both and yet the witness was disinterested.

5. It is finally necessary, for the purposes of explaining  my  decision  in
   this appeal, to refer to the Tribunal's treatment of the  oral  testimony
   of a second witness, Mr K. The Tribunal dealt with this at paragraph 30:

    I also heard from Mr K who told me that he knows the  Appellant  is  an
    openly gay man, although he gives no reasons for saying  this.  He  has
    also met the Appellant's claimed partner [Mr S, above] on one occasion.



6. Based upon his written grounds of appeal, I had at first thought that  Mr
   Chelvan's complaint about the approach of the Tribunal to  the  testimony
   of Mr S was that it was not (and never could  be) appropriate  to  assess
   the credibility of a witness by reference to his demeanour and  behaviour
   at the hearing. However, during the course of his  oral  submissions,  it
   became apparent that  his  argument  was  that  the  Tribunal  had  acted
   unfairly in failing to raise its concerns about Mr S's behaviour  at  the
   hearing with the appellant's representative before relying upon it  as  a
   basis for making adverse credibility findings. In order to reinforce that
   argument, Mr Chelvan referred to a letter that the witness  had  written,
   post-hearing, in which he provided an explanation  for  having  left  the
   hearing room  after  he  had  completed  giving  his  testimony.  It  not
   appropriate for me to comment upon the plausibility of that  explanation.
   This is because it is not my present task to assess  the  credibility  of
   the appellant's claim. I am at this stage considering  only  whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law.   The  letter  does  however
   serve the purpose of underscoring the need  to  act  with  great  caution
   before placing weight (however slight) upon the demeanour  and  behaviour
   of a witness at the hearing, and the need to investigate the  possibility
   that there may be an alternative explanation for the conduct in  question
   to that which the Tribunal is otherwise prepared to  assume.  It  may  be
   (and I put it no higher)  that  the  Tribunal  would  have  accepted  the
   explanation for Mr S's conduct that has now been placed before me, had it
   given  the  appellant's  representative   the   opportunity   of   taking
   instructions before reaching a settled conclusion on the  matter.  As  it
   is, the appellant was effectively 'ambushed' in respect of a matter  that
   was material to the Tribunal's decision to dismiss his appeal.

7. It is right, as Mr Bramble pointed out, that the Tribunal later  returned
   to the issue of the appellant's claimed relationship with Mr S.  At  that
   stage, the Tribunal remarked upon the failure of Mr S and  the  appellant
   to take every available opportunity to be together.  Nevertheless,  I  am
   satisfied that the appellant would have a legitimate sense  of  grievance
   if a decision of such potential importance to him was allowed  to  stand,
   in circumstances where he had been deprived of an opportunity to  address
   one of the reasons that led to it.

8. Mr Chelvan further argued that the  Tribunal's  finding  that  Mr  K  had
   failed to give any reason for stating that he knew the appellant to be an
   'openly gay man' was factually inaccurate. Thus, at paragraph  5  of  his
   witness statement, Mr K stated as follows:

    When I found out [the appellant] was Ugandan I really wanted to support
    and help him, as I could tell he was in a very difficult situation.  In
    early 2011 I first invited him to our house and I  would  say  that  is
    when we really started to become good friends.  It  was  then  that  he
    opened up to me and told me his whole story and that he was gay.  There
    were other people in our church who are openly gay. After he  had  told
    me he told the rest of the church and we have all accepted  him  as  an
    openly gay man.

   It is possible of course to make  a  distinction  between  knowledge  and
   belief. However, if the Tribunal was seeking to  make  a  distinction  at
   that level of subtlety, then the appellant was in  my  view  entitled  to
   have this made clear to him in the determination. It would also  be  fair
   and reasonable to expect that such a distinction would be investigated in
   the course of questioning the witness, whether in cross-examination or by
   way of clarification from the Bench. As it  is,  the  Tribunal's  finding
   that Mr K had given no reason  for  his  knowledge  or  belief  that  the
   appellant was leading the life of an openly gay man was, on the  face  of
   it, contrary to the evidence.

9. In my judgement, the above failures in procedural fairness are such  that
   the determination of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside. In  light
   of the reasons that I have given for  arriving  at  this  conclusion,  it
   would be inappropriate for any of the original  findings  to  stand.  The
   matter is therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  it
   to be determined afresh.

Decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law  and  its  decision
   is set aside.



Signed                                  Date: 17th October 2014


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

