
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/01060/2012
     AA/01061/2012
     AA/01062/2012
     AA/01063/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared on 13 May 2013                       |Date sent                    |
|On the papers                                 |On 6 may 2013                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS HINA JASSIM
                          MR MUHAMMAD JASSIM FAYYAZ
                             MISS AREEBA JASSIM
                              MISS IZBAJ JASSIM

                                                                 Respondents


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pugh, following a hearing at North  Shields  (Kings
    Court) on 22 May 2012.  For ease of reference, I shall throughout  this
    determination refer to the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent as "the Secretary of State" and to the respondents, who were
    originally the appellants, as "the claimants".

 2. The first claimant, who was born on 22 November 1979, is a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, who arrived in this country pursuant to a visit  visa  on  18
    June 2011, together with her husband,  the  second  claimant,  and  two
    minor children as her dependants.  A further  child  was  born  to  the
    first and second claimants while in the UK.

 3. The claimants claimed asylum on 1 November 2011, but their  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State, and the claimants were  notified
    of this refusal in a refusal letter dated 17 January 2012.

 4. The claimants appealed against this decision and their appeal was heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pugh, sitting at North Shields  (Kings
    Court) on 22 May 2012.

 5. In a determination dated 26 May 2012, Judge Pugh allowed the appeals on
    asylum grounds and also under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 6. The Secretary of State has  appealed  against  this  decision  and  was
    granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on  20
    June 2012.

 7. There are a number of grounds set out by the Secretary of State  within
    the grounds of appeal.  It is not necessary  to  repeat  these  grounds
    within this determination, because on 9 October 2012, I gave directions
    in the following terms:

    "1. The appellant in this appeal (the Secretary of State)  must  by  no
    later than 14 days after these directions are sent out, file  with  the
    Tribunal and serve on the respondents, a skeleton argument setting  out
    precisely:

    (1)  What of the HOPO's "amplifications" referred to in the grounds  it
    is said were  not considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,

    (2)  The reasons why it is said (if it is)  that  the  presence  of  an
    interpreter who may have been known to  one  of  the  parties  had  any
    material bearing on the outcome of the appeal, or if it  is  not  said,
    why the presence of that interpreter was procedurally  unfair,  and  in
    any event

    (3)  Why it is said that "the word of the representative"  with  regard
    to that interpreter should  not have been  accepted by the judge, and

    (4)  To where other than Karachi it was suggested at the  hearing  that
    these respondents could safely relocate.

    2. It  is  noted  that  notwithstanding  the  directions  of  Principal
    Resident Judge Southern, which were sent to the parties  together  with
    the grant of permission, the Secretary of State has not  submitted  any
    further evidence or made submissions as to why there  needs  to  be  an
    oral hearing, and the parties are put on notice that if  the  Secretary
    of State does not file and serve this skeleton argument  in  accordance
    with these directions it is the provisional intention of this  Tribunal
    to dismiss this appeal without a hearing, pursuant to Rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    3. In the event that the Secretary of  State  does  file  and  serve  a
    skeleton  argument  in  accordance  with  these   directions,   further
    directions will then be given for the disposal of this appeal."


 8. Notwithstanding these very clear Directions, the Secretary of State has
    chosen not to provide a skeleton argument, and has  not  addressed  the
    matters referred to within these Directions save that  on  22  February
    2013, a case worker, acting on behalf of the Secretary of  State  wrote
    to the Tribunal in the following terms:

         "We write with regard to the above appeal. The UK Border Agency has
         been given permission to appeal against the decision of Immigration
         Judge Pugh; however we seek permission  to  amend  our  grounds  of
         appeal.

         We no longer seek to rely on ground 2 of the appeal that was served
         on 8 June 2012 relating to the issue of procedural unfairness.

         We would appreciate it if this could be  put  before  the  relevant
         judge for their consideration."

 9. In the absence of any further argument or submissions on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, I am satisfied that there is no material  error  of
    law  in  Judge  Pugh's  determination,  and  that  his  decision   must
    accordingly stand.  As I indicated in paragraph 2 of the directions the
    Tribunal was likely to do, I have  accordingly  dismissed  this  appeal
    without a hearing, pursuant to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, the Secretary of State's appeal is  dismissed.   The  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal, allowing these appellants' appeals, is upheld.





Signed:                                 Date: 4 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
