
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01121/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th January, 2016                 |On 21st January, 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clark, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

The First-tier Tribunal ordered that  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  her  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies to  both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.  I order that that direction shall continue.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran of Ahwazi Arab  ethnicity  who  was
    born on 16th August, 1979.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 17th May, 2013 and applied for asylum on her arrival.  Her claim  to
    asylum was refused.  The respondent served the appellant with Notice of
    Refusal of leave to enter  on  8th  January,  2015  and  the  appellant
    appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Garbett,
    sitting at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent on  18th  June,  2015.   In  a
    detailed determination the judge found that the appellant's account  of
    what she claimed had happened to her in Iran was simply  not  credible.
    She accepted that the appellant played a role in the Wefagh Party at  a
    low level until the party was closed down and then became involved in a
    much smaller and more informal group but the judge did not believe that
    the appellant was politically active to such a degree as to be at  risk
    on return to Iran as a result of her activities undertaken in Iran.

3.   The appellant claimed to have been active  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    protesting at events in Iran, attending demonstrations and rallies, and
    writing articles published on the internet.   The  judge  examined  the
    appellant's sur place activities but found that she was not  a  leader,
    mobiliser or organiser of these demonstrations or rallies and  was  not
    the founder or head  of  any  of  the  organisations  she  belonged  to
    although the judge accepted she may be an avid member.

4.   The judge noted that the appellant's role is often  administrative  and
    that she was a number of demonstrators, part of  the  crowd,  and  only
    apparently leading a protest on one occasion.  The judge noted  AB  and
    Others and concluded that it was  unlikely  that  the  appellant  would
    attract attention on her return and asked about her internet  activity.
    She found that the appellant had not produced  sufficient  evidence  to
    show that the website to which she had blogged or published articles on
    in the United Kingdom are monitored or that she  would  necessarily  be
    identified if she  returned  to  Iran.   She  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant is known within Iran as a committed opponent or someone  with
    a significant political profile or that there are factors  which  would
    trigger an enquiry on  her  return  to  Iran  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of persecution.

5.   The appellant challenged the determination and was  granted  permission
    to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to
    engage adequately with the totality of the  appellant's  evidence  with
    regard to her sur place activity.

6.   Counsel suggested that the judge had erred  by  failing  to  take  into
    account the  appellant's  sister's  political  activities  although  he
    accepted that she had ceased her political activities  some  years  ago
    following her marriage.  He also suggested that the judge had failed to
    take into account the fact that another sister had been granted  asylum
    in the United Kingdom as the dependant of her  husband's  asylum  claim
    and that these factors would cause the appellant's profile to be raised
    in the perception  of  the  Iranian  authorities.   He  criticised  the
    judge's finding that she found it significant that in oral evidence the
    appellant was unable to say with any certainty why A had been  arrested
    and suggested that it was  wrong  of  the  judge  to  assume  that  the
    appellant had remained at home for the following seven  or  eight  days
    after A had been arrested because she was moving around.  He  accepted,
    however, that the judge had recorded that A's arrest took place on 16th
    April and that according to the appellant's own evidence  she  remained
    at home for seven or eight days before going to her sister's.

7.    Counsel  suggested  that  the  determination   lacked   a   cumulative
    assessment of the factors which would cause risk to  the  appellant  on
    her return.  These included her illegal departure  from  Iran  and  the
    fact that she is of Arab ethnicity.  The judge refers  to  SA  (Iranian
    Arabs - no general risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41 (IAC),  but  failed  to
    consider this in the context of someone who left the country illegally,
    who had written articles published on  the  internet  critical  of  the
    Iranian authorities and  who  had  taken  part  in  demonstrations  and
    protests against the Iranian government.  Additionally, the appellant's
    family were known to the Iranian authorities.  He  suggested  that  the
    Iranian authorities are paranoid enough to make  enquiries  of  persons
    who are  of  Arab  origin  and  known  to  have  undertaken  sur  place
    activities and these would cause her to be at risk.  She would have  to
    admit to having taken part in  demonstrations  and  she  could  not  be
    expected to lie about her having written what  would  be  perceived  as
    being articles critical of the Iranian state.

8.   Mr Clark urged me to find that there was no error of law  on  the  part
    of the judge and that the criticisms of the determination amounted only
    to disagreements with the findings.  At paragraphs 28 and 29 the  judge
    found that the appellant was politically  active  but  not  to  such  a
    degree as to be at risk on return  as  a  result  of  those  activities
    undertaken in Iran.  She did not find it credible that if the appellant
    were at risk following A's arrest she would remain at her home for some
    seven or eight  days  and  then  destroy  only  some  of  the  damaging
    documents she says were stored there only to flee  that  house  leaving
    the remaining documents.  The judge had taken account of these  factors
    and it was open to the judge on the evidence to make the  findings  she
    did.  The judge very carefully considered BA and SA and did so  in  the
    correct form.  BA (Demonstrations in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 31  (IAC)  was  the  country  guidance.   SA  needs  to  be
    considered in the context of BA.  The judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    involvement in activities in the United Kingdom but concluded that they
    would not cause the appellant to  be  of  any  risk.   The  judge  also
    considered AB and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) and noted that a high degree of activity is  not
    necessary to attract  persecution  and  emphasises  that  when  someone
    returns to Iran a pitch point is created so that returnees are  brought
    into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both the time
    and inclination to interrogate them and that it  is  likely  that  they
    will be asked about their internet activity.  The judge found that  the
    appellant had not provided sufficient evidence to show that the website
    which he blogged to or which published her articles in this country are
    monitored or that she would be identified if  returned  to  Iran.   The
    judge carefully examined the nature of the organisations in the  United
    Kingdom that the  appellant  had  been  involved  with  and  considered
    whether the appellant might be  identified  as  having  taken  part  in
    demonstrations and protests from photographs.  He urged me to find that
    there was no real risk that on return to Iran the  appellant  would  be
    persecuted.

9.   In responding Mr Muquit referred me to SA in which the  Tribunal  found
    that being an Iranian Arab returning from the United  Kingdom  enhances
    other factors where an Iranian Arab does not risk persecution  or  ill-
    treatment solely by reason of ethnicity.  He reminded me that the judge
    had found that the appellant had written  blogs  and  written  articles
    which  had  been  published  on  the  internet.   He   suggested   that
    publication of these articles may very well have been monitored because
    they were published on websites which are related to Ahwazi affairs and
    websites which are critical of the government.  He invited me to  allow
    the appeal.

10.  In a thorough determination the judge set out clearly  the  appellant's
    evidence at paragraph 15.  At paragraph 15(xxi)  the  judge  highlights
    the sur place activities undertaken by the appellant since her  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.  He draws attention to the fact  that  they  are
    detailed in paragraphs 61 to 95 of the appellant's witness statement of
    3rd March,  2015  and  in  paragraph  2  of  her  supplemental  witness
    statement dated 8th June, 2015.

11.  At 15(xxi)(a) the judge noted the appellant's membership of the  Centre
    for Combatting Racism and Discrimination in Iran, CCRADI, and that  the
    appellant was responsible for administering the centre's Facebook  page
    and updating and uploading posts.  The appellant also  attends  regular
    member meetings on Skype and discusses developments, articles,  reports
    and future action plans with the founder.  I do not believe that any of
    those activities are likely to  have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities.

12.  Similarly, I do not believe that the appellant's work  with  the  Ahwaz
    Human Rights Organisation in  translating  articles  and  reports  from
    Arabic to Farsi and vice versa are likely to have come to the attention
    of the authorities, but I do believe that  articles  published  on  the
    website of the Ahwazi Studies Centre  are  very  likely  to  have  been
    monitored.

13.  The Ahwazi Studies Centre website, it seems to me, is the very sort  of
    internet site that a paranoid government may very  well  monitor.   The
    appellant has published two articles on the website dealing with  child
    and adult abuse in schools  and  honour  killings.   I  have  read  one
    article written by the appellant published on the Ahwazi Studies Centre
    website entitled "Honour killing with double-edged sword  of  tradition
    and law" which appears at pages 129 to 133 of one  of  the  appellant's
    bundles.  It discusses the cultures where honour killings and  domestic
    violence against women are the most obvious breaches  of  human  rights
    and suggest that in these cultures normally the men are  in  power  and
    they are in charge of the family's finances and  control  the  family's
    cultural and  social  behaviour.   Yet  women  in  these  families  are
    inferior and have to listen to their brothers, husbands and fathers and
    if they disobey there will  be  severe  consequences.   This  might  be
    regarded as being critical of the Iranian authority but is not,  in  my
    view,  an  article  which  is  likely  to  have  excited  the   Iranian
    government's interest in the appellant.

14.  However, the appellant has  had  several  articles  published  by  Iran
    Wire.  The first of these describes celebration  of  the  International
    Women's Day and describes anti-government activities  being  undertaken
    to mark that day.  The English translation which I have found at  pages
    12 and 13 of one of the appellant's bundles and the article I found  at
    page 19 of the same bundle are likely to have attracted the interest of
    the Iranian authorities.  Iranian Wire appears to be a website critical
    of the Iranian authorities.  Some of  the  articles  are  published  in
    English, but not all of them.  The article at page  19  of  the  bundle
    refers to a picture of a Revolutionary Guard commander who  appears  to
    be standing next to a body.  It refers to  one  Yunes  Asakereh  having
    burnt himself to death  and  having  been  humiliated  by  the  Iranian
    government.  The article refers to an explosion in Yemen which prompted
    the Islamic Republic to  send  25  tonnes  of  medicine  to  Yemen  and
    transferring 52 injured Yemeni people to Iran  for  medical  treatment.
    It criticises the government for forgetting that "charity  starts  from
    home".  At pages 38 to 46 the appellant was apparently interviewed  for
    an article entitled "Mahabad Explosion case: 12 dead and 3 executions".
     The appellant is quoted and described as being a  lawyer.   I  believe
    that the comments she makes are likely to be viewed as  being  critical
    of the Iranian government.

15.  I do not think it likely that the appellant's  very  limited  political
    activities in Iran some years ago are likely to be of any  interest  to
    the Iranian authorities on her return.  Similarly,  I  do  not  believe
    that the appellant's having taken part in demonstrations  and  protests
    in the United Kingdom are likely to have caused her  to  be  identified
    such that she will be at risk on her return.  The appellant's sister in
    Iran ceased her activities some years ago, albeit under  pressure  from
    the Iranian authorities, when she married her husband  but  nonetheless
    they ceased.   I  think  it  very  unlikely  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's brother-in-law came with her sister to the  United  Kingdom
    and claimed asylum is likely to  cause  the  appellant  any  particular
    difficulty on her return, but the same cannot be true of  the  articles
    which the appellant has written which are  expressly  critical  of  the
    regime.  These are  published  on  websites  which  are  likely  to  be
    monitored.  I believe that there is a very real and serious  risk  that
    the appellant's name, articles and political  views  will  have  become
    known to the Iranian authorities.  I believe that there is a very  real
    possibility that she will be identified on  return  to  Iran  as  being
    someone critical of  the  regime  and  thereby  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.

16.  I believe that despite having written  a  very  detailed  determination
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  err  by  failing  to  consider  the
    possibility that as an Iranian  of  Arab  descent  returning  from  the
    United Kingdom this would enhance the risk to the appellant as  someone
    whose articles critical of the Iranian authorities,  published  on  the
    worldwide web, on websites which themselves contain  material  critical
    of the regime and therefore likely to be monitored.

17.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  I set aside the previous  decision.   My  decision  is
    that the appellant's appeal be allowed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
