
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01812/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Gilbert of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. This is an appeal by the Home Office against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Haria allowing the appeal by the Claimant in a  Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 5 October 2015.  The Claimant is a  national
    of Iraq born on 20 June 1989 and is a Shia Muslim.  He arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 8 September 2014 and made his asylum claim nine  days
    later at the Asylum Support Unit in Croydon.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he had been  working  for  his  maternal
    uncle in the Green Zone in Baghdad.  His uncle had a company, he was  a
    chief engineer and had been working with  the  Iraqi  Government.   The
    Claimant's specific job was to install pipes in the Green Zone which he
    did.  The first problem the  Claimant  said  he  had  was  receiving  a
    threatening phone call on 20 June 2010 which he  remembers  because  it
    was his birthday.  The call was from a militia saying  if  he  did  not
    leave his job they would kill him.  On 3 June 2013 the Claimant was  at
    home in Baghdad when two cars with seven men came to  his  house.   The
    men were armed, they were militia.  They kidnapped him,  kept  him  for
    twelve days during which time he was beaten and tortured on  the  basis
    that he had ignored the warnings that he had been given.  A ransom  was
    paid and he was released twelve days later.  He  was  then  treated  in
    hospital.  The family moved  to  a  different  area  and  the  Claimant
    stopped working in the Green Zone.

 3. However, on 24 May 2014 the Asaab Ahl Haq militia came to his house  in
    the Al Banuk area of Baghdad.  His mother said he  was  not  there  but
    they threatened him again via his mother that if he continued  to  work
    in the Green Zone he would pay the price. The Claimant  was  afraid  he
    would again be kidnapped or killed so he went, along with  his  family,
    to stay in a different area, the Al  Shab  area  and  then  the  family
    relocated to another house in the Al Banuk area.

 4. The Claimant took different employment as a  barber  and  then  with  a
    friend who set  up  a  business  importing  and  exporting  cattle  and
    livestock to Holland.  The Claimant travelled to Holland  on  8  August
    2014 for ten days on a business trip but then returned to Iraq.  On  23
    August 2014, ten armed men from the Al Haq militia attacked his  house,
    seeking his whereabouts, however, he was  not  there.   They  took  his
    laptop, his ID and his passport, stating that he was a traitor  and  he
    was accused of working with the Americans.  The  Claimant  subsequently
    fled the country.

 5. His asylum claim was rejected by the Respondent in a decision  dated  9
    January 2015 and his appeal came before the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing on 6 May 2015.  The  appeal  was  allowed  on  the
    basis that the judge at [57] accepted the credibility of the Claimant's
    account.  Although there were minor discrepancies the judge found these
    were  satisfactorily  explained  in  his  statement  and  in  the  oral
    evidence.   The  judge  had  regard  to  the  background  evidence,  in
    particular the most recent Country Information and Guidance  Report  of
    27 April 2015 and found at [61] firstly, that if the Claimant  were  to
    be relocated to the southern governorates he may end up residing  where
    persons of his religious sector in the minority may as  a  result  face
    heightened risk of indiscriminate violence or persecution.   The  judge
    also went on to find in the light of the  Respondent's  latest  country
    information guidance and based on the fact:  "That  the  appellant  has
    been targeted regardless of where he has relocated as he  is  perceived
    to be a government employee, even though  he  stopped  working  in  the
    Green Zone in 2007, in  the  appellant's  case  it  seems  to  me  that
    internal relocation is not a feasible option" and at [64] that in light
    of his acceptance of the Claimant's account of kidnapping  and  threats
    and that the threats have continued despite  stopping  working  in  the
    Green Zone, that there were substantial grounds for believing that  the
    Claimant would on return face a real risk of death or ill-treatment  in
    breach of Article 3 and for the same  reasons  allowed  the  appeal  in
    respect of the Refugee Convention.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on 13 October  2015  on  two
    grounds.  The first was the alleged failure by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to give reasons or adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
    matters viz the judge's finding at the first part of paragraph 61  that
    internal relocation was not feasible  and  the  judge  failed  to  make
    findings on why the Claimant may end up residing where persons  of  his
    religious sect are in the minority.  Reference was made to the  country
    report of 26 August 2011.

 7. The second point was in relation to the fact that the country  guidance
    decision by the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  [2015  UKUT
    544 (IAC) had recently been promulgated.  It  was  submitted  this  was
    available to the judge at the time of his decision.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  on
    23 October 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  did
    not make adequate findings in respect of why the claimant  may  face  a
    heightened risk of indiscriminate violence or persecution and  why  the
    claimant would end up residing in an area of Iraq where members of  his
    religious sect were in the minority.  It was said that it  is  arguable
    that her conclusions lack reasoning.

    Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me the Claimant was represented by Mr Gilbert and
    the Respondent by Mr Whitwell.  Mr Whitwell  accepted  that  the  judge
    signed the decision on 28 September 2015 and that  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq [2015 UKUT 544 (IAC) had been promulgated on  30  September  2015,
    which postdated the judge's decision even though it was  prior  to  the
    promulgation date.

10. The main thrust of Mr Whitwell's submissions was based on ground  1  of
    the grounds of appeal viz the adequacy of the reasons for  the  judge's
    findings.   He  provided  me  with  a  copy  of  the  relevant  Country
    Information and Guidance Report that was before the judge (the  version
    dated 27 April 2015) and drew my attention in particular to  paragraphs
    1.3.12 and 1.3.13.  He also submitted that the whole  of  paragraph  61
    was premised on whether internal relocation was feasible but  that  was
    not the correct test.  He submitted that the  assertion  by  the  judge
    that the Claimant might find himself in a Sunni area was not borne  out
    by the evidence.  He also drew my attention  to  [1.3.29]  which  makes
    clear that the levels of violence across the southern governorates  are
    considerably lower than  for  other  parts  of  the  country  with  the
    exception of Kri.  While the majority of  security  incidents  involved
    targeted attacks, mass casualty attacks did occasionally occur  in  the
    south, notably Basra and Karbala.

11. He further drew my attention to the fact that the paragraph  continues,
    "the   southern   governorates   also   continue   to   see    targeted
    killings/kidnappings and sectarian reprisal attacks against individuals
    including members of political parties, religious and  tribal  figures,
    government employees and  professionals"  and  he  submitted  that  the
    Claimant did not fall within the categories set out  there.   He  could
    relocate to the southern governorates.  He speaks Arabic, has travelled
    internationally and has family in the country and he submitted that the
    judge's reasons were inadequate.

12. In his response Mr Gilbert submitted that the judge had  concluded  his
    determination on 28 September 2015 and  so  is  not  cognisant  of  the
    promulgation of the country guidance decision  in  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq [2015 UKUT 544 (IAC) which has also been promulgated  subsequently
    due to corrections and the judge had  not  offended  any  principle  in
    failing to take it into account.  He invited me  to  read  the  judge's
    decision as a whole and he submitted that the grounds sought to extract
    one part of paragraph  61  from  the  other.   He  submitted  that  the
    Claimant would be perceived as a  government  employee  and  the  judge
    clearly found that at [61] and the judge  had  not  erred  in  that  he
    submitted that the test for internal relocation is firstly  feasibility
    and, if that is satisfied, the second part of the test  is  whether  or
    not it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  Claimant  to  internally
    relocate.

13. He submitted that at [64] the judge had clearly made a finding that the
    Claimant would be at real risk of treatment in breach of Article 3.  He
    pointed out that those who threatened the Claimant  were  Shia  militia
    i.e. from the same religious background as  the  Claimant  himself  and
    therefore relocating to a Shia area,  i.e.  the  southern  governorates
    would not alleviate the risk that he would face.  He drew my  attention
    to the Claimant's response at  question  64  of  the  Asylum  Interview
    Record where he makes reference to the Ahmadi Army and Asaab Al Haq and
    to the Country Information and Guidance Report at  1.3.28  which  makes
    clear that the south is predominantly made up of Shia  Arabs  and  that
    targeted killings have taken place there.

14. He also made reference to paragraphs 12,  15  and  18  of  the  judge's
    decision where he clearly set  out  the  events  as  described  by  the
    Claimant and submitted that these were events where  the  Claimant  had
    been targeted by Shia militia because of  his  work  assisting  foreign
    governments in the Green Zones and he further  submitted  that  Baghdad
    was run by Shia militia.

15. Mr Gilbert was prepared to accept that the first part of  paragraph  61
    was not adequately reasoned but  essentially  this  was  not  relevant,
    firstly, because the findings there were  clearly  in  respect  of  the
    Article 15(c) risk,  i.e.  the  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  and
    secondly the judge had elsewhere in his decision  at  [64]  made  clear
    findings that the Claimant would be at real risk  in  Baghdad  and  the
    south and he submitted it was uncontroversial that the  Claimant  could
    not internally relocate anywhere else within Iraq.  He further  pointed
    out that there had been no challenge to the credibility of the Claimant
    and he asked me to uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

    Decision

16. I find for the reasons and  submissions  provided  by  Mr  Gilbert  and
    despite Mr Whitwell's helpful submissions that  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria.   This
    is particularly in light of the acceptance that whilst the  first  part
    of paragraph 61 of the decision is inadequately reasoned this aspect of
    the decision is clearly in relation to the Article 15(c) risk  and  not
    in relation to the asylum and Article 3 risk.  I do consider  that  the
    judge made clear and adequate findings in relation to the risk  to  the
    Claimant of persecution or ill-treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  and
    those findings were properly open to the judge.  I find that proper and
    adequate reasons for finding that the  Claimant  could  not  internally
    relocate were provided at [61] in light of  the  Claimant's  particular
    history of being targeted by Shia militia  as  a  perceived  government
    employee because of his former employment in the Green Zone.

17. Mr Whitwell did not pursue the ground in relation to AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq [2015 UKUT 544 (IAC) given that the Judge had written  and  signed
    her decision prior to promulgation of the country  guidance  case,  but
    for the avoidance of doubt I do not consider that it would have made  a
    material difference to the outcome of this case in light of the Judge's
    findings, which I have found to be sustainable.

Notice of Decision

18. For the reasons set out above, I dismiss the appeal by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State and I uphold the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Haria allowing this Claimant's appeal.

19. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  I
    uphold that anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

