
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01247/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower                |           Decision & Reasons     |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 12 November 2015                       |           On 12 February 2016    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     o a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Loughran, Counsel instructed by TRP solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I make this order because  the  Appellant
    is a victim of trafficking to service the "sex trade". She has  suffered
    considerable physical and emotional abuse. I see  no  legitimate  public
    interest in knowing her identity.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing on refugee grounds but allowing on  human
    rights grounds an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    on 10 February 2014 to refuse her asylum and  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The facts of the case are not controversial and are  well  rehearsed  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  I do not see any point  in  setting
    them out in any great detail. Suffice it to say that this appellant  has
    been the victim of appalling ill-treatment  and  exploitation  following
    the death of her father when she was 13 years  old.   There  is  medical
    evidence showing that her body has been abused by her being forced  into
    prostitution. The reason that the appeal was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds is that the appellant's mental health  is  so  broken  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was persuaded that she could not  be  returned
    to Nigeria because she was just too poorly.  It is  right  to  say  that
    that finding was made in very emphatic terms and although the  Secretary
    of State sought permission to challenge it  permission  was  refused  on
    that point was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  application
    for permission was not renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The challenge to the Upper Tribunal is essentially on  two  limbs.   The
    first is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  herself  in
    deciding what amounts to trafficking and did not apply the  broader  and
    perhaps less precise definition which is  favoured  by  the  Council  of
    Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in  Human  Beings.   Had
    she applied that she would have been satisfied that as well as  being  a
    victim  of  exploitation  the  appellant  was  in  fact  a   victim   of
    trafficking. Mr  Mills  has  considered  that  point  carefully  and  he
    conceded that that is right.

 5. The second point is that the finding  of  the  Tribunal  on  an  earlier
    occasion was that the appellant would be a refugee were it not  for  the
    fact that she could internally relocate.  There  is  now  more  evidence
    about her mental state. It led to the  appeal  being  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds because she is too poorly.  It follows from that that she
    cannot relocate she cannot  look  after  herself  at  all.   It  is  the
    appellant's contention, which Mr Mills again has considered and conceded
    is right, that in  the  circumstances  internal  relocation  is  not  an
    option. It follows that she must be a refugee.  Internal  relocation  is
    only an answer to a refugee claim if it is reasonable.  If,  as  is  the
    case here, the  appellant  is  too  ill  to  relocate  then  she  cannot
    reasonably be expected to relocate and so she is a refugee.

 6. It is right to add that this case was carefully pleaded in very detailed
    grounds which Mr Mills was able to consider and which led to him  making
    the concessions that he did properly. For some reason when the file  was
    before the Presenting Officer considering a Rule 24 response all of  the
    necessary information was not available.  If it had been it may  be  the
    public purse would have been spared the  cost  of  a  hearing.  That  is
    something that those who instruct Presenting Officers to prepare a  Rule
    24 notices might want to consider.

 7. I am grateful to Mr  Mills  for  what  I  consider  to  be  a  perfectly
    professional and realistic response.

 8. In the circumstances Ms Loughran had nothing to say.







Notice of Decision



 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is  set  aside  and  I  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  grounds.   It  is
    probably only a technicality but it remains allowed on Article 3 grounds
    as well.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 December 2015               |



