
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01197/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination sent         |
|on 22nd September 2013                          |On 26th September 2013     |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            KHADIJA ALI ABDULLAH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by J R Rahman,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant claims to be a member of the Bajuni group and a  national
    of Somalia, born 26th May 1960.  She failed to establish her  claim  in
    proceedings in 2000 - 2004.  Further representations were  made  on  21
    December 2012.  The Respondent rejected them for reasons explained in a
    letter dated 24 January 2013, and issued removal directions.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Handley  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision by determination promulgated on  28th
    May 2013.  He found that the Appellant is not Bajuni, but was unable to
    make a finding as to her nationality (paragraph 27).

 3. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal were  not  prepared  by  Mr
    Winter and he did not adopt them in his submissions.  They  are  framed
    in extravagant language, describing the judge's reasoning as  "perverse
    and extremely irrational", but they are no more than disagreement  with
    factual conclusions which the judge was  entitled  to  reach,  and  for
    which his reasons are more than adequately explained.

 4. Permission was granted because "... even if the  Appellant  was  not  a
    Somali, the judge arguably erred in failing to consider her position as
    a sole woman on return to Somalia".  (There is nothing in  the  Grounds
    about this.)

 5. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 reply, which is rather confused.  It
    argues that a  judge  is  not  required  to  consider  a  case  in  the
    alternative when the Appellant's account is not accepted,  and  that  a
    claimant who tells lies on a central issue cannot  generally  have  her
    case saved by general evidence.  That is beside the point.

 6. Mr Winter observed that the removal directions dated 24th and served on
    the Appellant on 28th January 2013  specify  removal  to  Somalia.   He
    accepted that the Respondent's refusal letter declines to  accept  that
    the Appellant is from Somalia. He submitted that in those circumstances
    the judge should have determined the appeal as if the Appellant were to
    be returned to Somalia, which might give rise to a  risk.   He  had  to
    hand authorities on general risk to a sole woman returning to  Somalia.
    He did not propose to refer to  any  authority  on  the  correct  legal
    outcome where an Appellant is found not to have established that she is
    a national of the country she claims.

 7. I advised that in my view the error specified as arguable in the  grant
    of permission is misconceived.

 8. On a finding that an Appellant is not from  the  country  claimed,  the
    Respondent will not remove the person  there.   A  country  of  falsely
    claimed origin is not a possible destination of actual removal.

 9.  The  specification  of  the  claimed  country  of  origin  in  removal
    directions is often in line with an Appellant's claim,  and  with  what
    she may try to establish on appeal.  This makes sense where the claimed
    country of origin is not accepted, but  the  Respondent  is  not  in  a
    position to put forward another legally available destination.   It  is
    (or used to be) common to find in decision letters a statement that the
    destination was specified only as the focus of any appeal.





10. The absence of such a paragraph in the present  letter  is  irrelevant.
    The Appellant has had the chance to put forward (again) her  case  that
    she is a refugee from Somalia.  She may be in limbo of her  own  making
    (not stateless, but of unknown nationality), but the resolution is  not
    to find her a refuge in respect of a country  with  which  she  is  not
    connected.

11. It appears that some judges have allowed such appeals on the basis that
    to return an Appellant to a country where she is not a  national  might
    give rise to a risk either  under  the  Refugee  Convention  (or  under
    Article 3).  That proceeds on a wrong assumption.  Mrs O'Brien  advised
    that it was her understanding that when appeals  are  so  allowed,  the
    Respondent does not seek to appeal further, but advises  the  Appellant
    that no grant of refugee status  will  be  made,  and  that  a  further
    decision may follow (presumably  involving  removal  to  any  available
    country of removal which can be ascertained).

12. My decision appears  generally in line with the textbook  discussion  -
    Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 8th ed.:

         [16.65]

         The country of destination specified in removal directions has been
         the subject of extensive scrutiny by the courts. Removal directions
         which fail to specify a country of destination at all  are  invalid
         and do not give rise to a right of appeal.1  This  does  not  apply
         where a part of a country or a city is named  so  as  to  leave  no
         doubt as to the country to which removal is intended.2  The  naming
         of the wrong country in the removal directions has been held not to
         affect  an  asylum  appeal,  but  to  require  reconsideration  and
         amendment of  the  directions.3  A  starred  Tribunal  in  Zaqaj  v
         Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  laid  down  detailed
         guidance on the proper approach to dealing with cases of this type,
         indicating that any apparent  defects  as  to  destination  in  the
         removal directions should be  raised  at  the  preliminary  hearing
         stage in appeal proceedings.4 They indicated that where  the  error
         had prejudiced the appellant, the directions  should  be  withdrawn
         and fresh directions served, giving rise to  a  fresh  appeal,  but
         where the appellant was not so prejudiced, irregularities should be
         waived.
                1     Makambo [2002] UKIAT 06619, 19 February 2003 (a legal
                tribunal headed by Deputy President Ockleton). The  earlier
                decision of No 19 (01/TH/0093),  in  which  a  Tribunal  of
                Collins P, Ockleton DP and Moulden VP held a  notice  valid
                for  appeal  purposes  even  though  no   destination   was
                specified, cannot in our view stand.
                2      Sula  and   Demaj   (01/TH/00504),   where   removal
                directions  for   'Kosovo'   and   'Pristina'   were   held
                sufficiently unambiguous as to the country  of  destination
                to be valid.
                3     Ertan (19510) 5 July 1999. See also Wolde v Secretary
                of State for the Home Department  [2002]  UKIAT  01068  (10
                April 2002, unreported).
                4      Zaqaj  [2002]  UKIAT   00232   (4   February   2002,
                unreported)  (starred).  Although  the  Court   of   Appeal
                reversed the Tribunal's decision, see Zaqaj v Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 1919,  [2003]
                Imm AR 298, [2003] INLR 109, the point on  appeal  was  the
                scope of an appeal under the IAA 1999, s 66  and  does  not
                affect this guidance.
         [16.64]

         The situation is more complex where  nationality  is  disputed.  In
         cases where the Secretary of State  does  not  accept  the  claimed
         nationality of an asylum seeker, the  issue  of  which  country  to
         specify in removal directions has  caused  many  problems  for  the
         appellate authorities dealing with an asylum appeal.1 The Secretary
         of  State's  current  practice  is  to  specify  removal   to   the
         applicant's claimed country of nationality, for appeal purposes,  a
         practice which received the endorsement of a starred Tribunal in MY
         (Somalia),2 and the Tribunal and the High Court have made it  clear
         that an applicant who claims to be of a specified  nationality  for
         the purposes of an asylum  claim  cannot  be  heard  to  deny  that
         nationality when it comes to removal directions.3  It  is  not  the
         function of the appellate authority  to  ascertain  an  alternative
         nationality.4 However, where the Secretary of  State  asserts  that
         the applicant has more than one nationality, and issues  directions
         specifying one destination country, so that the issues on an asylum
         appeal are limited to that country, she cannot subsequently  switch
         and issue directions to the second  country  without  allowing  the
         applicant a further appeal.5



                1      See  eg  Abubakar  (01TH02477)  (6  December   2001,
                unreported), where an adjudicator upheld the  Secretary  of
                State's decision that the asylum seeker was not Somali  and
                then held that the removal  directions  specifying  Somalia
                were invalid and  that  there  was  no  valid  appeal.  The
                Tribunal  allowed  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  but
                remitted the case to the Secretary of State  to  reconsider
                nationality and to issue directions accordingly.
                2     [2004] UKIAT 00174, in which the  President  (Ouseley
                J) said that it was difficult to see how an applicant could
                challenge the rejection of nationality and its consequences
                without any removal being proposed.
                3     Khan (Asif) [2002] UKIAT 04412 (where the  claimant's
                contention that he was from Afghanistan was  rejected,  and
                before the Tribunal he  sought  to  challenge  the  removal
                directions specifying Afghanistan on the  ground  that  the
                adjudicator had found he  was  not  of  that  nationality);
                Hamza [2002] UKIAT 05185; R (on the application  of  Tu)  v
                Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWHC 2678
                Admin, [2003] Imm AR 288, a similar  scenario  involving  a
                disputed Indonesian nationality, where  the  Administrative
                Court  exercised  its  inherent  jurisdiction   to   refuse
                relief.
                4     Khan (Asif) above. The  Secretary  of  State  accepts
                that, where the adjudicator  upholds  his  decision  on  an
                appellant's  nationality,   he   must   undertake   further
                investigations to seek to ascertain the true nationality to
                effect lawful removal (unless removal can  be  effected  to
                another lawful destination under Immigration Act 1971,  Sch
                2, para 8(1)(c) such as the country  of  embarkation).  The
                court in Tu (fn 3 above) left open the possibility  that  a
                challenge to the legality  of  removal  directions  may  be
                feasible on the grounds that risk on return  had  not  been
                assessed in relation to the new destination. However in  MY
                (Somalia) (fn 2 above) the Tribunal made it clear  that  an
                applicant who had lied about his or her  nationality  would
                not be able to put forward a fresh, inconsistent  story  in
                response to removal directions to a different country.
                5     Wolde v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
                [2002] UKIAT 01068.



13. At best the Appellant's appeal might have been allowed  to  the  extent
    that the removal directions were not in accordance with the law,  being
    made to a country  to  which  she  is  not  removable.   But  any  such
    submission would have been inconsistent with her substantive  case;  no
    such submission was made; and such an outcome would make  no  practical
    difference to her position.

14. The Appellant was not entitled to any outcome other than  to  have  her
    appeal dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

15. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


                               [pic]
                                23 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
