






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/01052/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd December 2014                |On 13th January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

                                     R R
                          (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Professor Rees instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and claimed to have  been  born
    on 27th  September  1986.   He  appealed  against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent dated 21st January  2013  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom  following  a  refusal  to  grant  him   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and  protection  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  His appeal against that decision was refused by Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Stott on 4th October 2014.

 2. The appellant is a Tamil from North of Sri Lanka and  claimed  that  he
    had assisted the LTTE between 2002 and 2010 when  he  was  arrested  in
    Trincomalee and was detained by the government authorities.  He  claims
    he was tortured in detention and produced a medical report from Dr  Sam
    Lingam dated 17th February 2013 (although there appears to  be  another
    examination on 7th May 2013) to evidence scarring.  The appellant  left
    Sri Lanka on 29th September 2010 on a student visa and arrived  in  the
    UK.  He claimed asylum one day short  of  the  expiry  of  his  Tier  4
    Student visa in December 2012.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was refused by the  First  Tier
    Tribunal but renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  whereupon  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen granted permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  judge
    failed to make a careful application of GJ and Others (post civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 0039 (IAC)  in  the  light  of  his
    findings.

 4. The judge found the appellant to  be  lacking  in  credibility  in  his
    account and dismissed the appeal.  However the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had been [18] detained by the Sri Lankan authorities and that
    the injuries could not have been self inflicted and thus it was 'likely
    that the injuries were inflicted whilst he was in detention'.

 5. Thus although the Judge found the appellant had been detained and  thus
    received injuries during his time in detention [17]  he  did  not  take
    this into account when  applying  GJ  and  in  particular  whether  the
    appellant would be viewed as a threat to the Sri Lankan unitary  state.
    The detention which took place in 2010 was post the  cessation  of  the
    conflict in May 2009.

 6. The judge made adverse credibility findings against  the  appellant  in
    part because his mother had not sent a statement or letter regarding  a
    visit from the Sri Lankan authorities, but the judge failed to  address
    the appellant explanation in his witness statement [43].  Nor  did  the
    judge make reference to the appellant's explanation of why  he  delayed
    in claiming asylum.

 7. There is some reference in GJ where the need  for  protection  depended
    'on the specifics of the individual case' but  the  judge  appeared  to
    make no individual assessment bearing in mind his findings. In view  of
    the findings in relation to credibility both  Mr  Tufan  and  Professor
    Rees agreed that the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.

DECISION

 8. I find an error of law in the determination of  Judge  Stott  and  that
    determination must be set aside.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed      Date 22nd December 2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Rimington





Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed      Date 22nd December 2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Rimington



Direction to the appellant

If he has not already done so, the appellant  is  to  submit  to  the  Upper
Tribunal and the Respondent no later than 7 days prior  to  the  hearing  on
16th September 2013, information  regarding  evidence  of  his  relationship
with his spouse,  income,  accommodation  and  copies  of  documentation  in
relation to the children's education and their welfare.


