
[pic]
ar

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01728/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30 July 2014                      |On 25 September 2014                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                      F
                             (anonymity granted)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence
                    Lupin Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on [ ] 1983. He  arrived
    in the UK on 21 May 2012 as a Tier 4 Student with leave  valid  from  1
    May 2012 to 28 October 2013.  He retuned to Afghanistan for  a  holiday
    on 28 January 2013. He travelled back to the UK on 5 February 2013  and
    claimed asylum because he had received a warning from insurgents by way
    of a night letter delivered to his house on 2  February  2013.   Before
    travelling to the UK as a student the appellant had worked as a customs
    enforcement officer in  the  Customs  Department  of  the  Ministry  of
    Finance in Kabul from June 2011 until May 2012.

2.   The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal  to  grant  him
    asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell in a decision
    dated 4 March 2013.  On 11 March 2013 a First-tier  Judge  refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to appeal the judge's  decision.   On
    14 March 2013 an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  also  refused  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3.   On 22 March 2013  the  appellant  commenced  proceedings  for  Judicial
    Review of the decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing  permission  (the
    Cart Judicial Review).  He sought interim in relief by way of a stay on
    removal, but that was refused by Mr Ockelton sitting as a Judge of  the
    High Court on the same day.

4.   On 23 April 2013 the appellant was removed to Afghanistan.

5.   On 24 May 2013 permission was granted in  the  judicial  review  claim.
    According to the ruling by the Upper Tribunal (Mr C M G Ockelton,  Vice
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein) promulgated  on  10  July
    2014, there was a hearing before Nichol J on 20 April 2014. He  refused
    to order the appellant's return.  One of the orders made  by  Nichol  J
    was that the Upper Tribunal grant the appellant  permission  to  appeal
    the determination of his asylum appeal by Judge Kimnell.

6.   In light of the order made by Nichol J,  the  appellant's  appeal  came
    before an Upper Tribunal panel consisting of Mr. C M G  Ockelton,  Vice
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein, on  23  June  2014.   The
    Upper Tribunal decided in their ruling, firstly, that Section 1(4) does
    not apply to a case such as this. That is because  that  subsection  is
    directed to an appeal that is  pending,  which  ceased  to  be  pending
    because of the departure.  In a Cart case,  the  appeal  ceased  to  be
    pending by the Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal,  which
    was the "final determination" of the appeal and after which none of the
    proceedings of Section 104(2) caused  the  appeal  to  continue  to  be
    pending.  An appeal that  is  not  pending  cannot  be  abandoned;  and
    Section  104(4)  therefore  has  no  application  while  Cart   process
    continues.

7.   Secondly, if as a result of a Cart application the original refusal  of
    permission is quashed, it is beyond doubt that the application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal now requires  a  determination.
    So Section 104(2)(a) now applies: the appeal is pending.

8.   The Upper Tribunal decided with some hesitation that if the court  sets
    aside the Upper Tribunal's refusal to grant permission, we  will  treat
    the  appeal  as  pending  to  the  extent  of  granting  permission  in
    accordance with paragraph 3 of  the  order,  so  that  the  matter  can
    proceed before the Upper Tribunal.  A further hearing was  arranged  in
    the Upper Tribunal on 30 July 2014.

9.   On 28 July 2014 the appellant's solicitors  faxed  the  order  made  by
    Nichol J dated 25 July 2014, which made a quashing order in respect  of
    the refusal by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr on 14 March 2013 to grant  the
    appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell  promulgated  on  5
    March 2013.  In light of the quashing order, I treated  the  appeal  as
    pending to the extent of granting permission so that the  matter  could
    proceed before the Upper Tribunal.

10.  I heard evidence from the parties as  to  whether  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kimnell erred in law in his decision.

11.  Miss Radford relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  dated  22  June  2014
    prepared for  the  hearing  on  23  June  2014.   At  paragraph  7  she
    identified four areas in the determination where  the  judge  erred  in
    law.  The first was that he did not consider the  future  risk  to  the
    appellant arising from  his  government  employment  which  was  agreed
    between the parties.

12.  Secondly, he made no findings on whether the appellant was a member  of
    an enhanced risk group  such  that  he  was  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection; thirdly his findings on the  appellant's  credibility  were
    inadequately reasoned; he failed to consider the expert evidence (or to
    explain why it was rejected), and applied the wrong standard of  proof;
    and  fourthly,  his  alternative  findings   on   internal   relocation
    contradict Iftiqar Ahmed [2000] INLR 1 and/or HJ (Iran); HT  (Cameroon)
    [2010] UKSC 31, failed to apply the correct standard of proof on safety
    on relocation and failed to apply country guidance  on  the  safety  of
    relocation  and  failed  to  consider  at  all  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation, particularly to the north and west of Afghanistan.

13.   An  issue  arose  at  the  hearing  as  to  whether,  aside  from  the
    appellant's claim to fear persecution because of the  night  letter  he
    claimed to have come from the Taliban, the judge was asked  to  make  a
    finding  that  as  a  government  employee  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution.  Ms Radford said that this argument was  in  her  skeleton
    argument and was also raised at the hearing before the First-tier Judge
    at which she represented the appellant.  The skeleton argument which Ms
    Radford referred me to was the copy that was faxed to the Tribunal.  It
    contained alternate pages and therefore was incomplete.   This  led  Ms
    Radford to argue that it was a material error of law for the  judge  to
    have failed to consider the  arguments  in  the  skeleton  argument.  I
    reject this argument outright.  This is because as I was going  through
    the appellant's bundle after the hearing, I  noticed  that  a  complete
    copy of the skeleton argument was in the appellant's  large  bundle  at
    pages 67 to 80. This was the bundle that was before the Judge.

14.  I find that Miss Radford's arguments do not disclose an  error  of  law
    in the judge's decision.  I give my reasons below.

15.  I find that at paragraphs 2 and  5  of  the  determination,  the  judge
    correctly identified the basis of appellant's claim  for  asylum,  that
    is, his claim was based solely on what happened between 20 January 2013
    when he went on holiday to Afghanistan and  4  February  2013  when  he
    returned to the UK.  That claim was based on his response  to  question
    58 of his interview where he was quite  emphatic  that  his  claim  for
    asylum was based on the problems that you returned between  20  January
    2013 and 4  February  2013.    The  judge  said  at  paragraph  8  that
    according to the translation of the threatening letter,  the  appellant
    is accused of working under the command of  foreigners  in  Afghanistan
    and as such he is an infidel and should quit his job otherwise he  will
    be killed.  In light of this evidence, I reject Ms  Radford's  argument
    that the judge  was  required  to  consider  the  future  risk  to  the
    appellant from his government employment and that he failed to consider
    it and therefore fell into error. This is because  the  risk  from  his
    employment was inextricably linked to  the  basis  of  his  claim.   It
    cannot be considered in isolation.  It is the  content  of  the  letter
    which formed the basis of his claim and the content was as a result  of
    his employment which led to his claimed fear.  The judge considered the
    claim and found that the appellant's fear was not well founded that  he
    was not at risk of serious harm for the reasons given by him.

16.  I do not accept Ms Radford's argument that the judge's findings on  the
    appellant's credibility were inadequately reasoned and that  he  failed
    to consider the expert evidence  and  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof.

17.  I find that at paragraph 35 the judge properly identified the  standard
    of proof which he said is not  high;  it  is  necessary  only  for  the
    appellant to establish a reasonable degree of likelihood that  he  will
    be subjected to serious harm against which he will not be provided with
    protection.  The judge went on  to  say  that  the  phrase  "reasonable
    degree of likelihood" does  not  establish  a  threshold  beyond  which
    evidence of past events is to be accepted  as  fact.   It  is  for  the
    Tribunal to attach such weight as  it  considers  appropriate  to  each
    piece of evidence when considering the degree of  risk  on  return.   I
    find that throughout the determination the judge  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof in his assessment of the appellant's claim.

18.  Ms Radford  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  expert
    evidence or explain why  it  was  rejected.   The  expert  evidence  in
    question was the report prepared by Mr Tim Foxley MBE.   Contrary to Ms
    Radford's argument the judge considered the report at paragraph  43  of
    the determination.  The judge noted that the opinion of Mr  Tim  Foxley
    was that the appellant as a low/  middle  ranking  government  official
    would be a very viable target for Taliban intimidation and  punishment,
    but he was unwilling to give a judgment one way  or  the  other  as  to
    whether or not the threatening letter actually  emanated  from  Taliban
    sources, although the  example  presented  by  the  appellant  met  his
    understanding of what a Taliban night letter might look like. The judge
    did not reject Mr Foxley's letter.  At paragraph 51, he  relied  on  Mr
    Foxley's letter to find that the Taliban who have neither the  interest
    nor capability to chase the appellant around the country,  particularly
    if he relocated in the north or the west where the Taliban  support  is
    much less marked.  It was in the light of Mr Foxley's report  that  the
    judge found that it would not be  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate within Afghanistan.

19.  I do not accept the argument that the judge applied the wrong  standard
    of proof in his consideration of safety  of  relocation.    Ms  Radford
    based her argument on the judge's finding  at  paragraph  51  that  the
    appellant has been prepared to give up his career to come to the UK and
    he saw no reason why he should not give up his  career  in  the  Afghan
    government service if he feels himself at risk because of it.   I  find
    that the appellant's circumstances are different and cannot be compared
    to the appellant in HJ (Iran) or HT (Cameroon).  Unlike this appellant,
    HJ and HT were found to be members of a particular social group.  Being
    homosexual they had an immutable characteristic which would put them at
    risk.  Even so the Court of Appeal found  that  if  a  member  of  this
    social group did not intend to live his life openly  as  a  homosexual,
    then it is not likely that this person would be at risk of persecution.

20.  The judge noted that Mr Foxley made the point that it is  difficult  to
    say whether the appellant would ever  fully  be  without  risk  "if  he
    maintains a career in the Afghanistan government service".   Mr  Foxley
    continued that the appellant is but one of many thousands of low  level
    potential targets for the Taliban and he suspects that the Taliban will
    have neither the interest  nor  capability  to  chase  him  around  the
    country, particularly if he relocated in the north or  the  west  where
    the Taliban support is much less marked.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    only reason the appellant gave for not wising to relocate  was  because
    he could be located throughout the country but found that his  evidence
    was not supported by the expert report.  On this evidence, I find  that
    the judge applied the correct standard of proof  and  his  findings  on
    safety on relocation were reasonably open to him and sustainable.

21.  Ms Radford further argued that in  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim, the judge had  found  that  the  evidence  that  the
    threat actually came from the Taliban source was  lukewarm.   She  said
    this was the wrong threshold and was a misdirection in  law.   On  this
    issue I accept Mr Tarlow's submission that the judge was not expressing
    a standard of proof when he used the  word  lukewarm.   He  was  merely
    expressing uncertainty following consideration of the evidence on  this
    issue, which he is allowed to do under  the  old  case  of  Karanakaran
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11.

22.  The judge found that there was no evidence that the Taliban were  aware
    of the appellant's employment and nothing was done  during  the  months
    preceding delivery of the letter which  would  draw  attention  to  his
    occupation.  His conclusion that the  letter  did  not  come  from  the
    Taliban at all but had been manufactured by the appellant himself or on
    his behalf was a finding open to the judge on the evidence.  Linked  to
    this finding was  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  reason  why  the
    appellant put his details on the link Insight just before returning  to
    Afghanistan was part of the process by which he  produced  evidence  to
    support his asylum claim.  Ms Radford submitted that the  judge  needed
    to engage with what the expert said about the risk to the appellant  as
    a result of his employment and the receipt of the night letter.

23.  I find that the judge did engage with what the  expert  said  on  these
    issues as already found above.  In any event the question of weight  is
    a matter for the judge.  It was open to him to attach no weight to  the
    letters  purportedly  from  the  appellant's  brother  and  sister   in
    Afghanistan and to find that there was nothing to connect the enquirers
    with the Taliban or any other organisation.   It  was  merely  evidence
    that unknown individuals asked after the appellant.

24.  For these reasons I find that the judge did not err in law.

25.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

