











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01394/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Amended Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 16 February 2016               |On 18 May 2016                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                                    [S K]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, counsel (instructed by Jein Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

 In accordance with Rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 matters omitted from paragraphs 1, 9 and the Notice of Decision,
     promulgated on 9 March 2016 are included in this amended decision.

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1989. He appeals
      with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Freer promulgated on 23 November 2015 dismissing his appeal on  asylum
      grounds and humanitarian grounds. His  appeal  was  allowed  on  human
      rights grounds (Article 3).


   2. The Judge stated at [50] that the expert who prepared a medical report
      noted that the markings on colour photographs produced showed signs of
      being voluntary. In other words, it is very  possible  that  they  are
      self inflicted in order to boost the case. The Judge accordingly found
      that the appellant had failed to meet the burden of proof  in  respect
      of the scarring which in turn "sets everything else in real doubt that
      which is inconsistent or uncorroborated."


   3. Ms  Walker,  who  represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, contended that the Judge failed  to  properly  identify  the
      test established by the decision in KV (Scarring)  [2014]  UKUT  00230
      (IAC). He failed  to  identify  some  presenting  feature  within  the
      evidence before he was required to consider  SIBP  as  an  alternative
      cause.


   4. She submitted that the Judge erroneously took  the  view  at  [60]  in
      suggesting that the medical expert found that the scars  showed  signs
      of being "voluntary". In fact, Dr Longman did not expressly  say  this
      at any point, in either her main or addendum report, and it is unclear
      which part of the expert's opinion  the  Judge  drew  his  conclusions
      from.


   5. She submitted that the expert is clearly of the  view  that  the  burn
      scarring  is  likely  to  be  non-accidental.  Dr  Longman   expressly
      considered  and  ruled  out  alternative  accidental   causation   and
      concludes at paragraph 6.2.6 of her report that the  injuries  claimed
      to have been caused by cigarette burns are "diagnostic." Moreover, the
      injuries described at 6.2.2 (horizontal scars) are "typical" of  being
      beaten with heated metal. She did not suggest  that  the  scarring  is
      likely to be "voluntary." On the contrary she concluded at 6.2.12 that
      the overall pattern of lesions is, in  her  view,  "highly  consistent
      with the history [the appellant] has given  of  these  injuries  being
      caused against his will through torture."


   6. Moreover the Judge's statement that the markings  are  not  of  random
      appearance and appear tidy as if inflicted  with  a  careful  plan  of
      deliberation constitutes a subjective observation by the Judge himself
      without any engagement with  the  observations  made  by  the  medical
      expert, who observed that the scars are indeed not uniform,  expressly
      identifying the fact that they are "an irregular thickness"  and  have
      "tapered ends" which  suggests  could  be  a  sign  of  the  appellant
      attempting to avoid the painful stimulus and thus curling  or  rolling
      away from the rod.


   7. Having initially opposed the appeal, Mr Bramble informed the  Tribunal
      that he accepted that the findings at [60] were indeed flawed. Nor had
      the Judge considered the expert reports from D Longman in  conjunction
      with the psychiatric evidence produced. He did not give that  evidence
      any corroborative weight.


   8. He accepted that the findings at [60] "did not stop there." The  Judge
      went on to say that the finding set everything  else  in  real  doubt.
      Accordingly, that  incorrect  finding  clearly  "infected"  the  other
      findings. This included the finding that the appellant would not be at
      risk on return.


   9. In the circumstances the parties agreed that the decision relating  to
      asylum and humanitarian protection should be set aside and would  have
      to be re-made. The parties agreed that the findings of Judge Freer  in
      relation to Article 3 ECHR are preserved.


  10. Both accepted that the appropriate venue was the First-tier  Tribunal,
      Taylor House. Taking into  account  the  practice  statement  and  the
      extensive  findings  of  fact  required,  I  agree  that  this  is  an
      appropriate case to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
      made by a Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's the
      asylum and humanitarian protection appeal involved the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside. It shall be re-made in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, at Taylor  House,  before  a  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Freer.


      The findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer in relation to Article
      3 ECHR are preserved.


      There is a time estimate of about two and a half hours.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                                       Date 13 May 2016






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




