
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/01588/2013
     AA/01589/2013
     AA/01591/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 23 September 2013                          |On 2 October 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     ZG
                                     AR
                                     SR

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on  4  November  1969,  29
    June 1993 and 5 August 1994 respectively.  The  appellants  arrived  in
    this country on 4 August 2012 as visitors and applied for asylum  on  9
    January 2013.  Their applications were refused by the respondent on  31
    January 2013 and 1 February 2013.  Dependent upon  the  appeal  of  the
    principal appellant are her husband  and  other  children.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the three appellants but not from  her  husband  or
    from a son born on 29 August 1995.

2.   At the commencement of the hearing  Mr  Mahmood,  who  represented  the
    appellants then as he did before me, submitted that the appeals  should
    be heard by a legal panel and that an expert  report  was  required  to
    determine the appeal although it appeared there was no current  funding
    available for such a report.

3.   The appellants' claim was and is on the basis  that  they  are  of  the
    Shia Muslim faith and had suffered on that account  in  Pakistan.   The
    principal appellant's husband had  been  assaulted  and  threatened  in
    Karachi by Sipah-e-Sahaaba members.  Threats had been made against  the
    children.  There was a robbery at the store he ran in  Karachi  and  he
    had been forced to close the store.  The appellant's husband  had  come
    to study in the United Kingdom in February 2011.   There  had  been  an
    attempted kidnap of the appellant's son at the end of  2011  which  had
    not been reported to the police.   A  cousin  had  been  kidnapped  and
    murdered as had other family members.  The family had moved  to  Lahore
    in May 2012 but there had been a fall-out  with  the  neighbours.   The
    family had returned to Karachi on 22 July 2012.  Members of the  family
    were summoned to attend court on 27 July 2012 and when they  failed  to
    attend a warrant was issued.  The family  travelled  to  the  UK  on  4
    August 2012.  They had been advised by their landlord that it  was  not
    safe to return to Pakistan.

4.   The First-tier Judge found it remarkable that neither  the  appellant's
    husband nor her son had given evidence given that they  had  both  been
    said to have been the victims of religious intolerance and  could  have
    given first-hand evidence - he referred to TK Burundi  v  Secretary  of
    State [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  The judge found the evidence given about the
    kidnapping to be inconsistent and concluded there  had  been  collusion
    between the  appellants.   He  could  not  give  weight  to  the  court
    documents when viewed in the round.  The  appellants  had  not  claimed
    asylum  on  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  which   diminished   their
    credibility.  The judge found that  the  appellants  had  not  made  an
    honest claim and had not reported the incident to  the  police.   There
    had been no past persecution.  In reaching his findings the judge  took
    into account AH Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 05862 and AW Pakistan [2011] UKUT
    31.  He also  referred  to  other  background  material  to  which  his
    attention was drawn by Counsel.  While there had been  severe  violence
    involving some Shia faith followers the appellants had not  established
    a well-founded fear of persecution.  The  judge  accordingly  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

5.   There was an application for permission to  appeal.   First-tier  Judge
    Chambers refused the application on 8 May 2013.   The  application  was
    renewed.  It was submitted that the country guidance case of AH was out
    of date as was the case of AW.  The judge had not  properly  considered
    the  objective  evidence.   The  objective  material  provided  by  the
    respondent had been out of  date.   It  did  not  reflect  the  current
    position of  ordinary  Shias  in  Pakistan  and  whether  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection for them.  The judge had not  considered  the
    issue of internal relocation.  The judge had on the one  hand  accepted
    that Shias had been victims of persecution but had then relied  on  the
    country guidance material which  did  not  accord  with  the  objective
    evidence.  The judge had accepted that the appellants  were  Shias  and
    this alone was a genuine basis to claim asylum  based  on  the  current
    prevailing conditions.  In finding the  appellants'  claim  not  to  be
    honest the judge had not taken the correct approach when addressing his
    mind to the question of whether the asylum claim was  genuine  or  not.
    The appeal should be listed before a panel  so  that  country  guidance
    could be given.  The expert had not been instructed at the time of  the
    determination and the matter had only come to light  when  Counsel  had
    been instructed two days before the hearing.  It was  for  this  reason
    that an adjournment had been requested.

6.   Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 18 June 2013 considered it was  "just"
    arguable that the First-tier Judge had not given adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the first named appellant was not credible.

7.    Mr  Mahmood  submitted  that  the  situation  for  Shias  had  changed
    dramatically and an expert report was  needed.   The  decision  of  the
    judge had not been supported  by  the  evidence.   The  judge  had  not
    addressed the issue of internal relocation.  An analogy could be  drawn
    with the position of Ahmadis.  He relied  on  his  written  submissions
    dated 10 September 2013.  If a material  error  was  found  the  matter
    could be listed for country guidance and  an  expert  report  could  be
    compiled.

8.   Mr Bramble pointed out that permission to appeal had  been  granted  on
    the credibility issues and this particular issue had not been addressed
    by Mr Mahmood.

9.   The judge had set  out  in  paragraph  21  of  the  determination  full
    reasons for finding the appellants to be lacking  in  credibility.   He
    had pointed out that there was no oral evidence  from  the  appellant's
    husband or son.  He had dealt thoroughly with the credibility  aspects.
    Having found the appellants to be completely lacking in credibility  he
    had gone on to consider the country guidance and  country  information.
    He had looked at the more recent objective  evidence  and  the  current
    situation.  He had addressed the issue as to whether there should be  a
    panel hearing but there had been no expert report or funding for such a
    report.

10.   Mr  Mahmood  submitted  on  the  credibility  issue  that  while   the
    appellant's husband and  son  had  not  given  evidence  three  of  the
    appellants had given evidence.  They  had  given  a  detailed  account.
    Documentary material had been provided by Chenab Law  Chambers.   While
    the judge had considered the documentary evidence the reasons  for  the
    credibility findings were not sufficient.

11.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the decision on a point of law.

12.  The judge is firstly criticised for not  adjourning  the  case  but  an
    expert report had not been commissioned and it  does  not  appear  that
    appropriate consideration had been given at an early stage for the need
    to get such a report.  I am not satisfied that the judge  misunderstood
    the submissions that were being made on the appellant's behalf.   I  am
    not satisfied that his decision  to  refuse  the  application  for  the
    adjournment was in any way unfair.  As the judge points out he did have
    background materials available as well as the country guidance.

13.  Mr Mahmood in his opening submissions made no reference to the  judge's
    negative credibility assessment and it was only when Mr Bramble pointed
    out that that was the basis on which permission had been given that  he
    turned to that question.

14.  The judge looked  at  all  the  evidence  before  him  having  properly
    directed himself on the burden and standard of proof in paragraph 20 of
    his decision.  In paragraph 21 he gives detailed  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellants' account was lacking in credibility.  It  was  open
    to the judge, for  example,  to  find  it  quite  remarkable  that  the
    appellant's husband did not give evidence as well as the son given  the
    claims in this case.  He makes a  reference  to  TK  Burundi  where  at
    paragraph  20  the  Court  of  Appeal  refers  to  the  importance  for
    independent  supporting  evidence  to  be  provided  "where  it   would
    ordinarily be available".  Where there is no credible  explanation  for
    the failure to produce supporting evidence "it can  be  a  very  strong
    pointer that the account being given is not credible" (per Thomas LJ).

15.  In addition the judge found the account being given, as  I  have  said,
    not to be consistent and identified collusion between the witnesses.

16.  There is no foundation for the suggestion that the judge  neglected  to
    give the documentary evidence proper  scrutiny  in  the  light  of  the
    guidance in Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.   The  judge  properly
    considered the court documents and the background material relating  to
    corruption in Pakistan's courts and that fraud  in  relation  to  court
    documentation and lawyer's correspondence was rife.

17.  In my view the judge  gives  ample  reasons  in  paragraph  21  of  his
    decision  for  finding  that  the  account  of  the  appellants  lacked
    credibility.  He makes it plain that he had come to his findings  after
    considering the evidence as a whole and that the  order  in  which  his
    findings were set out did not indicate the order in which he  had  come
    to his conclusions.  It is plain that the judge gave the proper intense
    scrutiny to the background information when he reached his decision.

18.  In paragraph 25 the judge, having made his assessment, noted  that  the
    appellants had not made an honest claim and had not reported  incidents
    complained of to the police.  There had been no past  persecution.   At
    an earlier stage, at paragraph 21(viii) the judge refers to  the  first
    named appellant saying at interview that she had intended to return  to
    Pakistan "which rather weakens her assertion of a general fear for  her
    safety" until friends sent her the court documents.  He found that  the
    court documents had  come  into  the  hands  of  the  appellants  at  a
    convenient moment - see paragraph 21(vii).  It had been at a time  when
    they could not maintain their rental payments in the UK.

19.  Having found the appellants' account lacking  in  credibility  and  was
    not honest he did not accept that the family was in fear at all.

20.   It  appears  in  paragraph  25  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellants' claim was not honest and "even then" they  had  not  sought
    the assistance of the police.  What the judge appears to be  saying  in
    paragraph 25 is that the claims of the appellants lack credibility  and
    even taken at their highest there would be a sufficiency of  protection
    for them.

21.  I see no error in the judge's approach to  the  credibility  assessment
    which appears to be the principal point on which Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy granted permission to appeal.   In  relation  to  the  country
    guidance issue, the judge  quite  clearly  had  in  mind  the  material
    brought to his attention by Counsel as well  as  the  country  guidance
    cases of 2002 and 2011.

22.  I am not persuaded that the judge misdirected himself in  his  approach
    to the evidence before him, that his conclusions were not supported  by
    the background material and the country  guidance  cases  to  which  he
    refers or that it was incumbent on him to adjourn  the  proceedings  in
    the particular  circumstances  of  this  case.   The  determination  is
    satisfactorily reasoned.  I am not satisfied that the determination was
    flawed on a point of law - either the point of law on which  permission
    to appeal was granted or the points developed at the hearing before  me
    both orally and in the skeleton argument.

23.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was not flawed on a point  of  law
    and I direct that it shall stand.

Appeal dismissed.

The anonymity order made by the First-tier Judge continues.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
