
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2014 and 16 March 2015         |On 21 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr omar musa ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Mr P. Armstrong (12.11.14) and Mr David
                               Clarke (16.03.15), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant :   Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by
                               Wimbledon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Callender-Smith  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 27 August 2014) allowing the claimant's appeal on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds against the decision by the Secretary of State  to
    refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee   or   otherwise   requiring
    international human rights protection, and to remove him as an  illegal
    entrant/person subject to administrative removal under  Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  such  a
    direction is required for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Somalia, whose date of birth is 1 January
    1972.  He is recorded as having claimed asylum on 30 January 2004.   He
    said he had arrived on 21 January 2004 at  Heathrow  Airport,  and  had
    entered using a forged passport in the name Osman Yussuf Abdi which had
    been taken away by his agent.  In his screening interview, he  said  he
    had flown in from Kenya.  He was from Hamar  (in  Mogadishu),  and  his
    clan was Hawiye, subclan Abgal.  His wife and three children have  been
    living in Yemen for three years.  He had last seen his wife five months
    ago.  He had been living in Yemen or Saudi Arabia for nine  years.   He
    had been deported from Saudi  Arabia  to  Yemen.   He  had  left  Yemen
    because he could not get a job and also he did not have legal documents
    to stay in the country.

 3. The claimant was issued  with  a  Statement  of  Evidence  Form  to  be
    returned on 19 February 2004,  but  he  did  not  comply.   His  asylum
    application was refused on 8  March  2004.  He  subsequently  absconded
    between 12 June 2006 and 23 July 2012.

 4. In November 2012 the claimant made a fresh  claim  for  asylum.   On  4
    February 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for rejecting the
    fresh claim.  He had not submitted any evidence to show that he  was  a
    member of the Hawiye clan,  subclan  Abgal.   In  any  event,  evidence
    showed that the Hawiye clan along with the Darod, Isaaq  and  Dir  were
    major clans within  Mogadishu.   Whilst  he  had  not  established  his
    membership of the Hawiye clan, if he was a member,  he  would  face  no
    risk upon return to Somalia due to the Hawiye being a majority clan and
    as there were no longer clan based militias in Mogadishu.

 5. Consideration had been given to AMM and Others Somalia  CG  2011  which
    stated that Al-Shabab only withdrew from Mogadishu in early August 2011
    so there could therefore still be a risk in relation to Article  15(c).
    But the objective evidence  showed  that  there  was  now  no  risk  in
    Mogadishu in relation to Article 15(c).

 6. The claimant also relied on a  medical  report  from  Battersea  Fields
    Practice dated 24 January 2013 in respect of his mental health.   There
    was a health care centre within Mogadishu and it had been  reported  by
    the World Health Organisation  that  Amiptriptyline  was  available  in
    Somalia.  This was an alternative antidepressant  to  Sertraline.   The
    claimant did not have a condition which would breach Article 3  of  the
    ECHR, and there would be  no  flagrant  denial  of  treatment  for  his
    condition in Somalia.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Judge Callender-Smith received oral evidence from the claimant and  two
    siblings.  In  his  subsequent  determination,  he  accepted  that  the
    claimant had fled Somalia in 2004 because in 2003 and  2004  there  was
    clan warfare between the two major subclans of the  Hawiye.   His  clan
    members forced him to fight, and he had fled the country  to  save  his
    life.  He further found that if there were any female family members of
    his in Somalia, he was unlikely to be able to contact them or  identify
    them.  His UK family no longer supported him financially, and would not
    do so  if  he  was  returned  to  Somalia.   He  had  a  diagnosed  and
    significantly disabling mental health condition, undifferentiated  type
    schizophrenia.  That meant there was an increased risk  of  suicide  if
    his mental illness remained untreated either in the UK or  in  Somalia.
    He had a genuine fear of being persecuted on return to Somalia because,
    having fled from interclan fighting in Mogadishu, he would be likely to
    be a target of the potentially fatal attentions of his own clan (having
    deserted them during interclan fighting)  or  Al-Shabab.   His  general
    mental state made him a  vulnerable  target  for  their  attentions  in
    respect of his imputed political beliefs.  His fear  for  his  personal
    safety was real, and that fear would  be  intensified  because  of  his
    psychotic illness and could lead to further development of  persecutory
    delusions.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On 24 September 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         Given the judge found the [claimant] to be a member of  the  Hawiye
         clan which is  a  majority  clan  in  Somalia  and  the  respondent
         specifically raised in the  RFRL  (paragraph  20)  that  membership
         thereof would not place the claimant at risk on return, the judge's
         failure to assess the risk of return  with  reference  thereto  and
         with reference to the country guidance case of AMM and with  regard
         to the background evidence concerning the claimant's clan  arguably
         amounts to a material error of law which affected  the  outcome  of
         the appeal.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 12 November 2014

 9. At the error of law hearing, Mr Sharma submitted that the error of  law
    challenge was no more than an expression of disagreement with  findings
    that were reasonably open to the judge on the evidence before him.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. I find that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that
    the core of the claim was true.  Despite being pressed in the screening
    interview on the question of whether he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Somalia, the claimant did not claim to have fled Somalia
    for the reason given by him in his  appeal  or  indeed  for  any  other
    reason.

11. The judge held at paragraph 30(c) that his account  was  likely  to  be
    correct given the significant presence of other family members  of  his
    in the UK, and the fact that they had been granted refugee  status  for
    "broadly similar reasons".  This reasoning was insufficient.  The judge
    did not identify any objective evidence which supported the proposition
    that there had been clan warfare between  two  major  subclans  of  the
    Hawiye in Mogadishu in 2003 and 2004.  The judge did  not  engage  with
    the fact that the Hawiye clan was a majority clan, and hence members of
    the clan would not be recognised by the Secretary  of  State  as  being
    entitled to refugee status, unlike members of a Somali  minority  clan.
    The judge  did  not  identify  the  evidential  basis  for  the  highly
    improbable finding that the siblings had been  granted  refugee  status
    for "broadly similar  reasons".   It  is  highly  improbable  that  the
    siblings were granted refugee status for  broadly  similar  reasons  if
    they had presented themselves to the UK authorities as members  of  the
    Hawiye majority clan.

12. The fact that the claimant was a member of  the  Hawiye  majority  clan
    also impacted significantly on the issue of risk on  return.   In  AMM,
    the Tribunal found that a real risk of Article 15(c) harm did not arise
    in the case of a person connected with powerful actors.  Moreover,  the
    fact that the claimant was a member of a majority clan made it unlikely
    that all his relatives had left Mogadishu, as they would not have  been
    driven out by persecution.

13. Another theme of AMM is the threat posed by Al-Shabab. On  this  issue,
    the following statement by the Tribunal in AMM at  paragraph  [363]  is
    pertinent:

         Before leaving the issue of  Article  15(c)  in  Mogadishu,  it  is
         necessary to say something with an eye to the use that will be made
         of our country guidance findings in the next few weeks and  months.
         In assessing cases before them, judicial fact-finders will have  to
         decide whether the evidence is the same or similar to  that  before
         us (Practice Direction 12). To the extent it is not, they  are  not
         required to regard  our  findings  as  authoritative.  As  we  have
         emphasised, it is simply not possible on the evidence before us  to
         state that the changes resulting from Al-Shabab's  withdrawal  from
         Mogadishu are sufficiently  durable.  Far  too  much  is  presently
         contingent. As time passes, however, it may well be  that  judicial
         fact-finders are able to conclude that  the  necessary  element  of
         durability has been satisfied. How, if at all, that impacts on  the
         assessment of risk on return will, of course,  depend  on  all  the
         other evidence.

14. The Tribunal's country guidance was  largely  based  on  the  state  of
    affairs in Mogadishu up to July 2011, when Al-Shabab was in control  of
    much of it. Although  the  Tribunal  took  into  account  the  military
    withdrawal  of  Al-Shabab  from  Mogadishu   in   August   2011,   they
    deliberately did not  downgrade  their  risk  assessment  in  case  the
    withdrawal proved to be a false dawn. Assessing  Mogadishu  in  October
    2011, as they were, it was too early to say whether the relative  peace
    consequential upon the withdrawal was a durable one.

15. The judge erred in law in failing to ask himself  the  question  as  to
    whether in the light of the latest  background  evidence  the  relative
    peace had been durable and  whether  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the
    appellant being returned, or passing through, an area of Mogadishu that
    was controlled by Al-Shabab.  According to the  Danish-Norwegian  Fact-
    Finding Missions to Nairobi and Mogadishu in April and  May  2013,  Al-
    Shabab had completely withdrawn from Mogadishu at the end of  May  2012
    and Al-Shabab was  not  trying  to  re-take  Mogadishu.  There  was  no
    struggle or front line in Mogadishu and people could  now  freely  move
    around the city.

16. The judge relied on a UN Security Council letter dated 14 October  2013
    to reject the respondent's contention that the presence of Al-Shabab in
    Mogadishu had diminished.  But, as argued in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    except for the threat to persons associated with  the  government,  the
    quoted extract from the letter  was  extremely  vague  and  general  in
    nature.   It  did  not  make  clear  which  areas  of  Somalia  it  was
    addressing.

17. With regard to the medical evidence, the judge  observed  at  paragraph
    30(l) that the consultant psychiatrist's report was  heavily  dependent
    on a single observation/interview relating to a  self-reported  set  of
    background circumstances presented by the  claimant.   It  is  apparent
    from the determination as a whole that the judge's  acceptance  of  the
    diagnosis of Dr George is in part based  on  his  acceptance  that  the
    claimant was telling the truth  about  the  reasons  why  he  had  left
    Somalia in 2004 (whereas in his screening interview he had said he left
    Somalia nine years earlier) and that he had  a  genuine,  not  feigned,
    fear of being persecuted on return to Somalia because he had fled  from
    inter-clan fighting in Mogadishu.  As the  judge's  acceptance  of  the
    claimant's general credibility is flawed, his acceptance of Dr George's
    diagnosis of schizophrenia is consequentially unsafe.

The Resumed Hearing on 16 March 2015

18. I directed that there should be a further hearing before me  to  remake
    the decision, and that none of the findings of fact made by the  First-
    tier  judge  should  be  preserved.  I  also  directed  the  claimant's
    solicitors to use best endeavours to obtain and disclose the claimant's
    GP medical records from 2004 to date.

19. At the outset  of  the  resumed  hearing,  Mr  Sharma  applied  for  an
    adjournment.  This was because the claimant had failed to attend today,
    and his instructing solicitors had been without instructions  from  the
    claimant for about a week.  Mr Sharma confirmed that the  claimant  had
    been informed of the resumed hearing before me. But he  submitted  that
    it would not be in the interests of justice for the hearing to  proceed
    in his absence,  without  giving  him  the  opportunity  to  give  oral
    evidence.  Although he had been notified of the hearing,  it  might  be
    that his absence today was due to his mental health condition.

20. Mr Clarke opposed the adjournment request.  On the available  evidence,
    there was no guarantee, he submitted, that the claimant would appear on
    a future occasion.

21. I was not persuaded that it  was  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective to grant Mr Sharma's adjournment request, having regard inter
    alia to the fact that the claimant's credibility on the issue  of  past
    persecution was not pivotal to a fair disposal of  his  appeal  in  the
    light of the latest country  guidance  (see  below);  and  the  medical
    evidence did not support the proposition that the  claimant  might  not
    have understood the need to attend the hearing, even though he had been
    advised by his solicitors that he should attend.

22. Accordingly, the hearing proceeded on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    additional evidence  to  be  considered  beyond  that  which  had  been
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Sharma  explained  that  his
    instructing solicitors had not been able to obtain  the  claimant's  GP
    medical records going back to 2004 (or going forward from January 2013)
    as the claimant had recently been re-housed, and the new surgery  which
    he attended could not access the records held  by  the  claimant's  old
    surgery.

23. Mr Sharma referred me to MOJ and Others (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia
    CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and submitted that the  claimant  fell  into
    the risk category identified in sub-paragraph (xi) of the guidance:

         It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and  have  no
         real prospect of securing access to a  livelihood  on  return  will
         face the prospect of living in  circumstances  falling  below  that
         which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

24. Mr Sharma submitted that the appellant would be at  increased  risk  on
    return due to  is  mental  ill-health  and  his  situation  would  also
    aggravated by the fact that he would had no family members  to  support
    him in Mogadishu.  There was real risk of him of being an  IDP  on  his
    return.

25. With regard to an Article 8 claim,  the  claimant  had  linguistic  and
    cultural ties to Somalia.  But there would be significant obstacles  to
    reintegration into Somali society due to his mental ill-health and lack
    of family ties.

26. In reply, Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  clan  system  in  Mogadishu
    fulfilled the role of family.  Even if the appellant did not have close
    family members remaining in Mogadishu, this did not matter as he  could
    look to his powerful clan for support.  Family in the UK had  supported
    him financially in the past, and so it was not credible that they would
    not remit money to him in Mogadishu.  Furthermore, the country guidance
    indicated that there were jobs available for  low  skilled  workers  in
    Mogadishu, such as waiters.  In respect of an alternative  claim  under
    Article 8, Mr Clarke relied on Akhalu (Health claim:  ECHR  Article  8)
    [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) and  Bossadi  (Paragraph  276ADE;  suitability;
    ties) [2015] UKUT 0042(IAC).

Discussion and Findings

The Burden and Standard of Proof

27. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

Past Persecution or Serious Harm

28. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

Duty to Substantiate Claim for International Protection

29. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      i) The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

     ii) All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    iii) The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

     iv) The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      v) The general credibility of the person is established.

The Claimant's Evidence

30. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant adopted  as
    his evidence-in-chief a witness statement in which he said that he  had
    last spoken with his wife and children in  Somalia  in  2004.   He  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 January 2004.  His explanation  for
    not pursuing his asylum claim was that he was suffering from  a  mental
    health condition and depression.  He had been living  with  his  sister
    Jawahir.  He had started taking  medicine  for  depression.   He  heard
    voices and experienced nightmares and panic attacks.   He  feared  that
    someone was coming to kill him.  He had been away from Somalia for over
    ten years.  He was a very depressed person who had  lost  contact  with
    his wife and four children.  He regularly attended the local mosque  on
    a daily basis to offer his prayers.  If he was returned to Somalia, his
    life would be in danger from the armed  militia  and  Al  Shabaab.   He
    would be targeted by the militia in Somalia due to  his  vulnerability.
    He had no skills to survive in Somalia, and no family to rely upon  for
    his livelihood.

31. While Al Shabaab had a significant presence  in  Mogadishu,  the  fears
    expressed by the claimant were rational and well-founded.   But  he  no
    longer has a well-founded fear of Al Shabaab or a well-founded fear  of
    the danger posed by armed militia in Mogadishu.

The Country Guidance

32. The country guidance in MOJ and  Others  which  is  pertinent  to  this
    appeal is as follows:

         (i)  The country guidance issues addressed  in  this  determination
             are not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in AMM
             and Others (Conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
             Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC).   Therefore,  where  country
             guidance has been given by the Tribunal in AMM in  respect  of
             issues not addressed in this determination then  the  guidance
             provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.

         (ii) Generally, a  person  who  is  an  ordinary  civilian  ...  on
             returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will face  no
             real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm  such  that  would
             require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or  Article
             15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In particular, he  will
             not be at real risk simply on account of  having  lived  in  a
             European location for a period of time or of being viewed with
             suspicion either by the authorities as a possible supporter of
             Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as an apostate  or  someone  whose
             Islamic integrity has been compromised by living in a  Western
             country...

         (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek assistance from
             his clan members but not close relatives, such  help  is  only
             likely  to  be  forthcoming  for  majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.

         (viii)   The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
             changed.   Clans  now  provide,  potentially,  social  support
             mechanisms and assist with access to  livelihoods,  performing
             less of a protection function than previously.  There  are  no
             clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan
             based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for   minority   clan
             members.

         (ix) If it is accepted the person  facing  a  return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             the circumstances.  These considerations will include, but are
             not limited to:

             .    circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

             .    length of absence from Mogadishu;

             .    family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

             .    access to financial resources;

             .    prospects of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self-employment;

             .    availability of remittances from abroad;

             .    means of support during the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

             .    why his ability to fund the journey to the West no longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

         (x)  Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially if there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.

         (xi) It will therefore only be those with no clan or family support
             who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and  who
             have no real prospect of securing access to  a  livelihood  on
             return who will face the prospect of  being  in  circumstances
             falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in   humanitarian
             protection terms.

33. Accordingly, even if it were true that the claimant had fled  Mogadishu
    at the end of 2003 or the beginning  of  2004  because  of  inter  clan
    violence at that time, there is no longer a real  risk  of  inter  clan
    violence.  The evidence establishes clearly that in Mogadishu there  is
    no inter clan violence  taking  place  and  no  real  risk  of  serious
    discriminatory treatment being experienced on the basis  of  clan:  see
    MOJ at paragraph [337].  So  there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the claimant would face reprisals from his sub-clan  for
    allegedly refusing to take part in hostilities against another sub-clan
    of the Hawiye.

34. The clan has now become a social  structure  rather  than  a  protector
    structure: see paragraph [339].   Some  trades  are  dominated  by  one
    particular  clan  so  that  access  may  be  made  easier   with   clan
    sponsorship, but there is no  evidence  that  an  individual  would  be
    barred because of an absence of it: see paragraph [340].   While  there
    is no guarantee that help will be available from clan  members  outside
    the close family  network  of  a  returnee,  at  least  there  is  more
    likelihood of such a request being accommodated than if made  to  those
    unconnected by the bond of clan membership: see  paragraph  [343].   In
    the same paragraph, the Tribunal go on to cite  the  following  extract
    from an UNHCR report of January 2014, in which the view  was  expressed
    that a returnee might be rather more confident of receiving  help  from
    his clan, if not a minority clan member:

         Persons  belonging  to  minority  clans  ...  remain  a  particular
         disadvantage in Mogadishu ... There remains a low sense  of  Somali
         social and ethical  obligation  to  assist  individuals  from  weak
         lineages and social groups.  This stands in stark contrast  to  the
         powerful and non negotiable  obligations  Somalis  have  to  assist
         members of their own lineage (my emphasis)

    The claimant said that he was a member of the Hawiye majority clan when
    claiming asylum in 2004 and he has maintained that assertion by way  of
    appeal. Since this assertion objectively  weakened  his  asylum  claim,
    rather than strengthening it, there is no reason to  suppose  that  the
    claimant was inventing a majority clan membership when in fact he was a
    member of a minority clan.  In the COI on Somalia dated 17 January 2012
    at paragraph 19.13 it is said that the Abgal and Habr Gedir  groups  of
    the Hawiye clan are dominant in Mogadishu.  The claimant says  that  he
    is  a  member  of  the  Abgal  sub-clan  of  the  Hawiye,  and  so  the
    overwhelming likelihood is that he would be able to return to Mogadishu
    to live in an area where there is a high concentration  of  Abgal  clan
    members, and that he would be  able  to  access  practical  and  social
    support from such clan members.

The Medical Evidence

35. Turning to the medical evidence, it appears  that  the  claimant  first
    consulted a GP about his mental ill-health in  October  2012.   He  was
    seen without an interpreter, and he reported a long history of  feeling
    low in mood, difficulty in  sleeping  and  anger  issues.   He  had  no
    thoughts of suicide or  self-harm.   He  also  did  not  attribute  his
    symptoms to having suffered any traumatic experiences in Somalia before
    he left Somalia.  He reported episodes of paranoia when he was  chewing
    khat, a stimulant.  The GP observed that talking  rapidly  and  elation
    was a known affect of the drug, as was depression.  The GP had  a  long
    discussion with him about what to do next.  He was strongly advised  to
    stop taking khat, and he was started on sertraline.  The appellant  was
    booked to see the GP the next week, and it was proposed that  he  bring
    his uncle to interpret.  If he was  still  paranoid  after  coming  off
    khat, there might be a need to refer him to psychiatry.

36. He was apparently next seen again in January 2013.  He had been  taking
    sertraline, but he had missed three appointments.  He reported he  felt
    a bit better when he was on sertraline.  He had  stopped  taking  khat,
    and since he had stopped he had not felt paranoid.  He told the  GP  he
    had come from Somalia eight years ago, and felt very low because he was
    unable to support his family back home. It is to be noted that  he  did
    not report to his GP that he had lost  contact  with  his  family  back
    home.  He also told his GP that he did not feel that he would ever kill
    himself or engage in self-harm.

37. The claimant was seen by Dr Tahira George for psychiatric assessment on
    12 August 2014.  In her subsequent report, she described him as a  poor
    historian who  gave  limited  information  through  a  Somali  speaking
    interpreter.  Based on the history  he  provided  and  a  mental  state
    examination on 12 August 2014, she was  of  the  opinion  that  he  was
    suffering from an undifferentiated type of schizophrenia.  He  met  the
    criteria for schizophrenia,  but  did  not  meet  the  criteria  for  a
    paranoid, disorganised or catatonic type of schizophrenia.  The chronic
    use of khat had impacted on his mental health.

38. Dr George's diagnosis was entirely based on the  claimant's  report  of
    his symptoms, rather than upon how he presented to her.   At  paragraph
    16.1, she described the claimant as being alert and orientated with  no
    fluctuation to his conscious  level.   While  he  appeared  anxious,  a
    superficial rapport was established and  appropriate  eye  contact  was
    maintained.  There were no abnormal movements,  either  spontaneous  or
    induced.  His voice was low in volume, brief answers were provided, but
    they were normal in rhythm, tonality and spontaneity.  She  thought  he
    was anxious about the outcome of the psychiatric  assessment,  but  was
    not depressed.  He was not distracted during the interview.  He  denied
    any current thoughts of self-harm,  suicide  or  homicide,  actions  or
    plans.

39. Unlike what he told his GP, the claimant told Dr  George  that  he  had
    lost contact with his children and wife, and had become despondent as a
    result.  He also reported persecutory beliefs about Somalian clans  and
    said that sometimes he thought people  were  following  him.   He  also
    claimed to hear voices in  his  head.   At  paragraph  16.5  Dr  George
    referred to the claimant as having delusional beliefs about persecution
    from Somalian clans.

40. She said that during  the  assessment  the  claimant  was  willing  and
    motivated to engage in treatment but was fearful about  his  safety  if
    forcibly returned to Somalia and wished to be dead, although he did not
    admit to suicidal thoughts or plans.

Risk on return

41. While there  is  credible  evidence  that  the  claimant  suffers  from
    depression, there are not substantial grounds for  believing  that  the
    claimant suffers from a mental health disorder of such  gravity  as  to
    make him a suicide risk  or  as  otherwise  eligible  for  humanitarian
    protection and/or Article 3 ECHR protection on mental  health  grounds.
    In diagnosing the claimant as suffering from schizophrenia,  Dr  George
    was in part basing  her  diagnosis  on  the  proposition  that  he  had
    "delusional" beliefs about persecution. But on the claimant's  case  he
    is not deluded about what happened to him in the past; and, as  I  have
    observed earlier, insofar as his fear was related to Al  Shabaab,  this
    fear was a rational one. It is just not well-founded. Another  inherent
    weakness in the diagnosis is that it is solely based on the  claimant's
    self-reported history  of  events  and  symptoms,  and,  as  Dr  George
    acknowledges, he is a poor historian.

42. It is clear from Dr George's observations of him that the claimant does
    not present to the layman as mentally ill, and so the issue  of  social
    stigmatisation does not arise as a risk factor.  It is also clear  that
    the claimant does not have any cognitive impairment,  and  that  he  is
    able to function on a day-to-day basis.  Some time  ago  he  ceased  to
    live with his sister, and moved into NASS accommodation.   Although  Dr
    George is of the opinion that the  claimant  had  been  suffering  from
    mental  ill-health  since  adolescence,  this  would  not  prevent  the
    claimant from working or seeking work, according to what he said in his
    screening interview.

43. It is not shown that his mental disorder is even of such severity as to
    require medication, in that the claimant apparently did  not  seek  any
    medical treatment at all for his condition before October 2012.   There
    is a healthcare centre in Mogadishu where  he  can  access  appropriate
    treatment.  In particular, amiptriptyline is  available,  which  is  an
    alternative antidepressant to  sertraline:  see  paragraph  26  of  the
    refusal letter.  The claimant told Dr George that he had stopped taking
    antidepressant medication because it stopped  him  from  sleeping.   Dr
    George does not offer an opinion as to whether this is  a  likely  side
    effect from a clinical perspective.  But if it is, the obvious solution
    is for the claimant to be prescribed  sleeping  tablets  as  well,  and
    there is no reason to suppose that sleeping tablets are  not  available
    in Mogadishu.

44. As the claimant's wife and children are members of a dominant  clan  in
    Mogadishu, and Mogadishu is now enjoying an economic  boom,  there  are
    not substantial grounds for believing that they  do  not  remain  there
    with other family members and/or fellow members  of  their  clan.   But
    even if it is true that the claimant has lost contact with them,  there
    is good reason to believe that  the  claimant  would  be  able  to  re-
    establish contact with them on return to Mogadishu.  Alternatively,  if
    the claimant is given the benefit of the doubt on  this  question,  the
    overwhelming likelihood is that the claimant will be able to draw  upon
    a social support network provided by fellow clan members.  Furthermore,
    as family members in the UK have supported the claimant financially  in
    the past, there is no reason to suppose that they would be unwilling or
    unable to send remittances to the claimant in  Mogadishu.   It  is  not
    credible that family members here, who  have  professed  great  concern
    about the claimant's welfare, would not ensure that he  had  sufficient
    funds so as to be able to maintain and accommodate  himself  adequately
    in Mogadishu.

45. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, Said Musa Ahmed, one of  the
    appellant's  brothers  here,  said  he  would  no  longer  support  the
    appellant in Somalia because he wanted his brother to  be  independent.
    The implication of this evidence is that (a) Mr  Ahmed  has  sufficient
    funds to support the claimant in Somalia, and (b) that he will  support
    him until  he  becomes  financially  independent.  In  any  event,  the
    overwhelming likelihood is that, notwithstanding the position taken  by
    the two siblings before the First-tier Tribunal (both  of  whom  had  a
    motive to misrepresent their true intentions in  order  to  assist  the
    claimant in his appeal), money would be found by  the  family  here  to
    support the claimant in Mogadishu, at least until he had re-established
    himself there.

46. In conclusion, I find that the claimant has not discharged  the  burden
    of proving that he should be recognised as a refugee; or  that  on  his
    return to Somalia he would face a real risk of harm of such severity as
    to cross the threshold of Article 3 ECHR.  By the same token, there are
    not substantial grounds for believing that the claimant is eligible  in
    the alternative for humanitarian protection or subsidiary protection.

47. In respect of an alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR,  the  claimant
    does not have a viable family  life  claim  under  Appendix  FM.   With
    regard to a private life claim under Rule 276ADE(vi) the  claimant  has
    not discharged the burden of proving there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into the country to which he would have to
    go if required to leave the UK.  As was acknowledged by Mr Sharma,  the
    claimant retains cultural and linguistic ties to Somalia.  He may  well
    also retain family ties  to  Somalia.   There  would  be  a  degree  of
    hardship in returning to Mogadishu after a long absence abroad, but the
    hardship will be mitigated significantly by the  claimant's  membership
    of a dominant clan in Mogadishu, and  also  by  the  financial  support
    which he can expect to receive from family members here.

48. Turning to a claim outside the Rules, questions 1 and 2 of  the  Razgar
    test should be answered in the claimant's favour  with  regard  to  the
    establishment of private life in the United Kingdom.  Question 3 and  4
    of the Razgar test should be answered in favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  On the crucial question of proportionality, I do  not  consider
    that the asserted loss  of  contact  with  his  wife  and  children  in
    Somalia, or his mental health condition,  are  factors  which  tip  the
    scales in the claimant's  favour  in  the  proportionality  assessment.
    Under Section 117B of the 2002 Act, the public interest  considerations
    which are in play largely weigh against the claimant.   It  is  in  his
    favour that he must be able to speak English,  as  he  communicated  in
    English with his GP.  But he is not financially independent, and he has
    built up a private life here unlawfully.  I find that the  interference
    consequential upon the decision appealed against  is  proportionate  to
    the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,  which  is  the
    prevention of disorder and the protection  of  the  country's  economic
    wellbeing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
contained a material error of law,  and  accordingly  the  decision  is  set
aside and the following decision is substituted: the  claimant's  appeal  is
dismissed on all grounds raised.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
