
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01451/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2016                       |On 11 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     D L
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    In this matter the Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Meyler  who  had  refused  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision in respect of  her
    protection claim. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Reid by way of a decision dated 20 August 2015. It  was  on  that
    basis that the matter came for hearing before  me  on  2nd  June  2016.
    After I had heard the respective submissions of both  advocates  I  had
    reserved my decision.

2.    The grounds of appeal  are  wide-ranging,  but  in  essence  are  well
    summarised by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reid.  Namely  that  the  grounds
    contend  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to   address  the   Appellant's
    vulnerability and its consequent impact on  her  evidence  and  overall
    credibility; the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for her findings
    regarding the Appellant's sexual identity; the Judge made  unreasonable
    and contradictory finding in relation to answers given by the Appellant
    in her Home Office interview; there was a failure to adequately  assess
    the persecutory risk on return for a  member  of  a  Particular  Social
    Group; there had been a failure to adjourn and the Judge had failed  to
    make findings in respect of Paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


3.    Mr Sharif in his submissions before me said he relied on  the  grounds
    of appeal. In respect of ground one, the benefit of the doubt ought  to
    have been given to the Appellant  in  view  of  her  vulnerability.  In
    respect of ground two it  was  said  that  individual's  sexuality  can
    change over time but in this case the weight that the Judge had put had
    tainted  her  findings.  In  respect  of  ground   three   there   were
    contradictory findings in respect of the  Home  Office  interview.  One
    aspect were the findings at paragraphs 35 to 38 but then at  paragraphs
    44 to 48 it was said that  the  questions  during  the  interview  were
    inappropriate. The Judge had used the  same  answers  to  make  adverse
    findings in respect of credibility. The bar was  put  too  high  as  to
    whether she was a lesbian. In respect of  ground  four  the  Judge  had
    expected corroborative evidence. It was a higher standard of proof that
    had been applied. At ground 5 there was a failure to consider the  risk
    on return issues. The other grounds were then also referred to  briefly
    by Mr Sharif.

4.    Mr Mills made  detailed  submissions.  In  summary  he  said  that  in
    respect of ground one the Judge had acknowledged that the Appellant was
    a vulnerable person. The guidance did not say that a vulnerable  person
    be given the complete benefit of doubt and to ignore discrepancies. The
    Judge needed to take into account the vulnerability and  she  had  done
    so. It was impossible to say that the  Judge  had  not  considered  the
    matter in a fair and balanced way. Nowhere does it say that if there  a
    vulnerable person  that  you  then  ignore  the  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence.

5.    In respect of ground two,  the  Judge  said  she  was  placing  little
    weight on this and ultimately it was held against the Appellant.  There
    was no error of law.

6.    As for ground three which related to the  Home  Office  interview,  it
    was important to acknowledge what was actually said. The length of  the
    interview was disproportionate due to the Appellant's distress. Nowhere
    was it found that the interviewer was not trying to get  the  Appellant
    to do her best in a kind and supportive way. The only aspect  was  that
    at paragraph 38 of her decision the Judge  said  that  the  interviewer
    ought to have insisted that the interview stop. It was a long way  from
    saying it was an unsafe interview. The use of the term "benefit of  the
    doubt" by the Judge was an acceptable phrase.

7.    In respect of ground 4 the Judge was not saying at paragraph  52  that
    there was no evidence of the Appellant going to gay  clubs.  The  Judge
    was making the point that there were various sources of evidence but no
    one had told her why. For example there  was  a  letter  from  Sandwell
    Women's Aid but there was nothing about the Appellant being gay.  There
    was a letter from the Church and again nothing. All  of  this  evidence
    could have said that the Appellant is gay. There was no  evidence  from
    the counsellor on this either. There was no material error of  law.  Mr
    Mills relied on the Court of  Appeal's  judgement  in  TK  (Burundi)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40  when  at
    paragraph 20 of the judgment of Thomas LJ (as he  then  was)  and  with
    whom Waller and Moore-Bick LJJ's agreed had said that there was a  need
    for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach to  the  evidence
    of an appellant  where  independent  supporting  evidence  was  readily
    available but was not provided.

8.    As for ground 5 the Judge said the Appellant had been trafficked,  but
    it is all about what happened in this country. There is also the matter
    of the domestic violence.

9.    As for ground 6 there was  the  possibility  of  internal  relocation.
    There is widespread domestic violence in the Appellant's  home  country
    but there can be  internal  relocation.  The  reasoning  was  full  and
    adequate.

10.   As for grounds 7 it was just a "cut and paste issue"  with  the  error
    of the names.

11.   As for ground 8 the Appellant's counsel had not sought an  adjournment
    so how can it be an error  of  law  for  there  not  to  have  been  an
    adjournment?

12.   Finally in respect of ground 9, there was no paragraph 276ADE  pleaded
    and nor was it relied upon. Overall it was stressed that there  was  no
    material error of law.

13.   After hearing  from  Mr  Sharif  in  reply  I  had  then  reserved  my
    decision.

14.   I have considered the Respondent's  Rule  24  Reply  dated  27  August
    2015. In my judgment Mr Mills is plainly  right  that  the  Appellant's
    grounds of appeal in respect of the  adjournment  issues  are  mistaken
    because no adjournment was sought at the hearing. Similarly the grounds
    in respect of the Paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 issues must also  fail
    because the matters were not relied upon at the hearing.  Mr  Mills  is
    also correct that the evidence from the supporting  documents  such  as
    the letter from Sandwell Women's Aid failed to deal with the issues  in
    respect of the Appellant's sexuality and that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in TK (Burundi) means that the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal
    in that respect must also fail.

15.   What has concerned me  though  is  the  particularly  unusual  details
    relating to this Appellant's Home Office interview. The  Appellant  was
    unrepresented at the interview. That of itself is not unusual, but  the
    length of the interview was. It had lasted from 10.36  hours  to  15.40
    hours. The Interviewing Officer  noted  the  extreme  distress  of  the
    Appellant during the interview. He had sought to stop the interview but
    the Appellant had begged him to carry  on.  The  Judge  also  noted  at
    paragraph 40 of her decision whether the Appellant may have undiagnosed
    learning difficulties. Earlier in her decision the Judge had said  that
    she noted that at the hearing the Appellant had struggled to deal  with
    some very basic questions which had been put to her.

16.   Overall, the vulnerability of the Appellant was clear.

17.    The  Judge  quite  properly  highlighted  the  concerns   about   the
    Appellant's difficulties at the  hearing.  What  has  troubled  me  and
    ultimately which forces me to conclude that there is a  material  error
    of law is that the Judge noted  the  serious  problems  with  the  Home
    Office interview at paragraphs 34 to 38 but then some  of  the  answers
    from  that  very  interview  were  used  to  show   discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's case. There were the  later  adverse
    findings at paragraph 41 onwards in the Judge's decision.

18.   I conclude that there is a material error of law for the  reasons  set
    out  by  in  the  Appellant's  grounds.  Namely  that  there   was   an
    inconsistent approach to the interview.  If  the  interview  was  being
    rejected as being unreliable for the reasons advanced,  then  the  same
    interview could  not  later  be  used  to  find  discrepancies  in  the
    Appellant's appeal in the manner that it was.  The Judge was placed  in
    a difficult position  because  of  the  Appellant's  vulnerability  and
    because of the apparent failure by the Appellant's side to seek to  say
    that the interview ought to have had no weight placed upon it.  However
    the Judge made the findings that she did about the  interview  and  the
    Appellant and it was not  open  to  her  thereafter  to  use  the  very
    interview to make adverse findings.

19.   It means that the decision  as  a  whole  cannot  stand.  The  Judge's
    careful and detailed observations about the  Appellant  are  admirable.
    However in view the relatively unusual mix of  three  aspects  of  this
    case, namely (1)  the  Appellant's  vulnerability,  (2)  that  she  was
    apparently trafficked and (3) because of the state of the  Home  Office
    interview,  I  conclude  that  this  protection   claim   has   to   be
    reconsidered. That will  be  way  of  a  rehearing  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. None of the findings from the Judge's decision  shall  stand.
    For the avoidance of doubt, I am not making any binding  findings  that
    the Home Office interview ought to have no weight attached to it.  That
    will be for the Appellant's side to  consider  and  for  the  Judge  to
    decide upon at the rehearing if  any  application  or  submissions  are
    made.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material error of law  and  is
set aside.

There shall be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity order is made as this case relates to a protection claim.

Signed                                             Date 16 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
