
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01986/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 3rd February 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                  ARIF KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chalk of Immigration and Asylum Services
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  failed  to
         give anxious scrutiny to all the evidence and that it was  arguable
         that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
         the appellant's claim to be Hazara when the  respondent  had  given
         good reasons why she accepted this.

    Error of law

      2. This appellant has significantly changed the basis of his claim for
         asylum. Initially he claimed to have been born in Afghanistan, that
         his father had been murdered fighting for the Taliban and  that  he
         had been taken to the mountains on two separate occasions. This,  a
         few days before his hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  he
         changed and said that he  had  been  born  in  Pakistan  to  Afghan
         parents who were living illegally in Pakistan, that he had gone  to
         Iran  and  that  when  the  Iranians  were  returning  Afghans   to
         Afghanistan his parents (who were both alive) had sent him  to  the
         UK. He claimed he had  converted  to  Christianity.  Although  this
         changed basis of claim was notified to  the  Tribunal  and  to  the
         respondent a few days before the hearing,  the  respondent  plainly
         had no reasonable opportunity to prepare for this but  nevertheless
         did not ask for an adjournment.

      3. The grounds relied upon assert that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         at [22] conceded that the appellant's Hazara  ethnicity  had  never
         been disputed by the respondent. This is incorrect. The judge  does
         not make any such concession. The judge does state

             "27. Insofar as the appellant's claim to be a Hazara the  only
             evidence as to his ethnicity is his own.  There  is  no  other
             evidence supporting this claim.  The  burden  of  proving  his
             appeal rests upon the appellant to the lower standard and I am
             satisfied having found  the  appellant  to  be  an  incredible
             witness he has not established he is of Hazara  ethnicity  and
             therefore at risk in Afghanistan or Pakistan."

         There are a number of problems with this finding. First it fails to
         consider the evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
         relation to his ethnicity namely: the conclusion of the  respondent
         in the first reasons for refusal letter dated 19th April 2013  that
         he spoke the Hazaragi dialect of Dari which  is  spoken  by  Hazara
         ethnicity; that he was aware that the Hazara people are said to  be
         descendants of Genghis Khan and what their religious  beliefs  are;
         that it was submitted both orally and in the skeleton argument that
         Hazara are identifiable by their Asiatic features; the document  in
         Bundle 1 of the appellant's documents relied upon  which  describes
         the different ethnicity characteristics of Hazaras and Pashtun.  Ms
         Johnstone submitted that the submission by the appellant of a false
         birth certificate and the complete change of the basis  upon  which
         he now claimed international protection were so significant that it
         was open to the judge to find that the appellant was not Hazara  as
         claimed.

      4. Whilst it may be that a finding to that extent could be open  to  a
         judge on a reading of that material, it is  not  evident  that  the
         judge in this case had any regard  to  any  of  that  material.  He
         reached a conclusion that the appellant was not Hazara  because  he
         had already decided that the appellant was "an incredible witness".
         Not only does the judge reach a finding on a significant element of
         the appellant's claim (that he would be at risk of being persecuted
         by reason of his ethnicity) but  does  so  having  found  that  his
         account of the basis of his claim  was  incredible  without  taking
         into account the evidence before him to contradict that finding. It
         is by no means inevitable that another judge would have come to the
         same conclusion.

      5. The judge did not set out  the  appellant's  evidence  but  gave  a
         summary of five contradictory claims in [23]. Although of course it
         is unnecessary for a judge to set out an  appellant's  evidence  in
         full in all cases, it is incumbent upon a judge,  if  findings  are
         going to be made on that evidence to at least set out the  gist  of
         that evidence and cross examination where significant  and  serious
         adverse credibility findings are to be made. It cannot be  disputed
         that the appellant has told a story that was untrue when  he  first
         claimed asylum. Nor can it be disputed that it was not until a  few
         days before his appeal that he voluntarily changed his  account  to
         what he asserted to be the correct account. The First-tier Tribunal
         judge correctly directs himself to the proposition that although  a
         person may lie about one thing it does not necessarily mean  he  is
         lying about another; he concludes that he must  approach  the  'new
         story'  with  considerable  caution.  In  [35]  he  refers  to  the
         principal witness in  support  of  the  appellant's  conversion  to
         Christianity as accepting the appellant's  conversion  as  genuine.
         The judge then refers in [36] to a written witness statement by the
         appellant's girlfriend (she did not attend to give  oral  evidence)
         as not referring to his conversion and not referring to  him  being
         of  Hazara  ethnicity.  The  judge  concludes  this   significantly
         undermines his account of his conversion. The judge then goes on to
         conclude

             "37. Having considered all the material  in  the  round  I  am
             satisfied this appellant  cannot  be  believed  and  has  been
             untruthful. He has perpetrated his lies by deceit. This deceit
             has continued since he came to the UK  and  was  practiced  on
             experienced Home Office  investigators  and  those  in  Social
             Services who cared for him. Whilst I accept the goodwill of Mr
             Baillie believing as he does that  this  appellant  has  found
             Christianity I am satisfied  that  Mr  Baillie  has  been  yet
             another in a  long  line  of  those  who  this  appellant  has
             deceived. If the appellant's account is to be believed  it  is
             incredible that  he  still  purports  to  be  a  Shia  to  his
             girlfriend of several years.

             ...

             40.  ... for his account  to  be  credible  even  to  the  low
             standard  of  proof  something  so  potentially  life-changing
             should not be perfunctory, vague or ill  thought  out  as  his
             account is. Even at a young  age  this  appellant  has  proved
             extremely resourceful travelling across Europe with the single
             goal that his destination was the UK. Having arrived in the UK
             I am satisfied the appellant  engineered  an  elaborate  story
             that is now accepted to be a  lie.  This  continued  for  many
             years ... I have little  doubt  that  if  this  appellant  was
             allowed to remain in the UK he would soon fall away  form  his
             interest in Christianity."

      6. Although the judge purports to have considered all the evidence  in
         the round it does not appear that he has considered  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence of Mr Baillie, Mr Baillie's  position  in  the
         church or the processes and procedures undertaken by the Church  to
         satisfy themselves as to the genuineness of  conversion.  Nor  does
         the judge appear to have taken account of the appellant's  evidence
         that the relationship between him and  his  girlfriend  had  hit  a
         'rocky patch' or the reasons for that. Nor does he appear  to  have
         taken account of the appellant's evidence that he was sent  to  the
         UK by his parents and the effect that that combined with his  youth
         and the instructions he may have been given could impact  upon  his
         account. The foundation stone appears to be the lack of  reference,
         in a written witness statement by a young woman who  did  not  give
         oral evidence, to his being of Hazara ethnicity and that he had not
         told her he had converted. Yet that statement refers to her  seeing
         a bible at his home and to his explanation. Of course there  is  no
         requirement for a judge to identify  and  make  findings  on  every
         single piece of evidence  that  is  before  him.  But  there  is  a
         requirement to show  that  significant  and  relevant  evidence  is
         considered and taken account of. The fact that  the  appellant  has
         lied about the basis of his previous claim does not mean that those
         lies translate to a lie about the current  basis  of  claim  -  the
         evidence  he  relied  upon  in  support  has  not  been  adequately
         considered by the judge.

      7. I am satisfied there has been an error of law in  the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal such that it be set aside to be remade;  no
         credibility findings to be retained.

      8. This appeal needs a complete re-hearing with full oral evidence and
         I thus remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision.

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.




         Date 3rd February 2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
