
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01398/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2014 and 5 January 2015        |On 16 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              ZA (AFGHANISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Afzal, Legal Representative, instructed by
                    Legal Acumen Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (10 November 2014) and Ms A Everett
                    (5 January 2015), Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Callow sitting at Taylor House  on  26  June
    2014) dismissing his appeal against the decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a refugee, or  as  being  otherwise
    entitled to international or human rights protection.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, but I consider that  such
    a direction is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal as
    a central issue in the appeal is whether the appellant is a  vulnerable
    adult.

 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan,  whose  estimated  date  of
    birth is 1 January 1995.  This estimate is uncontested.  He is recorded
    as having applied for asylum on  7  January  2009.   In  his  screening
    interview, he said he was aged either 13 or 14.  He had  been  born  in
    Kabul, and his last permanent address in his country of origin was  the
    village of Zangora, in Laghman province.   His  normal  occupation  was
    "casual work in fields".   His  family  consisted  of  his  mother  and
    father, a brother and sister, two  maternal  uncles  and  one  paternal
    uncle.  He had left his country five or six months  ago.   His  parents
    had paid US$6,000 to get him to Athens.  He had come to  England  on  a
    boat, hidden in a box on a lorry.  He had not used an agent to  get  on
    the lorry because he did not have  any  money  left.   His  reason  for
    coming to the UK was to claim asylum.  He thought he could make a  life
    for himself here.  Life in Afghanistan was dangerous.  He had  received
    a letter threatening him for learning English.  He felt that  he  would
    be endangered if he returned.  Schools had been attacked and mined.

 3. The appellant provided a witness statement on 3 February 2009,  and  he
    was interviewed about his asylum claim on 24 March  2009.   On  7  July
    2009 the then Secretary of State gave his/her reasons for refusing  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  There were  internal  discrepancies  in  his
    account, and it also ran counter to the objective  evidence  about  the
    behaviour of the Taliban (paragraph 41).  Even if his claim  was  taken
    at its highest, he still would not qualify for the grant of asylum.  He
    had not shown that any incidents he had suffered were  not  simply  the
    random acts from some individuals  but  were  a  sustained  pattern  or
    campaign of persecution directed at him which was  knowingly  tolerated
    by the authorities, or that the authorities were unable or unwilling to
    offer him effective protection.  Also,  he  had  not  established  that
    there was not an area of Afghanistan to which he could return and  live
    safely.  He claimed that his family had relocated to  Logar  after  the
    Taliban threats.  He had lived there without having any  more  problems
    with the Taliban.  As he was previously able to relocate in Afghanistan
    without problems, he could do so now.  Consideration had been given  to
    the case of LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT
    0005 where the Tribunal held that an orphaned minor with no family  and
    friends to turn to, who provided evidence that they would be at risk of
    severe harm because they were children, were a particular social  group
    under the Geneva Convention.  But his claim  was  distinguishable  from
    that of LQ.  His mother, father and siblings remained in Afghanistan in
    the village when he left.  He had also been able to make  contact  with
    his parents since he had arrived in the UK to let them know that he had
    arrived safely.  It was noted that in answer  to  question  66  in  the
    asylum interview, he had said that his family had told him that the bad
    situation in his area had improved since he had gone,  and  there  were
    some facilities there now.

 4. The appellant appealed against the refusal decision, and his appeal was
    dismissed by Judge  Cox  on  18  September  2009.   The  appellant  had
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor, and on 25  May
    2012 he applied for further leave to remain.  His social worker,  Laura
    Poole, was asked  to  complete  a  "best  interests  consideration  pro
    forma", and to return it by 30 May 2012, which she did.

 5. On the topic of level of education / skills or qualifications gained in
    the UK, she said that ZA had completed his statutory education, and had
    almost completed his exams/course work for year 11.  He had  done  very
    well whilst at school and had made some  great  achievements.   He  had
    been interviewed and accepted on  to  a  course  of  education  at  the
    [college] in Peterborough.  It would start in September and  it  was  a
    full-time course lasting two years.

 6. On the topic of emotional and behavioural development, she said that ZA
    was a very well-adjusted young man.  He was happy and  settled  in  his
    life in England and there were no concerns regarding his emotional  and
    behavioural development.  Reports from school all said that he was well-
    behaved with good manners.  He responded to the  boundaries  that  were
    put in place for him.  On the topic of family and social relationships,
    she said that ZA had maintained a positive relationship with his foster
    parents despite the fact that he no longer lived  with  them.   On  the
    topic of self-care skills, she said that ZA was  an  independent  young
    man.  He lived in semi-independent accommodation and succeeded in being
    able to budget his money on his food shopping and to prepare  and  cook
    his own meals.  He had very good personal hygiene, and always took care
    in his presentation.  On the topic of the child's views, she said  that
    he was very mature and took responsibility for himself.  He was excited
    about starting college, but he was understandably anxious  as  to  what
    his future might hold.

 7. On 10 January 2014 the respondent gave her reasons for refusing to vary
    the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and for removing
    the  appellant  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Callow sitting at Taylor House
    on 26 June 2014.  The appellant was represented by  Ms  Afzal,  and  Mr
    Bose, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  In his subsequent determination, the judge said  that  the
    appellant had in effect renewed his claim for asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.  The core details of his  claim  were  the  same  as  those
    summarised by Judge Cox when he heard the appeal in 2009, save  in  one
    respect.  After his arrival in the UK the appellant was in contact with
    his mother by telephone, and regularly spoke to her.  When he sought to
    speak to his father, his mother advised that he was not available.   In
    the course of 2010 she informed the appellant that his father had  been
    killed and that his grandfather had passed away.  On  further  enquiry,
    she reported that his father had been killed by the Taliban because  he
    had sent the appellant to Europe.  The appellant's mother had remarried
    and had been barred from having contact with the appellant.

 9. In cross-examination, the appellant said  he  did  not  want  the  Home
    Office to look for his family in Afghanistan.  He accepted  they  could
    not be found, and if they had been found he would have been informed by
    the Home Office or the Red Cross.  As his mother had been  barred  from
    speaking with him on the telephone, he  did  not  know  where  she  was
    currently living.

10. The judge received evidence from  Gulfraz  Ijaz  and  Susan  Norman  of
    Peterborough  Council  about   the   appellant's   medical   condition.
    Notwithstanding the lack of diagnosis by a doctor, they  believed  that
    the appellant suffered from PTSD.  This might explain in their view why
    he had appeared to  be  inconsistent  in  the  answers  at  his  asylum
    interview.  Also, it was later discovered  that  the  appellant  had  a
    hearing impairment in one of his ears, and he may not  have  heard  and
    fully understand the questions that were asked of him.

11. At the  age  of  15  the  appellant  was  assessed  by  an  educational
    psychologist, and he achieved well  below  the  average  level  on  all
    subsets of the cognitive assessment.  He came  across  as  a  charming,
    responsive young man who had difficulty expressing himself  clearly  in
    English and also had difficulty in his comprehension in  English.   The
    psychologist determined that the appellant's ability was restricted  to
    that of a 6 year and 10 month old child, rather  than  a  15  year  old
    child.  He said that this would explain any lack of credibility issues.



12. The judge's findings of fact are set out in paragraph 27 onwards of his
    determination.  He was satisfied to the lower standard  of  proof  that
    the appellant's explanation for his asylum claim was credible.  He  was
    fortified in reaching that conclusion because IJ Cox accepted that  his
    core account was not wholly inconsistent with  the  objective  evidence
    produced at the hearing before him.  The judge continued:

         In this context it is  noted  the  appellant  attended  the  asylum
         interview with a legal representative and a responsible  adult  and
         the main issue as to his credibility  essentially  focused  on  the
         appellant's conflicting evidence as to the contact that he had with
         his mother.  Despite the fact the discrepancies remain unexplained,
         I do not consider them to be material on the consideration  of  the
         core  elements  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  protection.   The
         appellant has  not  told  the  truth  about  his  mother.   He  has
         embellished the details of his contact and  subsequent  termination
         to bolster his claim that he  cannot  now  be  safely  returned  to
         Kabul.  To the lower standard it  has  been  established  that  the
         reason why the appellant left Afghanistan was that there existed  a
         real threat of torture or death at the hands of [the] Taliban.

13. The judge went on to find that the appellant could safely  relocate  to
    Kabul, and that any potential interest the Taliban  had  could  now  be
    discounted by the lapse of time.  The judge  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on all grounds raised.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. Ms Afzal settled an application for permission to appeal on  behalf  of
    the  appellant.   As  summarised  by  Judge  Frankish   when   granting
    permission to appeal, she asserted that insufficient credit  was  given
    for the appellant's mental capacity being limited to that of  a  person
    under the age of 7 as shown  in  a  professional  report;  insufficient
    credit was given to the appellant's attachment  to  the  foster  family
    with whom he used to live; the judge had been wrong to accept  part  of
    the core claim but not all of it; the judge had been  wrong  to  accept
    the core claim of the death of the father at the hands of  the  Taliban
    but not of the risk arising to the appellant therefrom; and  the  judge
    failed correctly to apply KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1014  having
    regard to the appellant's mental handicap and the loss of contact  with
    the family.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

15. Judge Frankish granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         The fact that the appellant has a mental age below 7  is  found  in
         the recitation of his case at paragraph 11.  However,  it  features
         nowhere in the  analysis  which  commences  at  paragraph  27  and,
         indeed, at paragraph 52, he is referred to as a 19 year old without
         any qualification of that age.  That  may  amount  to  an  arguable
         error of law.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 10 November 2014

16. At the hearing, Ms Afzal developed the arguments raised in the  grounds
    of appeal, and in particular the point identified by Judge Frankish  as
    amounting to an arguable error of law.  In reply, Mr Armstrong  adopted
    the Rule 24 response,  in  which  the  respondent  submitted  that  the
    grounds disclosed no material errors of law, and were merely expressing
    disagreement with the negative outcome of the appeal.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

17. It is not irrational, as suggested  by  Ms  Afzal,  for  the  judge  to
    disbelieve the appellant on one aspect of his claim  (loss  of  contact
    with his mother) while at the same time accepting another aspect of his
    claim (that he had a well-founded fear of the Taliban at the time  that
    he was sent by his parents to Athens).  But it  was  incumbent  on  the
    judge to explain why he rejected the  appellant's  evidence  about  the
    loss of contact with his mother, and no such reasoning is  discernable.
    There is simply a bald statement by the judge that  the  appellant  has
    not told the truth about his mother, but no explanation as  to  how  he
    has arrived at this conclusion.

18. Mr Armstrong argues that the judge's  error  is  not  material  as  the
    appellant could safely relocate to live in Kabul on his own.  The claim
    that he is suffering from PTSD is at variance  with  his  own  evidence
    that he had no health  issues,  and  in  any  event  it  has  not  been
    substantiated by any credible medical evidence.

19. However,  at  paragraph  26  of  his  determination  the  judge  placed
    significant weight on the cognitive assessment of  the  appellant  when
    aged 15 in assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence.
    Unless there had been a dramatic improvement, there  was  by  inference
    the possibility that the appellant's  cognitive  abilities  were  still
    those of a child so as to render the appellant a vulnerable adult.   So
    the question of whether one or both parents  were  contactable  was  of
    acute relevance.

20. The judge did not make a clear finding as to  whether  the  appellant's
    father had been killed by the Taliban; or as to whether his mother  was
    contactable; or as to whether  the  appellant  now  had  the  cognitive
    abilities of a young adult (as  suggested  by  the  evidence  of  Laura
    Poole) such that he would be able to cope with life  in  Kabul  on  his
    own.

21. The lack of reasoning on the question of contact, and  the  failure  to
    address the question of whether the appellant was to be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable adult as a consequence of the cognitive assessment  made  of
    him when he was 15 years old, renders the finding on the  international
    protection claim an unsafe one.

22. Although the finding in the appellant's favour on  the  issue  of  past
    persecution is supported by  some  reasoning,  the  finding  is  flawed
    because the judge has not engaged with the detail  of  the  appellant's
    narrative and the discrepancies relied upon  in  the  original  refusal
    letter.  Accordingly, none of the judge's findings of fact in  relation
    to the international protection claim can be preserved.

23. I am not however persuaded there is any  merit  in  the  error  of  law
    challenge to the judge's disposal of the Article 8 claim.  It is argued
    in the grounds of appeal that the judge erred in law by not considering
    the  Article  8  rights  of  the  appellant's  foster  family,  and  in
    particular  the  detrimental  effect  upon  the  grandchildren  if  the
    appellant was returned to Afghanistan.  One  of  the  grandchildren  is
    autistic and has formed a great attachment to the appellant.

24. In her closing submissions before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Ms  Afzal
    accepted that the appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules
    "addressing Article 8".  She relied solely on the proposition  that  he
    had a private life deserving of protection under Article 8 ECHR outside
    the  Rules.   A  prominent  feature  of  that  private  life  was   his
    relationship with his foster parents and their family  which  continued
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant was now living on  his  own
    as  a  young,  independent  adult:   see   paragraph   18(c)   of   the
    determination.

25. At paragraph 52 the judge held as follows:

         The appellant, now 19 years old, has lawfully been in  the  UK  for
         over  five  years.   It  has  not  been  shown  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove him.  A  failed  asylum  seeker  has  no
         expectation of a right to remain or to further private  life  ties.
         The character of  the  appellant's  private  life  relied  upon  is
         ordinarily by its very  nature  of  a  type  which  can  be  formed
         elsewhere, albeit through different social ties after  his  removal
         from the UK.  The appellant's private life claim  advances  a  less
         cogent basis for outweighing the  public  interest  in  proper  and
         effective immigration control.

26. The judge went on to observe that the appellant's life in  the  UK  did
    not entitle him to remain  by  reference  to  a  Convention  which  was
    directed to  the  protection  of  fundamental  human  rights,  not  the
    conferment of individual advantages or benefits.

27. I consider the judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's private life claim outside the  Rules,  assuming  that  the
    appellant did  not  qualify  for  international  protection  (including
    humanitarian and Article 3 ECHR protection) as  a  result  of  being  a
    vulnerable adult. The judge's finding is  entirely  in  line  with  the
    relevant jurisprudence, including MG (Serbia and Montenegro).





The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 5 January 2015

28. The appellant was called as a witness, and he mainly gave his  evidence
    in English, although he was assisted from time to time  by  the  Pashtu
    interpreter whom he clearly understood.  He adopted as his evidence-in-
    chief his supplementary witness statement on the issue of contact.   He
    first established contact with his family in Afghanistan in the  course
    of 2010.  Previously, the authorities  had  kept  trying  to  call  the
    number that was found in his pocket when he first  arrived,  but  could
    not get through  on  this  number.   But  eventually  around  2010  the
    telephone did connect, and the Red Cross  informed  his  foster  father
    and/or Gulfraz.  It was at that point that his foster father  bought  a
    phone card for him, and he had dialled the number that he was given  by
    him.  The phone connected, and he believed he spoke to his  uncle.   He
    did not know whether in fact he was his uncle,  although  he  told  him
    that he was.  He did not recognise the man's voice, and he did not know
    whether he was from his mother's or father's side.  His uncle then gave
    him a number to call his mum, which he immediately did with the help of
    his foster father.

29. When he telephoned his mother, he asked how everyone was, and he  asked
    to speak to his father.  He was told he was not there.  At  that  point
    he sensed that something was not right, but he did not know what it was
    and he felt he had to accept his mother's answer.  From then on he  was
    in regular contact with his mother on  a  weekly  basis.   Whenever  he
    would ask to speak to his father, his mother would say that his  father
    was not here but was somewhere else such  as  in  Logar  or  Jalalabad.
    After several months or a year, his mother eventually told  him  around
    late 2010 that his father had been killed and that his grandfather  had
    passed away.  As he was very distressed by the news, he did not ask for
    any further details.  His mother never gave the phone to his  siblings,
    and so he never spoke with them.  When he asked her why they  had  sent
    him away, she said it was for his own safety.  They had no  choice  but
    to save him from the Taliban.  His mother once told him that ten people
    where they lived had been killed.  He was quite alarmed by  this  news.
    Later he asked his mother about how his father  died.   She  said  that
    somebody had found out that he had sent his  son  to  Europe,  and  the
    Taliban had killed him.  Shortly after that, his mother told  him  that
    she could no longer speak with him because she had remarried  and  that
    people would know who he was, and would  not  let  him  speak  to  her.
    Although he kept trying to call her every week thereafter, he never got
    an answer.

30. In cross-examination, he said that he had last spoken to his mother  at
    the end of 2011 or the beginning of 2012.  He had last spoken with  his
    uncle in 2010.  He was asked whether he had  tried  ringing  his  uncle
    when he could not get a response from his mother.  He said he  did  not
    have a separate number for his uncle.  He had the same telephone number
    for his uncle as he did for his mother.  He had started living  on  his
    own in 2011.  He was still in contact  with  his  mother  when  he  had
    started living on his own, but not for a long time.  At  New  Year  (at
    the beginning of 2012) he had told his foster family that he  had  lost
    contact with his mother.  When speaking to his mother, he did not  know
    whether she was in Laghman Province or in Kabul.

31. His family had paid 6,000 US dollars to an agent to secure his  passage
    to Greece.  After Greece, he did not have the help of an agent.  He had
    made friends, and he had travelled from Greece to the UK independently.

32. Susan Norman was called as a witness.  She works for Peterborough  City
    Council  in  the  Leaving  Care  Services  Department.   She   is   the
    appellant's current personal advisor.  In her witness statement  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, she said  the  appellant  had  been  known  to
    Children's Services since November 2008.  He was placed in foster  care
    until August 2011.  He attended [school], and there were concerns  that
    he had a learning disability.  When considering the  appellant's  case,
    Judge Cox had said that the vagueness and inconsistency in his evidence
    led him to conclude that he was not telling the  truth.   She  strongly
    believed this could have been the result of his low cognitive  ability,
    rather than any intended deception.  The appellant had worked extremely
    hard at school.  He had left school  with  passes  in  Science,  Sports
    Studies, Food Science, IT and English.  In August  2011  the  appellant
    moved into semi-independent accommodation.  He improved his independent
    living skills on a daily basis, and  in  February  2013  the  appellant
    secured his own tenancy.  He was currently at [college] studying on  an
    ESOL course.  He was making  good  progress,  and  his  latest  college
    report stated that he was a social,  charming  and  hard-working  young
    man.  She had been working with the appellant since June 2012.  In  her
    opinion, since arriving in the country he had progressed and  developed
    well.  While he continued to show excellent  improvement  in  both  his
    independent skills and academic ability, she would not confidently  say
    he was yet operating at a level consistent with his chronological age.

33. In her supplementary witness  statement  dated  23  December  2014,  Ms
    Norman said the appellant would have a six month pathway plan where  he
    would talk openly about his contact with his mother and his feelings at
    the time.  In the early days when they discussed the  possible  outcome
    of his asylum claim, and what would  happen  if  he  was  refused,  the
    appellant would say that it was OK if he had to return home, because he
    would get to see his mother.  But in the last few  pathway  plans  that
    she had done with the appellant, he had been talking about  not  having
    contact with his mother and how that made him feel very  sad.   It  was
    important to note that in all the years she  had  known  the  appellant
    since 2008 (she was assigned to him as his  personal  advisor  when  he
    turned 18 in 2013) he had never lied to her.  She had always found  him
    to be honest and trustworthy.  She had no reason to disbelieve him when
    he said that he was not in contact with his mother, and that he did not
    know the whereabouts of his remaining biological family.

34. In cross-examination, Ms Norman said she  could  not  recall  when  the
    appellant had first said that he had lost contact with his mother.   It
    would have been at one of the six monthly pathway  sessions  that  they
    had together.  It was definitely the case  that  he  had  not  been  in
    contact with his mother at the last two sessions, which were  in  March
    and September 2014 respectively.  She could not say  whether  this  was
    the case for the previous  pathway  session  in  September  2013.   The
    explanation he had given for losing contact was his mother was that his
    mother had remarried, and so she was no longer  able  to  have  contact
    with him.  The appellant was aware of the Red Cross, and  she  believed
    that she would have discussed with him the  possibility  of  trying  to
    find other members of his family after he had  lost  contact  with  his
    mother.  She could not contact the Red Cross on  his  behalf,  and  she
    felt that he had given up.  She had come on board  when  the  appellant
    had turned 18, and it was around that time that  he  had  lost  contact
    with his mother.

35. Ms Norman was  asked  to  comment  on  Dr  Young's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's daily living skills at paragraphs 19 and 20 of her  report.
    His overall score in daily living skills was in the moderate low range,
    which meant that he had performed better than 13% of other young people
    his age.  At paragraph 21, Dr Young said that his daily  living  skills
    were largely appropriate for his age.  His scores in the  domestic  and
    community living skill areas were  quite  age  appropriate,  suggesting
    that  he  demonstrated  a  range  of  skills  suitable  to  assist  his
    functioning at home and out and about.  On the whole, his low score for
    the personal living skills brought his overall score down.

36. Ms Norman said that the appellant managed at  home,  but  it  was  like
    going into a boy's bedroom.  If it were not for his foster family,  she
    wondered how often he would put his clothes in the washing machine  and
    how healthy his eating habits would be.

37. She was asked whether it surprised her that the appellant had been able
    to cope with travelling on his own from Greece to the UK.  She answered
    she was amazed how any child of the appellant's age  was  able  to  get
    here.

38. Mr K S was called as a witness.  In  his  witness  statement  dated  23
    December 2014 he said he was the  appellant's  foster  father,  and  he
    continued to support him as he would do his own son.  The appellant had
    come to them at the age of 13,  around  November  2008.   He  had  made
    contact with his mother about six months after joining  them.   He  had
    made contact  via  the  Red  Cross  in  Peterborough.   The  Red  Cross
    investigated the telephone numbers that they had, and he believed  that
    Gulfraz, who was his social worker  at  the  time,  was  involved  with
    assisting the  appellant  in  making  contact  with  his  family.   The
    appellant initially spoke to an uncle, and was then given a  number  to
    call his mother.  He believed the appellant was  in  contact  with  his
    mother for approximately two years or just over that  time.   His  last
    contact with his mother was a little  before  he  left  their  care  in
    August 2011.  He recalled that he was visibly  upset  when  his  mother
    told him that his father had died; and on another occasion when she had
    told him that this was the last time she would speak  with  him.   This
    was probably around the early part of 2011.

39. In answer to supplementary questions,  Mr  S  said  the  appellant  was
    talking in Pashtu to his family, and so he (Mr S) did not know  at  any
    given time to which family member he was speaking.  But  he  understood
    from the appellant that he had spoken to his uncle once or twice at the
    beginning, and thereafter he had only spoken to  his  mother.   He  was
    asked whether the appellant had tried to call his uncle's number  after
    he had failed to get through to his mother's number.  He answered  that
    he did not know.

40. Dr Claire Young was called as an expert witness, and  she  adopted  her
    psychometric  assessment  report  dated  5  November  2014.   She   had
    conducted an assessment appointment  with  the  appellant  lasting  two
    hours on 21 October 2014 for the purposes  of  completing  a  cognitive
    assessment.  She had also drawn upon a clinical  interview  with  Mr  S
    which had been conducted by  a  colleague  in  order  to  complete  the
    Vineland adaptive behaviour scale; she  had  had  several  consultation
    meetings with Susan Norman to assist in gaining  information  regarding
    the appellant's current care plan; and she had  taken  into  account  a
    letter dated 23 October 2014 from Mr K H, assistant principal  at  [the
    school], where the appellant had studied from  12  January  2009  until
    2012 (after which he had moved  to  [college]  to  follow  a  mechanics
    course).

41. Mr H reported that when the appellant joined school in year 8,  he  had
    almost no English skills.  As his language developed,  it  became  more
    evident that  his  cognitive  abilities  appeared  to  be  considerably
    delayed.  He gradually developed his ability to  speak  simple  English
    and establish good relationships with members of staff and  his  peers.
    However, it was always evident that  his  ability  to  learn  was  very
    limited, and that this was more than just the fact that he  was  trying
    to acquire a second language.  His ability to understand  concepts  and
    retain information appeared to be very limited.

42. The results of the cognitive assessment tests which she had carried out
    at the  assessment  appointment  on  31  October  2014  were  that  the
    appellant achieved a verbal IQ score of 60, which fell in the extremely
    low range.  In comparison, his performance IQ score was 84, which  fell
    within the low average range.  His VIQ score would be considered to  be
    within the range of a learning disability.  On reviewing his responses,
    the appellant performed significantly better  on  the  non-verbal  sub-
    test.

43. The Vineland adaptive behaviour scale assessed an individual's adaptive
    behaviour in the four broad  domains  of  communication,  daily  living
    skills, socialisation and motor skills.  There was also  a  maladaptive
    behaviour index that provided a measure of problematic behaviours  that
    might interfere with an individual's adaptive behaviours.

44. The appellant scored in the low range for communication.  It was  clear
    from  the  assessment  the  appellant  had  severe  difficulties   with
    communication.  It was  acknowledged  that  his  language  difficulties
    would invariably impact on his overall  communication  score.   But  it
    would be expected that his level of English would be  higher  than  the
    scores obtained from the assessment, on the basis that he had  had  six
    years of daily exposure to English, and that he had attended an English
    school and lived with an English family for a period  of  three  years.
    So it should not automatically be concluded that  the  appellant's  low
    scores  for  this  domain  could  be  solely  attributed  to   language
    difficulties.

45. For socialisation, the  appellant  scored  within  the  moderately  low
    range.  This meant that he performed better than  12%  of  other  young
    people his  age.   The  motor  skills  section  of  the  test  was  not
    administered, and the appellant's score on  the  maladaptive  behaviour
    index was in the  average  range,  which  indicated  that  he  did  not
    demonstrate any maladaptive behaviours.

46. In her  conclusions,  Dr  Young  said  the  results  of  the  cognitive
    assessments indicated the appellant had significant  difficulties  with
    his verbal skills, both receptive and expressive language.  The  impact
    of such clear deficits in the use of and understanding of language (and
    this was not specific to English or Pashtu and ZA  showed  difficulties
    with both) could not be underestimated, as the  ability  to  understand
    language was a central element in promoting learning.  The report  from
    school highlighted their concerns around  ZA's  ability  to  learn  and
    retain complex concepts throughout  his  schooling  career,  suggesting
    that there was little improvement over time.

47. In contrast to his verbal skills, the appellant showed strengths in the
    areas of non-verbal skills.  Since starting his car  mechanics  course,
    the appellant said he was able to follow instructions from pictures and
    observe others and this was a more effective way for him to learn.  The
    VABT  indicated  that  the  appellant's   daily   living   skills   and
    socialisation was adequate which again  illustrated  strengths  in  his
    ability to manage himself on a day to day basis:  organising  his  day,
    cooking/cleaning and managing his money.   Notwithstanding  his  higher
    ability in this area, it appeared largely promoted  and  maintained  by
    ongoing contact with his carers.  It would therefore be possible  that,
    without  such  support,  the  appellant  would   struggle   to   manage
    independently.

48. In cross-examination, Dr Young was asked whether she was surprised that
    the  appellant  had  been  able  to  travel  from  Greece  to  the   UK
    independently as a 13 year  old  child.   She  answered  she  would  be
    surprised if any 13 year old child had  been  able  to  do  this.   She
    agreed with Ms Everett that the appellant could work for  a  living  if
    given the  right  job  and  the  right  support.   He  had  very  clear
    difficulties with his memory.  His working memory was quite poor.   But
    this had not been explored in detail.

49. In answer to questions for clarification purposes  from  me,  Dr  Young
    confirmed that she had not seen the recent reports from the appellant's
    college about his progress.  She was not surprised that  the  appellant
    was praised as being a strong verbal  communicator.   She  was  however
    surprised that his level of understanding was described  as  excellent,
    although she was not sure how challenging the course was.

50. In re-examination, she was asked whether the appellant would be able to
    fend for himself in Afghanistan.  Dr Young said  she  did  not  believe
    that the appellant would be able  to  be  completely  independent.   He
    would require support.  On paper, he was living on his own in  the  UK.
    But since he had sought out his former foster parents  and  others  for
    practical support, you could argue that he was not  fully  independent.
    The biggest barrier to his survival on return to Afghanistan  would  be
    his difficulties in communication.  There were  clear  deficiencies  in
    his verbal abilities.

51. In answer to further questions for clarification purposes from  me,  Dr
    Young said that she was talking about the appellant's verbal ability in
    English.  Her report did not deal with his cognitive or verbal  ability
    in Pashtu.

52. In answer to a further question from Ms Afzal, Dr  Young  said  that  a
    lack of social support was the biggest risk factor for young people.

53. In her closing submissions on behalf  of  the  respondent,  Ms  Everett
    relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 10  January  2014.   She
    submitted it was not clear when contact with his family in  Afghanistan
    had stopped, but in any event it was not shown that there was no family
    left in  Afghanistan  with  whom  he  could  resume  contact.   It  was
    submitted that the appellant's ability to travel on his own from Greece
    at a very young age was highly significant, as it  showed  he  had  the
    necessary skills, in particular social skills, to fend for  himself  on
    return to Afghanistan.  The appellant did not fall into a risk category
    as a vulnerable young adult on account of being assessed  as  having  a
    low cognitive and verbal ability.

54. In reply, Ms Afzal relied on her skeleton argument  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and also the skeleton argument which she had tendered in
    support of the error of  law  challenge.   She  drew  my  attention  to
    various passages in the evidence upon which she relied.  These  showed,
    she submitted, that the appellant had a genuine fear  of  the  Taliban.
    The evidence also established, she submitted, that the appellant had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution on return  to  Kabul  and/or  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Kabul as he  did
    not have any family there and he was a vulnerable young adult.

Relevant Legal Principles

The Geneva Convention

55. Article 1 of the 1951 Geneva Convention defines a  refugee  as  someone
    who owing to a well-founded fear of being  persecuted  for  reasons  of
    race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion is outside the country  of  his  nationality  and  is
    unable or owing to such fear is  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country or who not having a  nationality  and  being
    outside the country of his former habitual residence  as  a  result  of
    such events is unable or owing to such fear is unwilling to  return  to
    it.

Asylum under the Immigration Rules

56. Under paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules an asylum  applicant  will
    be granted asylum in the United Kingdom if the Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied inter alia that he is a refugee  as  defined  by  the  Geneva
    Convention.

Grant of Humanitarian Protection under the Immigration Rules

57. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  provides  that  a  person  be
    granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom if the  Secretary
    of State is satisfied inter alia that he does not quality as a refugee,
    but that substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  the
    person concerned, if he is returned to the  country  of  return,  would
    face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or  owing  to
    such risk, unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

58. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

Past Persecution or Serious Harm

59. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

Duty to Substantiate Claim for International Protection

60. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      i) The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

     ii) All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    iii) The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

     iv) The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      v) The general credibility of the person is established.

Discussion and Findings

61. At his screening interview which took place on  19  January  2009,  the
    appellant gave a very clear  account  of  his  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  At his asylum interview which took place on 3  February  2009
    he confirmed that his parents and siblings remained in Zangora, Laghman
    Province.  He had rung them once en route to the  United  Kingdom,  and
    they had said that the situation  in  their  home  area  was  a  little
    better.

62. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum came before  Judge
    Cox sitting at Birmingham on 16 September 2009.  The appellant  adopted
    as  his  evidence-in-chief  his  witness  statement  prepared  for  the
    hearing, and because  of  his  age  he  was  not  cross-examined.   The
    appellant's evidence was that his family had not moved to Kabul because
    they had nowhere to live there.  Also his  mother's  family  were  from
    Kabul and they were enemies of his father's family.  He  did  not  know
    the details because his father would never discuss them with him.   His
    mother had left home when he was very small, and  her  brothers  blamed
    his father for her disappearance.

63. In his  subsequent  determination,  Judge  Cox  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant's age had to be borne in mind when assessing his credibility.
     At the age of 14, in a strange country in the unfamiliar and no  doubt
    somewhat daunting circumstances of a formal asylum interview  conducted
    through  an  interpreter,  some  allowance   had   to   be   made   for
    misunderstanding  and   confused   responses,   however   careful   the
    interviewer may have been.  Having  reviewed  some  of  the  background
    evidence, the judge held that it was not beyond possibility that  there
    were still some extreme  Taliban  who  maintained  their  objection  to
    English and who might therefore seek to deter pupils and teachers  from
    pursuing its study.  On the other hand, it was notable that in none  of
    the reports was the teaching of English  cited  by  the  Taliban  as  a
    reason for targeting schools, teachers or pupils; and insofar as  there
    was targeting of pupils (as opposed to  teachers),  it  was  girls  who
    appeared at risk, the Taliban not approving of education for females.

64. Having borne in mind the need to give some benefit of the  doubt  to  a
    young teenage claimant such  as  the  appellant,  he  ultimately  found
    himself unpersuaded on the totality of the  evidence,  both  subjective
    and background, that his account was reasonably likely to be true.  The
    vagueness and inconsistencies in his account of his  schooling  and  of
    surrounding events were at a level which in his judgment exceeded  what
    might be allowed for simply by virtue of age and experience in a person
    who had genuinely experienced the events  described;  and  any  support
    from the objective materials was minimal.

65. The judge went on to consider whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    succeed on LQ grounds.  He found he was not as he  was  not  an  orphan
    like LQ and the whereabouts of his  parents  were  known.   They  lived
    about three hours' drive from Kabul.  He noted the appellant  was  born
    in Kabul, but his mother's family still lived there.  He was unable  to
    accept the appellant's assertion in his recent witness statement to the
    effect that her  family  were  enemies.   He  found  this  was  a  late
    embellishment to the appellant's claim designed to show  why  he  could
    not relocate to Kabul.  He said  this  because  in  his  first  witness
    statement at tab C of the respondent's bundle he had said at  paragraph
    17 that the reason for not moving to Kabul was because they had nowhere
    to live.  There was no mention at that stage whatsoever of any conflict
    with his mother's family in the city, and it  would  have  been  highly
    pertinent to refer to that had it been so.  There was also  no  mention
    whatsoever of  this  matter  in  the  lengthy  asylum  interview.   The
    appellant had been able to communicate with his parents from here,  and
    in the event of his notional return now, he was satisfied that  advance
    arrangements could be made for them to meet and collect him from Kabul.



66. The unappealed findings of Judge  Cox  necessarily  form  the  starting
    point of my credibility assessment.  Ms Afzal invited me to  find  that
    the decision was legally  erroneous,  but  she  did  not  identify  any
    arguable error of law in what presents as a  cogent  and  well-reasoned
    decision.

67. Before Judge Callow, Ms Afzal sought to undermine Judge Cox's  findings
    by reliance on the educational psychologist's report dated 5 July 2010.



68. As Dr Bennett explained in his introduction, the reason that he  became
    involved was that school staff reported that the appellant had not made
    the progress acquiring  English  that  would  be  expected,  especially
    considering he lived in an  English  speaking  household.   Dr  Bennett
    quoted from a childcare review record of  9  September  2009  recording
    that  the  appellant  now  had  regular  contact  with  his  family  in
    Afghanistan.  He contacted them approximately every two weeks.  He  had
    begun attending [a school], and his literary and  numeracy  skills  are
    very low.

69. Dr Bennett quoted from a childcare review record of 1 March 2010  which
    recorded that there had been some issues in school which  involved  two
    young females bullying the appellant.  His spoken  English  had  vastly
    improved since the last meeting.  He appeared to be more confident when
    speaking.  He continued to have five hours of teaching support to  help
    him settle in his new group and ETCIC had funded a further  five  hours
    of support provided by Mr Afzal from the Minority Ethnic  New  Arrivals
    Team.  Following some difficulties at home, the appellant stated he was
    now happy and content with his foster placement and  it  appeared  that
    all the issues had now been resolved.  School staff reported  that  the
    appellant was making significant progress, but not as much as they  had
    hoped.  There seemed to be a  problem  with  the  appellant  processing
    information.  The appellant continued to  have  regular  phone  contact
    with his family, and they knew that he was safe and living in England.

70. Dr Bennett met with staff, who reported that the appellant appeared  to
    be thriving with his foster family and  regularly  accessed  news  from
    Afghanistan through the internet and telephone conversations  with  his
    family.

71. Dr Bennett assessed  the  appellant's  cognitive  abilities  using  the
    Wechsler Intelligence Scale for children (WISC 1V UK).   The  appellant
    achieved well below the average level on all of the  sub-sets  for  the
    cognitive assessment.  He came across as a  charming  responsive  young
    man who had difficulty expressing himself clearly in English  and  also
    had difficulty in his comprehension of English.  Dr Bennett  said  that
    this scores on the various sub-sets should be treated with caution  due
    to his difficulties with the English expression and comprehension.  The
    appellant was also assessed on selective sub-tests of  British  ability
    scales II and he achieved the age equivalent of 6 years and  10  months
    in spelling and reading.

72. Mr S reported to Dr Bennett that the  appellant  had  left  Afghanistan
    because the family did not want him to get involved in the Taliban.  He
    had been with the foster family for nineteen months and appeared  quite
    mature in his attitudes.  He spent a lot of time on  the  computer  and
    got news from Afghanistan.  He was very independent.   He  could  cook,
    wash and iron his clothes and generally look  after  himself.   He  ate
    Halal meat.  The appellant was taken to a mosque but was  reluctant  to
    continue going there as was he concerned  when  they  asked  about  his
    family in Afghanistan and where they lived.

73. In his summary, Dr Bennett repeated his warning to treat the results of
    the   individual   assessment   with   caution.    In   his   list   of
    recommendations, Dr Bennett said that the appellant might benefit  from
    a first language assessment and if this could be carried out  he  would
    be interested to hear the results.  He was also likely to benefit  from
    opportunities to speak his first language (Pashtu) and  keep  in  touch
    with his cultural heritage.

74. On a careful reading of Dr Bennett's report it is apparent that it does
    not retrospectively cast doubt on the determination of Judge Cox.   The
    appellant presented his asylum case in his first language, Pashtu,  and
    there was never any suggestion of any  misunderstandings  through  this
    medium of communication.  As stressed  by  Dr  Bennett,  his  cognitive
    assessment was confined  to  the  appellant's  cognitive  abilities  in
    English, a language which he was struggling to master.  Dr Bennett made
    it clear that he was not reaching any conclusions about  the  level  of
    the appellant's cognitive or verbal abilities in his first language.

75. In her report, Dr Young says she spoke with the interpreter  after  the
    assessment  to  gain  some  qualitative  feedback  on  the  appellant's
    receptive and expressive language ability.  The  interpreter  commented
    that the appellant appeared to understand the instructions  adequately,
    but  observed  difficulties  with  the  appellant  expressing   himself
    verbally - both in English and Pasthu.  It was apparently this evidence
    from the interpreter which underpinned the conclusion at  paragraph  28
    of Dr Young's report that there were clear deficits in the  appellant's
    use  and  understanding  of  Pashtu,  as  well  as  in  his   use   and
    understanding of English.  However, when I asked Dr  Young  to  clarify
    her conclusions, she, like Dr Bennett before her, confined them to  the
    appellant's cognitive and verbal  abilities  in  the  English  language
    medium. I consider that she was right to do so, as the evidence of  the
    interpreter is too vague and unspecific to reach a reliable  conclusion
    about the appellant's cognitive  and  verbal  abilities  in  his  first
    language.

76. Laura Poole began  working  with  the  appellant  in  June  2011.   She
    continued working with him until January 2013 when he  turned  18,  and
    his case was  fully  transferred  to  Susan  Norman.   In  her  witness
    statement of 19 June 2014, she said that throughout  her  time  working
    with the appellant, she witnessed an  improvement  in  his  ability  to
    communicate in English,  both  spoken  and  written.   They  went  from
    needing to use an interpreter at  all  times  to  being  able  to  have
    conversations in English.  By the time that her  involvement  with  the
    appellant ended, they no longer used an interpreter.  She said that the
    appellant was currently living in his own flat and managing his tenancy
    well.  He continued to utilise the support available to him  to  ensure
    that he was successful in this task.  He was very good  at  asking  for
    help when needed and is very appreciative of the support he receives.

77. It  is  clear  from  Dr  Young's  assessment  that  the  appellant  has
    "adequate" daily living skills for a person of his  chronological  age.
    A theme of both her oral evidence and that of Ms  Norman  is  that  the
    appellant is not truly independent as  he,  for  example,  consults  Ms
    Norman or Mr S about the payment of utility bills.  But, as is  tacitly
    acknowledged by Ms Poole, being very good at asking for help when it is
    needed is a strength, not a weakness.

78. On the issue of contact with family members in Afghanistan,  there  are
    significant  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence.   Each  of  the  three
    witnesses who gave evidence before me  on  this  topic  gave  different
    accounts as to when the contact  with  the  appellant's  mother  ended.
    Moreover, the appellant claimed only to have  ever  had  one  telephone
    number for his mother and uncle, whereas he had previously stated  that
    he had separate telephone numbers for each of them.   On  the  accounts
    given by the  appellant  and  Mr  S,  Ms  Poole  would  have  been  the
    appellant's supervising social worker in the  period  when  his  mother
    allegedly told him that she was not  going  to  speak  to  him  anymore
    because she had got remarried.

79. But in her witness statement of 19 June 2014 Ms  Poole  merely  records
    that the appellant no longer has contact with his mother.  She does not
    say why contact has ceased, nor does she refer to the  alleged  killing
    of the appellant's father.  The fact that Ms  Poole  does  not  mention
    such matters is highly significant.  She says that the  appellant  used
    to speak to her about his worries regarding his mother's safety and the
    safety of where she was living.  During one phone call with his mother,
    she says that he learned that ten people had been killed in the village
    where she was.  So it is not credible that  the  appellant  would  have
    shared such matters with Ms Poole, but not have shared with her (if  it
    was true) the fact that his father had been killed, or the  reason  why
    contact with his mother has ceased.

80. Having considered all the evidence that is  before  me,  including  the
    considerable volume of additional evidence that was  not  before  Judge
    Cox, I find that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proving
    that he is a reliable witness of truth with regard to the core  of  his
    claim.  In short, there are not substantial grounds for believing  that
    the appellant fled Afghanistan to escape persecution at  the  hands  of
    the Taliban for attending a school which taught English.  By  the  same
    token there are not substantial grounds for believing  the  appellant's
    father was killed by the Taliban for sending the appellant  to  Europe.
    I accept the appellant is no longer in contact with his mother, but  it
    does not follow that either she or other family members in  Afghanistan
    are not contactable.  In his screening interview, he said  he  had  two
    maternal uncles and one paternal uncle.  His mother's family are  based
    in Kabul, and so prima facie the appellant should be able to  access  a
    family support network in Kabul through one or  both  maternal  uncles.
    But even if, contrary to my primary finding, there is no family support
    network available to the appellant in Kabul, I find that the  appellant
    has the skills and resourcefulness to access social support networks in
    Kabul so as to be able to survive in Kabul  and  to  lead  an  adequate
    private life in Kabul.  Alternatively,  since  the  appellant  has  not
    established a well-founded fear of persecution in his former home  area
    in Laghman Province, he  is  sufficiently  mature  and  resourceful  to
    arrange for his independent travel from Kabul to his  home  village  in
    Laghman Province.  There are not substantial grounds for believing that
    the appellant is a vulnerable young adult such that  returning  him  to
    Kabul would engender a real risk of persecution or a real risk  of  the
    appellant suffering serious ill-treatment of such severity as to  cross
    the threshold  of  Article  3  ECHR.   Alternatively,  insofar  as  the
    appellant needs to live in Kabul rather than in  his  home  village  of
    Laghman Province for reasons of safety, it is not shown to the required
    standard of proof that the appellant's relocation to  Kabul  is  either
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
on Article 8 grounds did not disclose an error  of  law,  and  the  decision
stands.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  appellant's  claim
for international protection did contain an error of  law,  and  accordingly
the decision is set aside and the following  decision  is  substituted:  the
appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a
refugee, or as otherwise requiring humanitarian or human rights (Article  3)
protection, is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 16 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

