
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01517/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     H B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Vaskuk
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Mayall dated 30 June 2015 having  heard  the  Appellant's  asylum
    appeal at Hatton Cross on 19 May 2015.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  11  March  1998.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on or around  10  May  2010  using  his  own
    passport and a Tier 4 (student) entry clearance  valid  from  22  April
    2010 to 10 June 2012. He claimed asylum on 9  July  2012  and  gave  an
    account of a history of supporting the LTTE in Sri Lanka  by  providing
    financial support and transporting LTTE members  in  his  vehicle  from
    place to place. He has also undertaken some political activity  in  the
    United Kingdom, from 2013. I will not set out here the  entire  account
    given by the Appellant but it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, having had regard to medical evidence, accepted at [60]
    that the Appellant had been detained and tortured for a period of  five
    months from 15 May 2009 to 10 October 2009.

3.    The Appellant's account had been that he had secured his release  from
    detention with the assistance of an agent and upon his father paying  a
    bribe. At [2], the judge set  out  part  of  the  Respondent's  refusal
    letter which read:

         "(3) You have claimed that:

         ...

         f) You were released from Akkaraipattu Army camp after your  father
         paid an agent a bribe of 25 Lakhs to secure your release (AIR Q58).
         When you were released on 10 October 2009 you were told  to  report
         to Akkaraipattu Army camp every three months (AIR q 64-65)"

    The judge also set out the evidence of the Appellant at [31] and [32]:

         "31.     He said that his father paid 25 Lakh to the agent  and  he
         paid a bribe and 10 Lakh to the officers  and  got  him  out  on  a
         reporting condition to come back in three months.  The  agent  gave
         him a Muslim ID card and he used this to travel around Colombo.  He
         was kept in the agent's house in Colombo. The agent told  him  that
         his release had been a set up and he could not go back  to  report.
         He said he would be arrested and he should leave the  country.  His
         family told him to leave the country.

         32.      He was not legally released from detention and it was  not
         official as it was clear that he could be rearrested at  any  time.
         It was not on the basis that  he  was  no  longer  of  any  adverse
         interest. He relied upon the agent's advice."

4.    The Appellant's further account  was  that  in  2012  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities started to visit his family home in Sri Lanka, with further
    visits during 2013, 2014 and 2015. The judge considered this element of
    the Appellant's account from [64] onwards:

         "The appellant claimed that the authorities are still interested in
         him. He claims that, since 2012, his father has been visited by the
         authorities seeking information about him.  It is  this  aspect  of
         the appellant's claim which troubles me considerably."

5.    The Judge then at [64] sets out discrepancies within  the  Appellant's
    evidence as to whether his father had been taken and assaulted in April
    2012, and as to whether or not he had been arrested in August 2014. The
    judge noted at [56] that Mr Paranjothy  accepted  that  'there  clearly
    was a contradiction as to when his father was assaulted etc',  although
    the judge recorded that  Mr  Paranjothy  asserted  that  this  was  not
    particularly material.

6.    The judge held at [65] that:

         "It seems unlikely in the extreme that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
         would  start  questioning  the  father  and  his  family  in   2012
         continuously up to 2015 after the Appellant had  been  released  on
         payment of a bribe in October 2009. In  this  context  I  note  the
         country guidance case of GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319".

7.    The judge then set out the  whole  of  the  head  note  of  GJ,  which
    includes:

         "(7)      The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are:

             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

8.    The judge held at [66]:

         "Given the approach of the Sri Lankan authorities at that  time  it
         seems unlikely that they would have suddenly developed an  interest
         in the Appellant in August 2012.  I note that it could not be  said
         that this was as a result of his sur place activities. It  was  his
         case in interview that he had not started attending  demonstrations
         until 2013.  In all the  circumstances  I  regret  that  I  am  not
         satisfied, even to the lower standard, that  the  authorities  have
         continued to visit the Appellant's family or have shown an interest
         in him in Sri Lanka."

    And at [74]:

         "As stated I have rejected his claim that (the  claim  for  asylum)
         was prompted by visits by the Sri Lankan authorities to his  family
         in Sri Lanka."

9.    The judge considered the Appellant's  sur  place  activities  at  [68]
    onwards,  placing  little  weight  on  a  letter   from   a   political
    organisation in the United Kingdom, the TGTE, as a  result  of  certain
    inconsistencies contained  within  it.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had attended various demonstrations in  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, the judge held/noted that:

         (i)      the Appellant would not be perceived to be a threat to the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single State on the basis that  he  is,
         or would be perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
         post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
         of hostilities within Sri Lanka [72];

         (ii)     it was implausible that the Appellant would not have known
         of the possibility of claiming asylum [73];

         (iii)    it was necessary to assess whether  the  Appellant's  past
         persecution, his release on a bribe, and his sur  place  activities
         would cause a real risk of harm to arise now [75];

         (iv)     the  Appellant's  past  activities  for  LTTE  were  at  a
         relatively low level [77];

         (v)      the Sri Lankan authorities would not regard the  Appellant
         as posing a current threat to the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
         single state [77]; and

         (vi)     "Having regard to the paragraphs set out above, and having
         considered the factual basis of this appellant's  claim  I  am  not
         satisfied that the culmination of his past experience combined with
         the limited sur place activities which I have found would  lead  to
         him being at real risk on return [78]."

10.   Permission to appeal was at  first  refused  by  the  First  tier  but
    renewed  grounds  of  appeal  dated  10  August  2015  prepared  by  Mr
    Paramjorthy of Counsel challenge the judge's decision in  a  number  of
    respects. However, at the commencement of  the  hearing  before  me  he
    indicated that the second half of paragraph 5 of his grounds of  appeal
    should be deleted (a drafting error) and he no longer  sought  to  rely
    upon paragraphs 6 and 7.  The challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  is
    therefore represented by paragraph 4 and the beginning of  paragraph  5
    of the grounds:

         "4.      Para 65 - the FTTJ has rejected the  A's  account  of  the
         authorities questioning the A's father and his family in 2012 until
         2014, considering the fact that the A had been released on  payment
         of a bribe in October 2009 and the FTTJ has made reference  to  the
         country guidance of GJ Sri Lanka. Whilst the  FTTJ  is  correct  in
         noting the fact that the A did not  start  attending  demonstration
         until 2003, the A provided an account of the  authorities  checking
         his parents' and sister computer and they wanted  to  know  whether
         the A was in the UK. The A had sur place involvement  in  2013  and
         2014 and therefore it is plausible that  the  authorities  came  in
         search of the A and it appears that the  FTTJ  has  not  considered
         this fact.

         5. It is submitted  that  A  had  clearly  stated  in  his  witness
         statement para 30 & 36 that his release was not  official  and  was
         released on payment of bribe and  on  a  condition  to  report,  he
         failed to report and he was not realised officially."

11.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Archer on the grounds that it was arguable that the judge had failed to
    make clear findings about questioning of the family in  Sri  Lanka,  as
    opposed to assessing the probability of such questioning; Judge  Archer
    suggested that Judge Mayall had used different standards ('unlikely  in
    the extreme', and  'unlikely')  in  different  paragraphs  and  neither
    coinciding with the standard of proof in asylum appeals.  It  was  also
    observed that a finding that the Appellant  'may  have'  attended  some
    TGTE meetings was not a finding of fact. Finally: "It is arguable  that
    the judge failed to adequately consider the combination  of  past  LTTE
    activity, release on a bribe, failing to comply with release conditions
    and only leaving Sri Lanka through payment of  further  bribes  at  the
    airport plus disaspora activism when assessing risk on  return.  It  is
    further arguable that the judge failed to make findings of fact  as  to
    either the appellant is on a 'stop' list at  the  airport  or  a  local
    'watch list'."

12.   It can be seen that Judge Archer  therefore  identified  issues  which
    had not been raised in the grounds for permission to appeal.

13.   Thus the appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal.

14.   In relation to the Appellant's ground of appeal regarding the  release
    on condition of reporting, it was with respect not  clear  to  me  from
    paragraph 5 of the Appellant's grounds which 'fact'  it  was  said  the
    judge had not considered. The reference to the authorities checking the
    family's computer is something which the Appellant asserts at para [38]
    of his witness statement occurred in 2014, and even if (which I do  not
    find) the Judge should have made some specific reference to it  in  his
    findings, it would not  have  explained  why,  three  years  after  his
    release from detention in 2009, the authorities came  looking  for  the
    Appellant in 2012.

15.   I take the Appellant's ground of appeal to be to the effect  that  the
    judge had, in a general sense, failed to have adequate  regard  to  the
    Appellant's evidence as to the circumstances of his release or to  make
    findings on it which were sufficiently clear.

16.   Mr Paramjorthy drew my attention to a number of extracts  of  evidence
    within the Appellant's  witness  statements  dated  18  May  2015,  for
    example the following:

         "29.     The agent took me and kept me in  his  house  in  Colombo.
             The agent told me my release was a set up and I cannot go back
             to report.  I would be arrested again and I should  leave  the
             country. I spoke to my family members using the agent's  phone
             and they said to go with the agent and protect  my  life  from
             further problems.

         30.      I would like to point out that I was not legally  released
             from detention and it was not official as it was clear that  I
             could  be rearrested at any time and that my release  was  not
             on the basis that I was no longer of any adverse  interest  to
             the authorities in Sri Lanka and the agent was  reluctant  for
             me to return to my village in case I was rearrested  and  that
             is why I remained with the agent. Whilst I  was  not  searched
             for by the authorities when I was with the agent the  fact  of
             the matter is that I relied upon the  agent's  advice  and  he
             told me that it was not safe for me to return to  the  village
             and for there to be questions as to what I was doing there and
             where I had been and in any case my  presence  there  open  up
             further problems for me and my family.  (Paragraph 33  of  the
             refusal letter)."

17.   Mr Paramjorthy also referred me to certain questions from  within  the
    Appellant's SEF interview dated 8 January 2015 as follows:

         "Q83:Can you clarify what you mean by security reasons?

         A: As I said earlier, I was released with reporting conditions  and
             I had to report every three months.  The agent told me that if
             I went back to my village I would be arrested again.

         Q84:     Why would you be arrested again if you had been   released
             with reporting conditions?

         A: Because my release was not an official one because of the  bribe
             I was released. Therefore  possibilities  were  there  that  I
             would be arrested again.

         Q87:     When you were  due  to  report  three  months  after  your
             release did the army visit your house?

         A:  No, because the bribe was paid to the higher officer  they  did
             not look for me.

         Q88:     If that is the case then why could not you go back to your
             village to visit your family?

         A: The agent did not allow me to do so.

         Q89:     At question  84  you  stated  that  the  release  was  not
             official and as such you could be arrested again. However,  at
             question 87 you stated that your bribe was paid  to  a  higher
             officer so they did not look for  you  despite  not  attending
             your reporting.  Can you clarify this part of your account?

         A: A bribe was paid in order to secure my release. The officer told
             the agent that I should report every three months.  After that
             the agent took me and I stayed with him but the army  did  not
             take any action against me.  Because  bribe  was  paid  I  was
             released and they did not look my file back (look at  my  file
             again)."

18.   Mr Paramjorthy invites  me  to  find  that  that  evidence  about  the
    circumstances of  the  release  of  the  Appellant  and  the  condition
    attached to such a release required a specific finding to be made  upon
    it by the judge.

19.   I am of the view that the judge dealt  adequately  with  the  evidence
    before him.  It is manifestly clear from paragraphs [2], [31] and  [32]
    of the decision that the Judge was aware what the Appellant's  evidence
    was regarding the circumstances of  his  release.  The  passages  above
    drawn to my attention  by  Mr  Paramjorthy  do  not  disclose  anything
    material that the judge had not already set out in  the  decision.  The
    judge was aware that the Appellant was released by payment of a bribe.

20.   If (which is unclear) the  Appellant's  complaint  is  that  that  the
    judge did not make a finding as to whether the Appellant was either (a)
    released with a genuine requirement of reporting, or (b) there  was  no
    such requirement and there was a risk  that  the  next  time  that  the
    authorities came across the Appellant, they may re-detain him,  I  find
    that there was no requirement for such finding to be made.

21.   The issue which troubled the judge 'considerably' [64] was  the  claim
    that, three years after his release, the authorities came  looking  for
    the Appellant at all, at a time when the Appellant had done nothing  in
    the UK to  have  caused  any  renewed  interest  in  him.  Whether  the
    Appellant's release was or was not conditional on reporting, there  was
    nothing the Appellant's evidence which explained  why  the  authorities
    resumed an interest  in  him.  The  Judge  contrasted  the  Appellant's
    assertion as to this renewed interest in him  in  2012  with  the  2013
    guidance within GJ as the approach taken by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    to past LTTE members and supporters; see 'in this context' at [65]  and
    'given the approach' at [66]. Whether either of the  scenarios  (a)  or
    (b) above was the case, the chronology asserted by  the  Appellant  was
    found to be unlikely/unlikely in the extreme.

22.   Mr Paramjorthy did not address me  on  the  standard  of  proof  issue
    taken by Judge Archer. For my part, I do not think it can be said  that
    the Judge failed to make a clear finding of  fact  as  to  whether  the
    authorities visited the family  home  from  2013  enquiring  after  the
    Appellant; the judge's finding at the end of [66] and at [74],  as  set
    out in my para [8] above, make it clear  that  the  judge  applied  the
    correct standard of proof and rejected the Appellant's account. I  also
    find that at [66], when finding 'in all the  circumstances'  that  that
    the authorities had not visited the Appellant's family, the  judge  was
    taking into account the inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's  evidence,
    set out by the judge at [64], as to what had happened  to  his  father,
    and when, as part of the alleged renewed interest in the Appellant. The
    judge, contrary to Mr Paramjorthy's apparent submission to the contrary
    at First tier, was clearly entitled to take such admitted discrepancies
    into account.

23.   Further, with respect to Judge Archer's concern  that  the  judge  may
    not have looked at the Appellant's case in  the  round,  assessing  all
    relevant risk factors, I find that this was what he did, at length,  at
    paras [69]-[78].

24.   In the light of the concession from Mr Paramjorthy  that  he  was  not
    relying on certain other parts of his grounds of appeal it seems to  me
    that that deals with the entirety of the challenge made to the  judge's
    determination.

    Decision

25.   I find that the making of  the  decision  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    asylum appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  I  uphold
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Signed:
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Dated: 27.1.16

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Dated: 27.1.16
