
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01843/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Shah Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sesay, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not  make,  an  order  restricting  publicity
    about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse
    to vary his leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    remove him.  It was his case  that  he  was  a  refugee,  that  he  was
    entitled to humanitarian protection and  that  removing  him  would  be
    contrary to his human rights.

 3. The appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and humanitarian  protection
    grounds but it was allowed on human rights grounds  with  reference  to
    Article 3.  There is no cross-appeal from the claimant.  The  Secretary
    of State  was  given  permission  to  appeal,  mainly  because  it  was
    considered to be  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    misdirected himself.

 4. The claimant has lived in the United Kingdom since he was 13 years old.
     He is now 18 years old.  Put simply, he wants to stay.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised that he had made in the United
    Kingdom and wrote respectfully of him. Paragraphs 42, 43 and 44 of  the
    Decision are particularly material  although  they  are  not  the  only
    paragraphs that touch on his conduct and links in the  United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the  claimant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom expecting to return to  Bangladesh  with  his  father  but  his
    father returned to Bangladesh without  him  and  effectively  abandoned
    him.

 6. The claimant had been looked after by his paternal uncle, who  attended
    the hearing before me.  Attempts have been made to find the rest of the
    family but they been unsuccessful.  The claimant's  uncle  has  visited
    Bangladesh on several occasions, most recently in 2013 but he not  been
    able to make any contact with the rest of the family.  It was  accepted
    that the claimant has no meaningful family links in Bangladesh.  He has
    an aunt but there has been a dispute over family properties and she  is
    not someone who would be interested in supporting the claimant now.

 7. Paragraph 44 is particularly apt and I set it out.  The judge said:

         "The [claimant] has spent the last six years in  education  in  the
         United Kingdom and has built up a circle of friends and I have seen
         a number of letters of support from those friends.  I am aware also
         that the [claimant] will have met friends through his  interest  in
         cricket which he plays.  The [claimant] gave his evidence to me  in
         fluent English and clearly has become immersed  in  English  solely
         within the United Kingdom both  in  his  education,  working  as  a
         carer, and in his sporting activities."

 8. This appears to be a case of a young man who was brought to the  United
    Kingdom when he was a young  teenager  and  who  seems  to  have  taken
    advantage of the opportunities of living in the United Kingdom and  has
    behaved in a way that is wholly to his credit.

 9. The  structure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  not
    unimpeachable but  it  is  reasonably  clear  that  the  judge,  having
    rejected the claims on  asylum  and  humanitarian  grounds,  considered
    particularly paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which applies  in  cases  such  as
    this one of a person aged over 18 years who has lived  continuously  in
    the United Kingdom for less than twenty years, but where  "there  would
    be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the
    country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom". Clearly in this case  the  relevant  country  is  Bangladesh.
    Before me the parties agreed that this Rule offered  the  claimant  his
    best chance of success.

10. The difficulty is that although the judge has identified  the  Rule  by
    name he has not applied the right test.  He refers on two occasions  in
    paragraphs 46  and  47  to  there  being  "significant  obstacles  with
    integration in Bangladesh".  That is not the test.  The  test  requires
    "very significant obstacles".  The Secretary  of  State's  grounds  say
    correctly that the word "very" is not mere  surplusage  but  emphasises
    that the Rules is one that is hard to satisfy and is only satisfied  by
    something that can truly be described as very significant.

11. Mr Sesay, correctly, has emphasised that the  judge  did  identify  the
    correct Rule but he cannot get around the  plain  fact  that  there  is
    nothing on the  face  of  the  Decision  which  shows  that  the  judge
    appreciated the strict  test  under  the  Rules.   He  twice  erred  by
    referring only to "significant obstacles".  I have  not  been  able  to
    find anything, and Mr Sesay did not draw to my attention, anything that
    would enable me to say that although  the  judge  had  used  the  wrong
    formula he had in fact applied the right test.  He did not and  I  have
    to say that he erred and I have to set aside the decision.  The reasons
    for allowing it were not  sound  in  law.   The  wrong  test  had  been
    applied.

12. I must now decide what to do.  I see no purpose in a  further  hearing.
    It is perfectly plain what this claimant has been believed.  The  facts
    are not in issue.  I have reminded myself of the  positive  aspects  of
    the case and the time that the claimant has spent in the United Kingdom
    but I cannot say that the things drawn to my attention can be described
    properly as  "very  significant  obstacles".   The  fact  is  that  the
    claimant would be returning to the country of nationality, the  country
    he lived in until he was 13 years old, and as  a  young  man  with  the
    advantages of an education  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  considerable
    fluency in English that would put him at some advantage in  the  labour
    market.  I do not suggest it would be an easy transition  for  him  but
    there are not very significant obstacles.

13. I also sit back and ask myself if this is a case where there is  proper
    reason to allow the claimant's appeal outside the Rules and I can  find
    none.

14. I have been reminded about Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  This sets out the public interest considerations.
     It is plainly applicable.  It  reminds  me  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the  public  interest.   There  are
    aspects that assist the claimant to a small  extent,  for  example  his
    ability to speak English and his integration in British society but  it
    is not a case where he relies on a life partner or being a father. This
    is to his personal credit. He is a  very  young  man  and  I  would  be
    concerned if he had made such commitments.  He has not  but  these  are
    not positive reasons for saying that he should be  allowed  to  remain.
    It is just that some of likely negative reasons are not relevant or  do
    not feature in his case.

15. Section 117 also instructs me that little weight should be given  to  a
    private life established at a time when the person's immigration status
    is precarious, and this person's immigration status has been precarious
    throughout.  He has never had indefinite leave to remain.

16. It follows therefore that I have the unhappy task of saying that, in my
    judgment, the First-tier Tribunal was wrong and the only proper outcome
    on the facts as found is a decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

    Notice of Decision

17. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal.  I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 2 February 2016                |

