
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01412/2013
                                                               AA/11003/2013
                                                               AA/04112/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd November 2014                            |On 17th March 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                NA, As & L R
                         [anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Radford Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant, NA is a citizen of Iraq.   The  second  and  third
    appellants Mrs LR  and  Mr  AA  are  citizens  of  Morocco.  The  third
    appellant is the minor child of the first two appellants.

 2. As the proceedings impact upon the rights and interests of  a  child  I
    make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Levin promulgated on 21st February 2014 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  decisions  of  the
    respondent to remove each of the appellants from the UK. The  countries
    of destination in the refusal letters were Morocco and/or Iraq.

 4. In deciding the appeal Judge Levin had found that the  first  appellant
    was not at risk in his country of nationality or in  Morocco  and  that
    the other appellants were not at risk in their country  of  nationality
    or in Iraq, the country of nationality of the first appellant. He  went
    on to find however that the first appellant could not now  be  returned
    to Morocco. He therefore considered the prospects of the  family  going
    to Iraq. Having considered the prospects for the appellants  to  go  to
    Iraq, Judge Levin dismissed the appeals on all grounds

 5. By decision made on 13 March 2014 permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The matter appears before me to determine in  the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law in  the
    original determination.

Immigration background

 6. The first appellant was born in Iraq but left there in 1978  in  search
    of employment. He travelled to Morocco, where he met  and  married  the
    second appellant. He was working in Morocco and  had  a  residence/work
    permit, which was renewed annually. He appears to have run a school but
    the authorities closed the school on health and safety grounds.

 7. The family remained in Morocco for some time after the closure  of  the
    school  whilst  attempts  were  made  through  the  courts  to   obtain
    authorisation for the school to be reopened. In August 2010 the  family
    left Morocco and came to the UK on visit visas. In 2010 at a time  when
    the first appellant was claiming  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
    Morocco and family were seeking to leave Morocco, the  first  appellant
    had obtained from the UNHCR in Morocco a refugee card, ostensibly as  a
    "refugee" from Iraq. Thereafter the appellants travelled on  their  own
    passports including the first appellant travelling on an Iraqi passport
    and came to the United Kingdom.

 8. The appellants were claiming that about 18  months  before  the  family
    left Morocco the  family  were  receiving  threats  from  Sunni  Muslim
    fundamentalists and that it was as a result of those threats  that  the
    family left Morocco.

 9. The appellants had applied for visas to come to the United  Kingdom  in
    June 2010. The appellants entered the United Kingdom on the 20th August
    2010 on their own passports on visit visas, which were valid until  the
    10th December 2010.

10. Having entered the UK the appellants  claimed  asylum  on  3  September
    2010. Their  claims  were  refused  and  immigration  decisions  issued
    against the first and second appellants with the third appellant  as  a
    dependant. The appellants appealed against the decision and their cases
    were dismissed by First -tier Tribunal Judge Kebede in a  determination
    promulgated on the 16th December 2010.

11. The appellants had claimed that the family were at risk of  persecution
    and harm from Muslim  fundamentalists  and  the  Moroccan  authorities.
    Judge Kebede in deciding the appellants' cases made adverse credibility
    findings on material aspects of the appellants' account.  Judge  Kebede
    noted that it was only after the first appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse him authorisation to  continue  running  the  school
    that the family had left Morocco. It was alleged that  there  had  been
    threats from Sunni Islamic fundamentalists but the judge noted that the
    appellants had remained in Morocco  for  18  months  or  so  after  the
    threats and nothing had happened.

12. Judge Kebede found that, had the first appellant been given  permission
    to reopen his school,  the  family  would  have  remained  in  Morocco.
    However as found by the judge the  school  had  been  closed  down  for
    health and safety reasons and not for any other reason. The  appellants
    had been able to pursue legal action with regard to the  closure  of  a
    school for over 18 months but had been unsuccessful.  It  was  only  at
    that stage that the appellants sought to leave  Morocco.  Judge  Kebede
    did not find the appellants  claims  to  be  at  risk  of  harm  to  be
    credible. The judge was satisfied that the appellants were not at  risk
    of any harm in Morocco.

13. In making her decision Judge Kebede had only considered  the  prospects
    of the appellants being returned to Morocco. There was an appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal and as is evident from paragraph 4 of the Upper Tribunal
    decision the issue of whether the first appellant was a refugee had  to
    be determined with reference to his country of nationality that is Iraq
    not Morocco. The Upper Tribunal found as is evident  from  paragraph  9
    onwards that the evidence before the Tribunal was not such as  to  show
    that the first appellant would have a well founded fear of  persecution
    in Iraq or show that the first appellant would be at risk of inhuman or
    degrading treatment or punishment. The Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that
    the second appellant and  her  dependant  were  not  refugees  and  the
    findings of fact by Judge Kebede, were justified in the  circumstances.
    The Upper Tribunal concluded that the appellants were not refugees  and
    there was no basis upon which Judge Kebede could have  found  that  the
    first appellant or any other of the appellants were refugees

14. In making that decision the Upper Tribunal did not interfere  with  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Kebede.  The  Upper  Tribunal  took  the
    findings of fact and looked at the prospects of the first appellant  on
    return to Iraq on the basis of the facts as found.

15. The Upper Tribunal upheld the decisions to dismiss the appeals  on  all
    grounds and the appellants appeal rights became exhausted as of 20 July
    2011.

Present Appeal

16. On the 31st August 2012 further submissions  together  with  a  further
    statement and an expert report from Professor Joffe were  submitted  to
    the Home Office. The Home Office accepted such as  a  fresh  claim  and
    made fresh decisions to remove each of the appellants from  the  United
    Kingdom again to Morocco and/or Iraq.

17. The appellants appealed against those decisions. The appeal  was  heard
    by Judge Levin, who in a determination promulgated on the 5th  February
    2014 dismissed the appellants' appeals. The appellants  now  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge Levin.

Error of Law

18. The grounds of appeal in summary raise three issues:-

         a) the judge materially in his consideration of paragraph 276 ADE

         b) the judge materially in his approach to credibility

         c) the judge failed properly to consider the  case  of  IA  v  SSHD
            (Scotland) [2014] UKSC 6.

19. Judge Levin in dealing with the credibility of the appellant's  account
    had accepted the starting point was the findings of fact  made  in  the
    previous determinations by Judge Kebede and the Upper  Tribunal.  Judge
    Levin had applied the principles set out in the case  of  Devaseelan  v
    SSHD [2002] UKAIT 00702.

20. In the previous appeal the Upper Tribunal, in dealing with  the  appeal
    from the First-tier, had accepted the findings of fact  made  by  Judge
    Kebede and applied those findings. The Upper Tribunal altered the focus
    of  the  first  appellant's  appeal  concentrating   upon   the   first
    appellant's  country  of  nationality  as  required  by   the   Refugee
    Convention. They did not interfere with any findings of  fact  made  by
    Judge Kebede and there is no reason for those findings of fact  not  to
    stand. There was no reason for Judge Levin not to treat the findings of
    fact as the starting point in accordance with Deevaseelan.

21. Further it is to be noted within paragraph 50 of the  determination  by
    Judge Levin he clearly takes account of  the  fact  that  the  previous
    determinations are merely the starting point and he has to take account
    of the evidence of events which have happened since and other  evidence
    including the expert evidence advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellants,
    which may bring into question those findings of fact.

22. Judge Levin thereafter has carefully analysed the evidence given by the
    appellants and given valid reasons for making the findings of fact that
    he did.

23. Within the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is  alleged  that  the  judge  has
    misunderstood the evidence and failed  to  give  the  evidence  anxious
    scrutiny. It is suggested that the judge has misunderstood the evidence
    about why and when the appellant feared returning to Iraq.

24. Judge  Levin  from  paragraph  66  onwards  of  the  determination  was
    examining in part assertions made in the first  appellant's  statement.
    The appellant in his statement at paragraph 4 [page P1 onwards  of  the
    appellants' bundle] stated that the reason he had not returned to  Iraq
    was because his life was in danger. The first appellant had obtained  a
    new passport and his wife had obtained a visa to go  to  Iraq  in  Aril
    2009. A family visit to Iraq was intended but was cancelled because  of
    the alleged fear according to paragraph 4 of the statement.  The  judge
    in paragraph 69 had rejected  the  assertion  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    appellant's statement that he feared return because  his  life  was  in
    danger and therefore he and his family had not visited Iraq. The  first
    appellant had asserted that is brother had been  killed  in  2010.  The
    judge looked at that and looked whether there was any other  cause  for
    the appellant to believe that his life was in danger in 2009. The first
    appellant had accepted that the death of his brother had occurred after
    they had decided to cancel the trip to Iraq. The judge  concluded  that
    he did not accept the first appellant's claim  that  his  life  was  in
    danger in April 2009 if he had returned to Iraq.

25. As the appellant had made the assertion in his statement, the judge was
    entitled to make the finding that details in  the  statement  were  not
    true and that that damaged the credibility of the appellant.

26. The grounds of appeal raised  the  issue  that  the  judge  has  failed
    properly to take into account the  UNHCR  card,  which  recognised  the
    appellant as a refugee in Morocco.  In  the  first  instance  that  was
    considered in the determination by Judge Kebede,  as  is  evident  from
    paragraph 56 of her determination.  It  was  also  a  matter  that  was
    considered in the Upper Tribunal as is evident from paragraph 9 of  the
    Upper Tribunal determination. There the Upper Tribunal clearly assessed
    the UNHCR card and even taking that into  account  concluded  that  the
    first appellant was not a Convention Refugee.

27. The appellants' representative sought to argue  that  the  approach  of
    Judge Levin with regard to the UNHCR card fails to  take  into  account
    the case of IA v SSHD 2014 UKSC 6. However as is evident from that case
    much may depend upon the credibility of an individual and a decision by
    the UNHCR does not bind Tribunals. Paragraph 29 of the judgement in  IA
    makes that specific point. The approach to be adopted to such cards can
    be seen from paragraph 45 onwards of the judgment.

28. The Upper Tribunal had considered the card previously and had given  it
    due weight.  Judge Levin, as is evident from paragraph 28 and  45,  was
    aware of the issue and that that issue had been dealt with by the Upper
    Tribunal previously. The judge was entitled to make his  assessment  of
    the evidence in light of that and has fully justified in  the  findings
    of fact made.

29. The grounds of appeal argue and  it  was  argued  before  me  that  the
    judge's approach to paragraph 276 ADE was flawed. The judge  had  taken
    careful note of the fact that the first appellant have lived for nearly
    35 years in Morocco. However he noted also that the appellant's brother
    had until 2010 been living in Iraq when  it  is  alleged  that  he  was
    killed. The first appellant had extended or renewed his passport  on  a
    number of occasions. The first appellant also required a fluent  Arabic
    interpreter at the hearing. The judge noted that he had spent the first
    26 years of his life in Iraq and had been educated to university level.
    The judge having considered all the evidence  came  to  the  conclusion
    that he was satisfied that the first appellant continued to  have  ties
    to Iraq. That was a finding of fact that the judge was entitled to make
    on the basis of the evidence presented.

30. Paragraph 276ADE is considered in detail from paragraph 94.  The  judge
    had considered the case law  applicable.  Again  the  judge  has  fully
    justified his decision.

31. It is suggested that the judge has raised an issue  not  taken  by  the
    respondent. It is suggested that the judge has raised the  requirements
    under Appendix FM -S-LTR.2.2 because the first appellant has  submitted
    false information. In applying paragraph 276ADE the  Immigration  Rules
    provide that  the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  the
    provisions of appendix FM identified.

32. However in the first instance the judge  had  already  found  that  the
    first  appellant  did  not  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE.  He  was
    satisfied that the first appellant and thereafter the other  appellants
    through the first appellant had in the circumstances ties to Iraq.  The
    fact that he gave subsequently a further reason for  not  allowing  the
    appeal Under 276 ADE was not material in the circumstances.

33. Within the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is  suggested  that  there  is  an
    inconsistency in the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge.  It  is
    suggested that having found that the appellant had not  lived  in  Iraq
    for 35 years but lived in Morocco that finding  was  inconsistent  with
    the judge suggesting that the first  appellant's  lack  of  credibility
    impacted upon whether the first appellant had visited Iraq  since  that
    time. There is nothing inconsistent in the findings of fact made by the
    judge a person can clearly be settled in  a  country  and  returned  to
    visit their homeland. That does not suggest that  they  are  living  in
    their homeland again but merely that they are visiting.

34. Having considered the issues raised I find that there  is  no  material
    error of law in the determination.  I uphold the  decision  to  dismiss
    these appeals on all grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


