
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01214/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 January 2015                            |On 19 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                              SAFIATOu DIAKITE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Mali born  on  15  June  1991.  She  has
      appealed with the permission of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid, promulgated on  29
      October  2014,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
      respondent  to  remove  her  to  Mali,  having  refused   her   asylum
      application.


   2. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is that she was  forced  into
      marriage by an uncle and raped. She had gone  to  France  in  2008  to
      escape the marriage but the French authorities returned her  to  Mali.
      None of this was accepted by the respondent.  The  appellant's  appeal
      against the decision to remove her to Mali was heard on 8 October 2014
      by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid.  He   dismissed   the
      appellant's appeal, concluding her evidence  lacked  credibility.  His
      sole reason  for  this  conclusion  appears  to  have  been  that  the
      appellant said in evidence she had no-one in  Mali,  which  the  judge
      found inconsistent with her account of her departure being arranged by
      her aunt.

   3. Counsel who had represented the appellant at her appeal, Ms Emma King,
      drafted grounds seeking permission to appeal which argue, among  other
      things, that the judge had not recorded the evidence correctly. As her
      own notes of the evidence showed, the appellant had given reasons  why
      she could not rely on her aunt if she returned to Mali. More  broadly,
      the  judge's  reasons  were  inadequate.  The  appellant  was  granted
      permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The respondent has not filed a response opposing the appeal. Mr  Avery
      accepted there was an error of law, as outlined above, and the  appeal
      should be remitted for another hearing. I agree. Judge Majid  did  not
      give adequate reasons for his decision that the appellant  was  wholly
      incredible and the  one  reason  he  gave  for  his  finding  did  not
      accurately reflect the appellant's evidence. The appellant is entitled
      to a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

     The appeal shall be heard de novo in the  First-tier  Tribunal  subject
    to the following directions:

         1)   The appeal will be heard at Taylor House on 24 June 2015,  not
             before Judge Majid;
         2)   If either party wishes to adduce additional evidence, it  must
             be filed and served no later than 5 pm on 10 June 2015.


                               Signed                 Date 16 January 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
