
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01504/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 30th July 2015                     |                  On 14th August 2015 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                 mrs S A B Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Behbahani
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 4th  March  1971  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Behbahani of Counsel.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Mr Bramble, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had come to the United Kingdom on 13th August 2013  on  a
    visit visa with her three children and on  10th  October  2013  claimed
    asylum.  The Respondent had refused  the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum on 14th January 2015.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision
    and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson  sitting
    at Taylor House on 20th May 2015.  He had allowed her appeal on  asylum
    grounds and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Respondent had made application for permission to appeal  and  such
    had been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  on  19th
    June 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had erred in
    law by finding that the exclusion of the Appellant's children from  all
    but the poorest schools and denial of university and education did  not
    cross the threshold amounting to persecution and that sufficient weight
    had been placed on Section 117B of the 2002 Act in terms of  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Bramble relied upon the Grounds of Appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had relied on a principle within Iran called  Gozinesh  but  that
    did not amount  of  persecution  and  in  any  event  the  question  of
    university given the ages of the children was entirely speculative.  It
    was submitted that Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  had  not  been  the
    starting point nor properly examined in terms of Article 8.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Mr Behbahani submitted that the judge had made  findings  and  although
    the Respondent disagreed with those findings the judge was entitled  to
    conclude that what was said  to  potentially  take  place  amounted  to
    persecution.  He referred me specifically to the  Gozinesh  process  or
    principle as outlined within documents in the Appellant's bundle and in
    particular referred me to page 140.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    evidence and I now present that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had allowed this appeal on asylum grounds namely  that  there
    was a reasonable likelihood the Appellant and her children aged between
    3 and 10 at the time would suffer persecution for a  Convention  reason
    if returned to Iran.

 8. The background to such claim was that the Appellant's father-in-law was
    granted asylum in 1979 because he had been a cleric at the Royal Palace
    during the Shah's regime, and had been well-known and imprisoned at the
    time of the Iranian Revolution.

 9. The Appellant's husband and father of the three children had indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK probably granted as noted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 20(iii), under family reunion Rules  following  his  father's
    grant of asylum.

10. The  Appellant's  own  father  and  brothers  were  involved  in  anti-
    revolutionary activities but following release from a short  period  of
    detention in 1994 they had remained in Iran although  reported  to  the
    authorities (paragraph 20(iv)).

11. The Appellant's husband although he had been granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK had clearly returned to  and  spent  time  in  Iran
    following evidence noted by the judge at paragraph 20(vii) to (x).

12. The judge noted that there were limited factual disputes in respect  of
    the claim (paragraph 35).  The judge found it  likely  the  Appellant's
    husband had made unsuccessful attempts to recover  land  owned  by  his
    father, and confiscated in about 1979 by the Iranian  Government.   The
    judge had found an insufficiency of evidence to suggest the Appellant's
    own telephone calls were being monitored as claimed  but  that  women's
    meetings she held may have been monitored.

13. Having analysed the evidence the judge found at paragraph 43 that there
    was no  evidence  the  Appellant  or  her  family  would  suffer  harm,
    detention or physical ill-treatment as a result of family  connections.
    She had done nothing personal critical of the  regime  and  that  judge
    found that by simply claiming as there was no particular risk  for  her
    on return.  He had further noted  at  paragraph  44  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor her husband had been arrested or detained as a result  of
    connections to the Appellant's father-in-law nor  had  the  Appellant's
    own father or brothers suffered any ill and the Appellant faced no risk
    through a connection to those individuals.

14. Against those  findings  the  factors  the  judge  had  looked  at  and
    concluded amounted to persecutory treatment were:

      i) The Appellant's difficulties in holding women's meetings.

     ii) A difficulty in  getting  her  children  into  better  schools  and
         potentially university because of the policy known as Gozinesh.

15. The  judge  had  concluded  the  above  factors  were  borderline,  but
    concluded it amounted to persecution (paragraph 48).  However  she  had
    further concluded at paragraph 49 that she agreed with  the  Respondent
    that point (a) above (monitoring of  meetings)  did  not  without  more
    amount to persecution.

16. Thus the judge's conclusions that the Appellant and her  children  were
    at risk of persecution in Iran was based essentially on  the  education
    factor referred to in point (b) above.

17. The evidence relating to the policy of Gozinesh as before the judge was
    contained in an Amnesty International Report dated June 2003 within the
    Appellant's bundle.  It is  a  general  report  covering  a  number  of
    countries and presented to the 91st session of the International Labour
    Conference in June 2003.  The relevant section relating to Iran  begins
    at page 137 of the Appellant's bundle and  refers  to  the  process  of
    Gozinesh asserting that the process "impairs equality of opportunity or
    treatment in employment or occupation for all those who  seek  work  in
    the public and parastatal sector and reportedly in  some  instances  in
    the private sector".

18. Page 139 sets out the scope of  the  process  and  is  aimed  at  those
    seeking employment.  At  page  140,  which  Mr  Behbahani  specifically
    directed me to there is set  out  the  criteria  for  employment  as  a
    teacher.  At page 141 the report notes the  Gozinesh  process  is  most
    vigorously applied to prospective university students.

19. The judge had noted  and  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    husband that as an academic he had not been able to get  employment  in
    academia and potentially other work.  That was accepted  as  a  feature
    that would not make it reasonable for him to relocate to Iran when  the
    judge considered the case under Article 8 of the ECHR.

20. However the judge had allowed the appeal on asylum grounds in the first
    instance and that related to the finding that a return of the Appellant
    and  her  three  children  would  place  them  at  reasonable  risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason.  The judge had conceded  that  the
    risk did not devolve to the Appellant.  It  was  solely  based  on  the
    findings that as a result of the Gozinesh process as  indicated  within
    the papers the children could not access other than basic  schools  and
    would not be able to access  university.   Whilst  the  judge  had  the
    benefit of hearing from the witnesses  and  assessing  the  evidence  a
    material error of law was made in  concluding  that  this  amounted  to
    persecution for the following reasons:

      i) There was no suggestion that the  children  would  be  deprived  of
         education merely that they may not be able  to  access  the  better
         schools.  It is difficult to see how  that  crosses  the  threshold
         from potential discrimination to actual persecution.

     ii) The evidence relating  to  the  Gozinesh  process  principally  the
         report referred to above and drawn to my attention  in  submissions
         in fact makes no  reference  to  educational  discrimination  below
         university level at all.  It is dealing throughout  with  potential
         discrimination in public sector employment.

    iii) Whilst there is clear reference  to  potential  discrimination  for
         university entry, the Appellant's children are aged  3  to  10  and
         accordingly any potential access to university is at least eight to
         fifteen years in the future.  It further is dependent upon a number
         of speculative features including:

          a) The academic abilities of the children.

          b) Their desire in any event to go to university.

          c) It ignores potential university education in other  countries.



21. It was a material error of law to regard the factors above as amounting
    to persecutory treatment such that the family could not return to  Iran
    and required international protection.

22. Whilst the judge had separately considered Article 8 of the ECHR it  is
    tainted by her findings on asylum grounds and  by  a  reliance  upon  a
    commentary from the UNHCR noted at paragraph 58 and a failure  to  give
    proper weight to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

Notice of Decision

23. There were material errors of law made  in  this  case  such  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be set aside and remade.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

