
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01678/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 26 July 2016                     |On: 17 August 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                    J P D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
      Heynes), promulgated on 25 September 2015, brought with the permission
      of  Designated  Judge  Peart;  Judge  Heynes  having   dismissed   the
      appellant's appeal - brought on protection and human rights grounds  -
      against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 27 January 2015  to
      remove the appellant from the United Kingdom




   2. The appellant claimed before the First-tier Tribunal that there  is  a
      real risk of him of being persecuted should he be removed  to  Angola,
      the country of which he is a citizen. Broadly speaking (as  identified
      in paragraphs 7-11 of its decision) the appellant claimed  before  the
      FtT that:




      i) In March 2011  he  had  volunteered  to  put  up  posters  for  the
         Motivemento Da Revoloucas (MRA) calling for free speech and an  end
         to dictatorship. Whilst doing so, he was beaten and  stabbed  by  a
         policeman, losing consciousness;

     ii) On 22 November 2014 he attended a peaceful  demonstration.  He  was
         arrested and taken to a prison  outside  Luanda.  He  was  kept  in
         appalling conditions;

    iii) On 13 December 2014 he  and  two  other  prisoners  were  asked  to
         collect some water from a nearby river. One  of  the  three  guards
         knew a prisoner (not the appellant) and distracted the other guards
         so that the appellant and his fellow inmates could escape;

     iv) The appellant  telephoned  a  friend  who  informed  him  that  his
         parents, who had fled the country, had left something for him.  The
         appellant was also advised to leave the country. He found $1600  in
         the family house as well as documents from the police  telling  him
         that his parents would be killed if he did  not  hand  himself  in.
         Thereafter he travelled to the United Kingdom using an agent.




First-tier Tribunal's decision




   3. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant to be  untruthful  in  the
      evidence he gave and, as a consequence, rejected his assertion  to  be
      at risk upon return.




   4. Two aspects of the appellant's account found prominence in the  First-
      tier Tribunal's reasoning; (i) the assertion by the appellant that  he
      did not know he was coming to the United Kingdom prior to his  arrival
      here and (ii) the circumstances of the appellant's escape from prison.




   5. In relation to the latter of these matters the FtT found as follows:




         "37.     I reject as incredible  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         escape. The  expert  and  the  background  evidence  give  explicit
         accounts of the appalling treatment of prisoners,  particularly  in
         respect of those arrested  at  demonstrations.  I  find  it  wholly
         incredible that a guard would  distract  his  colleagues  to  allow
         three prisoners to escape, not least because  of  the  consequences
         which it is reasonable to show would befall them upon their  return
         to prison without the prisoners. ...




         39.      During cross-examination, the appellant was unable to give
         a coherent account of events immediately after his alleged  escape.
         At his interview, the appellant stated  that  when  I  escaped,  he
         called his friend who caught the appellant's parents who  told  him
         that they had run away. At the hearing, the appellant said that his
         friend already knew  that  his  parents  had  left.  The  appellant
         claimed that the account he had given at  interview  was  incorrect
         and was attributable to his difficulty with English,  then  (having
         been reminded that there was  an  interpreter  at  the  substantive
         interview) claims to have been traumatised.  I  formed  the  strong
         impression that the appellant was simply unable to hold his account
         together."




Discussion on error of law



   6. The appellant submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
      approach to, and consideration of, the expert evidence before it - the
      appellant having produced reports from two experts in support  of  his
      claim to be at risk in Angola.




   7. The first, a medical report, was authored by Dr Juliet Cohen and dated
      10 October 2015. Within that report the doctor, who is undisputedly an
      expert in the relevant field, gives careful consideration to the large
      number of scars that appear on the  appellant's  body.  Of  particular
      significance,  asserts  Ms  Khan,  are  those  scars  which  Dr  Cohen
      concludes are  highly  consistent  with  the  evidence  given  by  the
      appellant. Two such scars are said to be highly  consistent  with  the
      blow from a gun, seven of with "whipping injuries",  and  one  with  a
      bayonet wound.




   8. There were numerous other scars on the appellant's body which Dr Cohen
      concludes to be typical or diagnostic of the cause attributed to  them
      by the appellant. Dr Cohen also considered scar grouping and found one
      such group to be diagnostic of whipping injuries and a second group of
      scars to be diagnostic of sharp trauma assault wounds.




   9. At paragraph 56 of her report Dr Cohen finds:




         "I note that at paragraph 62 of the decision letter it is  asserted
         his physical injuries could be caused by every  day  injuries  that
         could have been caused in any number of ways. This  is  a  clinical
         judgement that it is not apparent that Quezon is qualified to make.
         On clinical examination he has a high number  of  physical  lesions
         reaching the highest level of consistency, i.e. they are diagnostic
         of torture."




  10. Under the heading "Medical report" the  First-tier  Tribunal  said  as
      follows of Dr Cohen's evidence:




         "24.     Dr. Cohen concluded that when all of the  lesions  on  the
         appellant's face are considered as a group "I  consider  that  from
         what is known of his lifestyle and experiences, the chance  of  all
         10 being due to a variety of accidental injuries and  falls  it  is
         highly  unlikely"  .....  "Overall,  I  consider  this   group   of
         lesions... are typical of repeated injuries."




         25.      With no disrespect to Dr. Cohen's experience I  have  some
         concerns about this conclusion. It  is  not  clear  to  me  why  an
         accident could not result in a number of injuries.




         26.      Some scars were found to be diagnostic of high  consistent
         with being whipped by a cable.




         27.      Whilst scars on the upper arm could be due  to  accidental
         causes, but similar scars on the appellants backed led Dr. Cohen to
         find, when taking all of the  scars  as  a  group,  that  they  are
         diagnostic of assault wounds.




         28.      It may well be appropriate to consider scars  as  a  group
         but Dr. Cohen could not explain the basis upon which she has  taken
         them as a group, given that scars are difficult if  not  impossible
         to age."




  11. The second of the reports produced by the appellant was authored by  a
      Dr Schubert, and is summarised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
      following terms:




         "19.     The first section of  the  report  echoes  the  background
         material  in  describing  the  poor  human  rights  record  of  the
         Government of Angola and the repression of demonstrators.




         20.      The second section of the report states, in essence,  that
         the appellant's account of events and hobbies  treatment  hands  of
         the authorities is consistent with the circumstances  that  prevail
         in Angola.




         21.      I mean no disrespect to Dr Schubert  in  saying  that  his
         report adds little, if anything to  the  appellant's  case.  He  is
         undoubtedly an authority and his answer the questions put to him by
         the appellants instructing solicitors. However, those questions are
         answered  by  the  120+  pages  of  background  evidence   in   the
         appellant's bundle which does not need to be studied in  any  depth
         to arrive at the conclusion that the account given by the appellant
         is capable of happening in Angola. Through no fault of Dr  Schubert
         time  and  (presumably  public)  money  has  been  wasted  by   the
         commissioning of this unnecessary report."




  12. I need do more for the purposes of this  decision  than  set  out  the
      following passages from Dr Schubert's report:




         "[the appellant's] descriptions of places (including Viana prison),
         the uniforms,  equipment,  and  the  methods  of  the  police,  are
         accurate and appear plausible...




         Overall, I find the appellant's account of abuse... consistent with
         my knowledge of how political  demonstrators  are  treated  by  the
         Angolan authorities. ...




         ...an escape from Viana prison to Catete ... is plausible"




  13. The other pertinent passages in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,
      relating to the relevance of the expert evidence read:




         "30.     Notwithstanding my concerns as to  the  basis  upon  which
         some findings have been made in the medical report, I  accept  that
         the report raises the possibility that the appellant has  a  number
         of scars were not the result of  accidental  injury.  That  finding
         does not, of itself, point to the appellant being mistreated in the
         circumstances or for the reasons he has claimed.




         31.      The fact that his account of his treatment in detention is
         consistent with the background evidence is a  factor  to  be  taken
         into account but it does not inexorably lead to the conclusion that
         the appellant was imprisoned. As Dr Schubert  pointed  out  in  his
         report, the treatment of a prisoner in an Angolan  jail  has  found
         its way onto YouTube. It  would  be  surprising  if  conditions  in
         Angolan prisons were not known there. ...




         38.      The medical evidence certainly  points  to  the  appellant
         having a number of scars some of  which  may  have  been  inflicted
         deliberately but that is not sufficient to  overcome  the  lack  of
         credibility surrounding the appellant's account of his  escape  the
         fact that his claim to have been detained falls within his  claimed
         escape."




  14. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr McVeety properly  accepted
      that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its  consideration  of,  and
      approach to, the expert evidence of Dr Schubert  and  Dr  Cohen;  such
      evidence   deserving   of   substantial   probative,   although    not
      determinative, weight when credibility was  being  considered  in  the
      round.




  15. The First-tier Tribunal's approach was to start  with  the  conclusion
      that the account given by the appellant of his escape was  implausible
      and then, in this context, consider the expert  evidence;  finding  it
      not to be of sufficient weight to "overcome" the  aforementioned  lack
      of credibility. This, as was accepted by Mr McVeety, is not a  legally
      permissible approach. The First-tier Tribunal was required to approach
      the evidence in the  round  when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
      assertions made by the appellant, it did not do so.




  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore flawed  by  legal
      error capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.  None  of  the
      findings of fact can be preserved. The appeal has to  be  reconsidered
      de novo and both parties submitted that the most appropriate forum for
      this was in the First-tier Tribunal. Had  there  been  an  interpreter
      available at today's hearing I would  nevertheless  have  gone  on  to
      remake the decision on  appeal  for  myself.  However,  there  was  no
      interpreter available and,  consequently,  I  accede  to  the  parties
      wishes and  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      considered afresh on all issues.




Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is therefore set aside.



The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  considered  afresh.
No findings of fact are to stand



Signed:

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor



