
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01040/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     HM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Selway, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the SSHD:     Ms Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



      1. I have anonymised the appellant because this decision refers to his
         asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who claimed asylum on arrival in
         the United Kingdom ('UK')  on  18  January  2014.    The  appellant
         contends that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq  on
         account of anti-Islamic views imputed to  him  on  account  of  his
         online / electronic and other activities.   The  SSHD  refused  the
         claim for asylum and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (FTT) against a decision to remove him.

Procedural history

      3. In a decision dated 17 July 2015 FTT Judge Jones QC  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal.  The judge did  not  accept  that  the  country
         expert was suitably  qualified  and  comprehensively  rejected  the
         entire credibility of the appellant's asylum claim.

      4. In a decision dated 27  January  2015  FTT  Judge  Osborne  granted
         permission to appeal observing inter alia that the judge's approach
         to the expert report was arguably flawed and that he failed to take
         into account relevant evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  online
         activity.

      5. The SSHD has submitted a rule 24 notice dated 7  February  2015  in
         which it was accepted that the decision is "a little unorthodox  in
         style" but that the FTT  was  entitled  to  reach  the  credibility
         findings for the reasons provided.

Hearing

      6. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Selway properly  indicated  that
         although the FTT had committed an error of law in its treatment  of
         the expert, that evidence was only relevant to plausibility and  as
         the FTT found that  "it  is  plausible  that  somebody  who  upsets
         religious fanatics in Iraq might be the object  of  threats  and/or
         fatwah" [22] the error of law may not be  material.   He  therefore
         focussed his attention on the FTT's credibility findings and argued
         that a number of these were unsustainable.

      7. Mr Parkinson relied on the rule 24 notice and invited  me  to  find
         that the FTT was entitled to make  the  factual  findings  for  the
         reasons provided.

      8. After hearing submissions I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

      9. Both representatives agreed that should I find  the  FTT  committed
         the alleged errors of law the most appropriate approach is for  the
         findings to be remade completely and  that  given  the  nature  and
         extent of those findings, this should be done in the FTT.





Discussion

     10. The decision under appeal comprehensively rejects  the  credibility
         of the appellant's account.  The bundle prepared on behalf  of  the
         appellant  contained  a  number  of  texts,  blogs  and  electronic
         communications said to be written  by  the  appellant,  which  were
         capable  of  an  anti-Islamic  interpretation  and  various   angry
         responses to these.  Such documentation supported  the  appellant's
         account if found to  be  genuine  and  required  careful  scrutiny.
         Unfortunately the FTT considered itself hampered by the failure  to
         refer to these documents during  the  course  of  the  hearing  and
         considered the evidence itself [23(i)].  Having  done  so  the  FTT
         found that "the various pages prove nothing.  The  translated  text
         could have been written by anybody whomsoever and can  be  entirely
         self-serving." [23(ii)]  It is difficult to  see  how  the  various
         pages "prove nothing" if they reflect genuine online and electronic
         activity.  Further all evidence tendered  to  support  a  claim  of
         asylum can be described as "self-serving".  That is not a reason of
         itself to attach no weight to it.  The FTT  repeats  its  error  at
         [23(iii)] where it  describes  the  appellant's  page  213  as  the
         product of "someone  intent  upon  putting  in  place  self-serving
         evidence".

     11. In addition to this, a lack of  good  faith  or  genuine  political
         belief (or as in this case religious views), of  course,  does  not
         preclude a claimant from international  protection;  see  Danian  v
         SSHD [2002] Imm AR 96, YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360,  BA
         (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT  36
         (IAC). The malign  profile  of  some  regimes  allows  for  adverse
         interest even where sur  place  activities  are  conducted  in  bad
         faith.  Similarly the malign profile of  "religious  fanatics"  (as
         the FTT put it) is such that even a small indiscretion  articulated
         in bad faith may be sufficient to arouse adverse interest.   At  no
         point in the  decision  does  the  FTT  address  this  issue,  when
         seemingly much of its concerns  were  predicated  on  material  and
         views that had been espoused in a public arena  in  a  self-serving
         manner or in bad faith.

     12. The FTT regarded the appellant's claim to have "espoused atheism in
         the very recent past to be little more than  a  clumsy  attempt  to
         bolster his asylum claim on the basis that once  he  has  renounced
         Islam he would be at even greater risks from the religious fanatics
         in Iraq" [23(x)].  Such reasons imply a clumsy  and  ill-considered
         very recent departure from previously held beliefs, which has  been
         manufactured.  This  is  a  serious  adverse  finding  against  the
         appellant yet the FTT has provided very little  reasoning  for  it.
         The FTT has not  engaged  with  the  appellant's  detailed  witness
         statement  dated  10  November  2014,  which  over  the  course  of
         paragraphs 3 to 28 explains and explores his espoused atheism.   At
         that time the appellant was 24 and had spent time living in the  UK
         as a student.  It is clear from his various statements that he  has
         been on a process of exploration of his religious beliefs for  some
         time but this has been a fluid process.  The FTT has failed to give
         adequate reasons for rejecting this aspect of the appellant's claim
         in light of the detailed evidence  before  it  in  support  of  the
         appellant's claim.

     13. I acknowledge that the FTT has provided other reasons for rejecting
         the appellant's credibility.  I am not confident that the  decision
         would have been the same on the basis of the  other  reasons.   The
         errors I have focussed upon go to  the  heart  of  the  appellant's
         claim and lead me to the view that the conclusion on credibility is
         vitiated by errors of law and unsafe.

     14. The FTT went on to find that even if it  accepted  the  appellant's
         claim he could internally relocate [24].  In so doing the  FTT  has
         not considered whether or not the  appellant  would  be  reasonably
         likely  to  espouse  similar  views  at  the  place  of  relocation
         thereupon placing him at risk.  This is an error of law and renders
         the errors of law  I  have  identified  regarding  the  credibility
         findings to be material.

Remittal

     15. The decision must be remade entirely  and  de  novo.   I  have  had
         regard to paragraph 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice
         Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
         required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is
         an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  Both representatives also
         agreed to the directions set out below.

Decision

      1. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      2. The appeal shall be remade by FTT de novo.

Directions
      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in North Shields (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first date  available.


      2) 14 days before the hearing date the appellant shall file and serve:
          i) a witness statement which condenses his claim in chronological
             order into one document, and  which  cross-references  to  the
             relevant  documents  (online  postings/threats,  etc)   in   a
             comprehensive   bundle.     Such    references    should    be
             particularised  and  refer  to   page   numbers   within   the
             comprehensive bundle;
         ii) an indexed and  paginated  bundle  (to  replace  all  previous
             bundles) containing  only  those  documents  relevant  to  the
             rehearing that are not contained in the SSHD's bundle.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 December 2015
