

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/01682/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24th May 2016                      |      On 2nd June 2016                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     M E
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, counsel, instructed by Greater
Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as ME. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds that  it
      was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  in
      refusing to adjourn to enable the appellant to obtain medical evidence
      as to the existence and extent of scarring.


   2. The appellant, an undocumented Kurd from Iran, gave oral evidence that
      he had been tortured by Etalat  who  had  damaged  his  testicles  and
      attempted to write sentences on his bare bottom. There was no  medical
      evidence to that effect and it  seems  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision that Mr Brown, who appeared  for  ME  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was as much taken by surprise by this  evidence  as  was  the
      judge.

   3. The judge correctly refused  to  permit  the  appellant  to  show  the
      claimed scars. The appellant claimed he had been  too  embarrassed  to
      mention the extent of the torture and scarring  previously.  Mr  Brown
      asked for an adjournment to enable a medical report  to  be  obtained.
      First-tier Tribunal Judge D N Harris refused to grant an adjournment.

   4. In submissions Mr Brown asked the judge to accept the presence of  the
      scarring even though it had been disclosed late and  noting  that  the
      appellant had previously referred to  ill  treatment.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge  in  his  findings  does  not  accept  the  appellant's
      contention that he was too embarrassed to mention the scarring earlier
      and that it was not credible that he would not have informed  his  GP.
      He found that the issue of scarring was a matter introduced to attempt
      to bolster a weak asylum claim and that the fact they  are  raised  at
      such a late stage is damaging to the credibility of his testimony.

   5. This is an unfortunate handling of what might be a vulnerable witness.
      The refusal to grant an adjournment to  ascertain  whether  the  scars
      existed or not and then to find  that  the  late  disclosure  of  such
      scarring in effect meant  that  they  did  not  is  unacceptable.  The
      finding by the judge that a contention that the appellant had been too
      embarrassed to refer to them previously as being  'completely  without
      substantiation' is very strong language to  use  against  someone  who
      might be vulnerable and might have been assaulted  and  mistreated  in
      the manner he claims.

   6. It may of course be the case that there are  no  scars  or  that  they
      could not be consistent with the mistreatment claimed. Late disclosure
      may be of relevance to the extent that they corroborate his claim  for
      asylum. But the total dismissal of such a claim in  the  circumstances
      of this appeal is not acceptable. Although it may be  that  those  who
      provided legal assistance to this appellant ought to  have  questioned
      the appellant more closely  as  to  his  claimed  ill  treatment,  the
      refusal to grant an adjournment in the face of such serious claims and
      then to hold the late disclosure against the appellant  and  find,  in
      effect, that the scars do not exist has not enabled  this  appellant's
      case to be considered with the anxious scrutiny required.

   7. If there is scarring as claimed the existence of that scarring  is  an
      element of the evidence that any responsible judge would  consider  in
      the context of the evidence as a whole. This does not  mean  that  the
      other credibility problems the appellant has are of no importance  but
      in an asylum appeal it is of critical importance that all evidence  is
      properly considered.

   8. The judge materially erred in law in failing to grant  an  adjournment
      to enable evidence to be produced.

   9. I set aside the decision to be remade.

    10. The failure to grant an adjournment means that there  has  been  no
        effective hearing of the appeal and the  findings  made  cannot  be
        relied upon. That does not of course mean that  evidence  given  by
        the appellant and recorded in the First-tier Tribunal decision will
        not be available to the judge who  determines  the  appeal  in  the
        future. But the findings are set aside. The scheme of the Tribunals
        Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does  not  assign  the  function  of
        primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

    11. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
        and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:


                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.




    12. In the circumstances of this appeal I  remit  the  hearing  of  the
        appeal, no findings  preserved,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
        rehearing by a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  D  N
        Harris.


              Conclusions:

         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

         I set aside the decision.

         I remit the hearing of the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  no
findings preserved.

                  [pic]

                                                 Date 24th May 2016
     Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
