
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01663/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th September 2014                       |On 28th October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  MISS SKN
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born  on  14th  April  1977.   The
    Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 20th September 2004 on  a
    voluntary worker visa  remaining  for  one  year  before  returning  to
    Uganda.  She re-entered on 8th November 2006 on a working holiday  visa
    for two years and on 29th January 2009 was issued with  an  EEA  family
    residence permit valid to 29th January  2014.   The  Appellant  claimed
    asylum on 31st May 2013.  The claim for asylum was based  upon  a  fear
    that if returned the Appellant would face mistreatment due to a  reason
    not covered by the Convention, namely that she would not have access to
    the medication and treatment she needed for her HIV and  mental  health
    condition.  Her claim for humanitarian protection was based upon a fear
    that if returned she would face a real risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment and she  also  claimed  that  removing  her  to
    Uganda would be a breach of  Articles  2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

 2. On 27th February 2014 the Secretary  of  State  issued  a  reasons  for
    refusal letter.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cruthers sitting at Manchester on 19th May  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 21st May 2014 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed  on all grounds.

 4. On 21st May 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds  contended  firstly  that  there  had  been  a
    failure by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider Article 3  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights and secondly  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider private life under Article 8.

 5. On 20th June 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ievins  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Ievins noted that there were  two  Grounds
    of Appeal and that the first  was  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    considering whether or not  the  Appellant  was  a  suicide  risk.   He
    considered that ground to be arguable.   He  noted  that  a  number  of
    matters were raised on the Appellant's behalf which might be thought to
    be a disagreement with the conclusions reached by the judge.   However,
    the judge referred to the six considerations set out in the case  of  J
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629 but he did not set  out  his  answers  to  the  six
    tests.  Judge Ievins states that the First-tier Tribunal Judge set  out
    the evidence under elements (a) to (e) and then concluded that from the
    summary of that evidence "it is clear that this appeal  cannot  succeed
    on the test explained in J".  Judge Ievins was of  the  view  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not explain why and  did  not  appear  to
    make findings on those six tests and that that failure amounted  to  an
    arguable material error of law.

 6. The second ground upon which permission to appeal was  granted  related
    to the consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Judge
    Ievins considered that from paragraph 41 onwards the judge appeared  to
    be assessing proportionality with reference to the  legitimate  aim  as
    "the public interest in proper immigration control".   He  stated  that
    the public interest in proper immigration control is  not  one  of  the
    grounds justifying an interference with a person's Article 8 rights set
    out in Article 8(2).  He  considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  in
    failing to follow a structured  five  stage  approach  as  required  by
    Razgar but  instead  by  addressing  his  mind  relatively  swiftly  to
    proportionality the judge had also fallen into arguable material  error
    of law.

 7. On 1st July 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  In that response the Secretary  of  State  notes
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge may not have  directly  applied  the
    facts as highlighted by the Court of Appeal in J to the facts  of  this
    Appellant's case but contended that that was immaterial  on  the  basis
    that it was clear what was being suggested.  The  feared  ill-treatment
    clearly did not meet the minimum level of  severity  as  the  Appellant
    denies any current thoughts  of  self-harm.   The  Secretary  of  State
    argues that a causal link has not been established between the  act  of
    removal and the ill-treatment (suicide risk).  The Secretary  of  State
    points out that the Appellant was  not  pursuing  her  application  for
    asylum  and  therefore  could  not  demonstrate  that  her   fear   was
    objectively well-founded and she clearly has a support  network  within
    Uganda that she could call upon  on  return.   The  judge  having  been
    informed that she had no right to remain under  Appendix  FM  was  also
    entitled to find that the Appellant's Article 8 application  could  not
    succeed as no compelling circumstances had been  identified  warranting
    consideration outside of the Rules.

 8. It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Nicholson.  The Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Harrison starts  by  indicating  that  he  relies  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  Mr Nicholson replies by stating that both assessments  under
    Articles 3 and 8 are wrong.  He acknowledges that it is  accepted  that
    this is an Appellant who has severe health problems but that the  judge
    has thereafter failed to go  through  the  relevant  factors  and  give
    reasons.  He points out there are six factors under J which need to  be
    considered but that the fifth is amended by the decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal in Y and Another (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (29th April 2009).  He refers me to paragraph 14 to  18
    therein of the judgment of the Court of Appeal submitting that the test
    of fear is a subjective test, i.e. one real to the Appellant, and  that
    the judge did not address this in rejecting J.

10. Further, addressing the Appellant's claim under Article 8 Mr  Nicholson
    submits that again the judge has failed to properly address the  issues
    and that the decision in Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article  8)  [2013]
    UKUT 00400 (IAC) is correct and that  the  Appellant's  claim  must  be
    looked at in the round.  He states as  there  is  no  Rule  within  the
    Immigration Rules on Article 8 relating to a claim based on health,  it
    is necessary to look at it outside the Rules.

11. Mr Nicholson contends that by giving due consideration to the  decision
    in Akalu and to the consultant forensic  psychiatrist's  report  of  Dr
    Chandra Ghosh to be found in the First-tier Tribunal bundle, the issues
    raised by the Rule 24 response as to there being  no  causal  risk  has
    been addressed and  he  asked  me  to  find  that  there  has  been  an
    interference   with   the   Appellant's   private    life    that    is
    disproportionate.  He submits that this case is about  whether  or  not
    the Appellant can avail herself of treatment in Zimbabwe and that  that
    is doubtful and costly and that the lack of monitoring that takes place
    in Zimbabwe is critical.  He submits there are no countervailing issues
    in this matter such as deportation, criminality, overstaying, etc., and
    that this is a case that is in line with the decision in Akalu and that
    it should be allowed.

12. Mr Nicholson goes on to submit that there is nothing  to  suggest  that
    the Appellant's church could help her in her home area and in any event
    the church cannot look after her medical needs.   He  points  out  that
    Judge Cruthers in his determination has at  paragraph  50  acknowledged
    there is a stigma attached to the Appellant's health that the judge has
    merely failed to conclude that this is "not a trump card".  He  submits
    that there is an error in the judge's approach to Article  8,  that  he
    has failed to follow Akhalu, has not approached the Article 8 test.  He
    contends that not everyone is at risk of suicide and that the judge has
    failed to distinguish it from the general case analysis.  He  asked  me
    to find there is a material error of law and to set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13. Mr Harrison reiterates his initial comment that he relies on  the  Rule
    24 response stating that the determination is well-balanced and that he
    disagrees with the analysis with regard to the decision in  Akhalu  for
    when the judge draws his conclusions together at paragraph 32 onward he
    submits the judge has considered a vast amount of evidence and that the
    conclusions the judge has reached were open to him and ones that he was
    entitled on the evidence before him to make.

14. Mr Nicholson responds by asking me to read paragraphs 32 to 39 of Judge
    Cruthers' determination pointing out that  paragraph  39  is  only  six
    lines long and that he submits the judge has failed to draw conclusions
    which he states that he should have done.  He submits that the judge is
    just looking at the factors and has not made any findings at paragraphs
    44 onwards.  He points out that paragraph 51  is  about  N  and  not  a
    conclusion and in any event he agrees with the judge that the threshold
    in N would not be reached although he points out  that  N  was  not  an
    Article 8 health case.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Case Law

17. I have considered the relevant case law in particular:

    Y and Another (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    - 29th April 2009

    Sedley LJ:

    The fifth principle, it will be recalled, is that:

         "In deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach of Article  3
         in a  suicide  case,  a  question  of  importance  is  whether  the
         applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state  upon  the
         risk of suicide is said to be based  is  objectively  well-founded.
         If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh  against
         there being a real risk that the  removal  will  be  in  breach  of
         Article 3".

         "... One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J  but  what
         may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine fear
         which the Appellant may  establish,  albeit  without  an  objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there  is  an
         enforced return".

    MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 279

         "23. The only cases I can foresee where  the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8".

    Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC)


         "(1) MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2012] EWCA Civ 279 does not  establish  that  a  claimant  is
             disqualified from accessing the protection of article 8  where
             an aspect of her claim is a difficulty or inability to  access
             health care in her country of  nationality  unless,  possibly,
             her private or family life has a bearing upon  her  prognosis.
             The correct approach is not to leave out of account  what  is,
             by any view, a material consideration of central importance to
             the  individual  concerned   but   to   recognise   that   the
             countervailing public interest in removal  will  outweigh  the
             consequences for the health  of  the  claimant  because  of  a
             disparity of health care facilities in all but a very few rare
             cases.


         (2)  The consequences of removal for the health of a  claimant  who
             would not be able to access equivalent health  care  in  their
             country of nationality as was available in  this  country  are
             plainly relevant to the question of proportionality. But, when
             weighed against the  public  interest  in  ensuring  that  the
             limited resources of this country's health service are used to
             the best effect for the benefit of those  for  whom  they  are
             intended, those consequences  do  not  weigh  heavily  in  the
             claimant's favour but speak cogently in support of the  public
             interests in removal".


Findings

18. Mr Nicholson has  spent  a  very  considerable  amount  of  time  quite
    properly taking me through the  authorities  and  contending  that  the
    authorities of Y and Akhalu impose a lower threshold than  that  in  N.
    The question for me is whether or not  the  judge  has  carried  out  a
    proper analysis of the law, applied the correct test and made  findings
    which he was entitled to and in the event that he has not as to whether
    or not such error is material.  The question has to be considered as to
    whether or not the submissions made by Mr Nicholson - eloquently put as
    they are - amount to nothing more than mere disagreement and  argument.
    The  decision  of  Judge  Cruthers  is  well-structured.   Firstly   he
    addresses the issues  and  law  applied,  and  thereafter  goes  on  to
    consider the general law and the authorities.  He addresses the essence
    of the Appellant's  case  and  at  paragraph  12  gives  due  and  full
    consideration to the Court of Appeal decision in J.  He  sets  out  the
    particular considerations for determining whether there is a real  risk
    in a case based on a claimed risk of suicide and thereafter goes on  to
    consider N  and  at  paragraph  14  notes  (as  stated  above  in  this
    determination) the full head note of Akhalu.

19. Judge  Cruthers  then  considered  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
    submissions and at paragraphs 32 to 39 considers the Appellant's  claim
    to be a suicide risk.  Mr Nicholson contends that the judge has  failed
    to answer the relevant questions  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.
    However that is not my interpretation.  Paragraphs 33  to  38  consider
    the relevant elements and whilst  paragraph  39  is,  as  Mr  Nicholson
    submits, short the judge does give due and proper consideration to  the
    test to be applied.  Whilst the judge does not specifically set out  as
    to why the test cannot succeed under J he does  state  he  agrees  with
    what is said regarding the Appellant's claim in paragraphs 36 and 37 of
    the Notice of Refusal as expanded by the Home Office Presenting Officer
    in his submissions at the hearing.  The judge  has  therefore  endorsed
    what is said in a very detailed and well-constructed Notice of  Refusal
    and given due consideration to the tests in J.

20. Paragraphs 36 and 37  address  whether  the  Appellant's  removal  will
    create or  exacerbate  a  risk  of  suicide  considering  the  apparent
    thoughts of suicide that the Appellant had had on a number of occasions
    and the sleeping tablets that she took in 2011.  Further, paragraph  37
    goes on to analyse the principles in J in some detail and includes that
    the Appellant has not reached the threshold  required.   Those  factors
    are considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge after further expansion
    of them in submission by the Home Office Presenting Officer.  The judge
    has made findings that he is entitled to and has fully engaged with the
    principles set out in J.  Further, whilst the judge has  done  no  more
    than refer to the head note in Akhalu it is clear he is mindful  of  it
    and he has looked at this case as is clear from  the  determination  by
    reference back to the Notice of Refusal in a test  of  the  Appellant's
    objective fear as expounded in the authority of Y.   Whilst  Y  is  not
    specifically referred to, the judge's approach  has  been  correct  and
    therefore does not disclose any material error of law.

21. The second limb of the appeal challenges the manner in which Articles 3
    and 8 generally have been considered.  The  judge  has  given  due  and
    proper consideration as  set  out  in  very  detailed  paragraphs  from
    paragraph  40  to  51  of  his  determination.   He   has   given   due
    consideration to factors in the round as set out in Akhalu and  has  in
    fact gone so far as to refer to that authority at  paragraph  43.   The
    judge has carried out a very detailed and considered  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's health and  the  support  that  she  has  and  despite  the
    submissions of Mr Nicholson to the contrary I find that the  judge  has
    looked at all the relevant factors and made findings of  fact  that  he
    was entitled to.  He had looked at the case subjectively, which is  the
    correct approach as set out in Akhalu, and has taken the  evidence  and
    come to conclusions that he is entitled to reach.  Merely to submit, as
    Mr Nicholson does, that the findings  are  short,  does  not  mean  the
    findings are not ones to which the judge was  entitled  to  reach.   In
    fact as for the reasons set out above  the  judge's  findings  are  not
    short and are detailed and ultimately the submissions amount to  little
    more than disagreement with  the  judge's  determination.   This  is  a
    determination that  has  been  well-reasoned  and  the  law  fully  and
    properly considered.  It discloses no material error  of  law  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is consequently dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No  application  is
made to vary that order and none is therefore made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           28th October 2014
