
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01282/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2017                            |On 26 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Paxton instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    (DRC).  In 2009, whilst in transit to Canada, the appellant arrived  in
    the UK in possession of a false Canadian passport.  She claimed  asylum
    at the airport.

 3. On 29 October 2009, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,   in   a
    determination dated 3 February 2010, Judge M J  Waygood  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. Thereafter, although the details are not entirely clear, the  appellant
    left the UK in 2012 and travelled to Belgium where  she  again  claimed
    asylum.  She was returned to the UK under the  Dublin  Regulations  and
    for a second time claimed asylum in the UK.  That claim  together  with
    her claims for humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR were
    refused by the Secretary of State on 18 December 2014.

 6. The  appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 15 June 2015, Judge B Lloyd dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  He rejected her claim to be at risk on  return  to
    the DRC on any basis including that she would be at risk on  return  as
    someone who had been suspected of the commission of a criminal  offence
    such as a document fraud by using a false  passport  when  leaving  the
    DRC.

 7. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    21 September 2015.

 8. That appeal initially came before me on 26 April 2016.  In  a  decision
    sent on 13 June 2016, I concluded that there was no material  error  of
    law in Judge Lloyd's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  (in
    particular  upholding  his  adverse  credibility  finding)  except   in
    relation to any risk on return to the DRC on the  basis  that  she  may
    have left the DRC on a false document.

 9. As a consequence, I directed that the appeal should be relisted  for  a
    resumed hearing before me in order to determine the  issue  of  whether
    the appellant would be at risk on return  to  the  DRC  on  that  basis
    alone.

10. Following an adjourned hearing and a  case  management  hearing  on  31
    August 2016 and 1 November 2016 respectively, the appeal was listed for
    substantive determination on 24 January 2017.

11. On 23 January 2017, the day before the listed hearing, the  appellant's
    representatives emailed the Tribunal seeking permission to withdraw the
    appellant's appeal under rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  A decision on that application was adjourned  by
    a judge at Field House to be determined by me at the hearing.

12. Mr Paxton, who  represented  the  appellant,  renewed  the  appellant's
    application to withdraw the appellant's case.  He  indicated  that  the
    appellant, on advice, had taken the view that the expert evidence which
    had been obtained did not sufficiently support the appellant's claim to
    be at risk on return to the DRC on the only  basis  the  appellant  now
    pursued her claim.  Mr Paxton accepted that the proper disposal of  the
    appellant's appeal was that it should be dismissed.

Decision

13. Although the application to withdraw is made late,  and  for  which  Mr
    Paxton apologised, it is properly based on pragmatic advice due to  the
    absence of  supporting  expert  opinion.   In  those  circumstances,  I
    consent to the withdrawal of the appellant's case under rule 17(2).

14. The decision of Judge Lloyd was set aside by my  decision  sent  on  13
    June 2016.  I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds.

15. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed




                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



