
[pic]
IAC-AH-PC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/01374/2015
                                                               AA/01376/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2015                 |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                            MH (first appellant)
                            AH (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E. Waheed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of Pakistan and are  married  to  each
    other.  The first Appellant ("the Appellant") was born on [ - ] and his
    wife, the second Appellant, was born on [ - ].  They  appealed  against
    the decision of the Respondent dated 13th January  2015  in  which  she
    refused to grant asylum to the first Appellant under paragraph  336  of
    the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  and  refused  the  second  Appellant's
    application as her husband's dependent.  Their appeal  was  allowed  at
    first instance by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Blake  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 21st May 2015.  For the reasons which I set  out  below
    at paragraphs 19 and 20 below I found there to be a material  error  of
    law and have set that decision aside. I have proceeded to  rehear  this
    appeal and will refer to the  parties  as  they  were  known  at  first
    instance for the sake of convenience.

2.   The Appellant's claim was summarised by the Judge at paragraphs  15  to
    30 of his determination.  The Appellant was of the  Shia  Muslim  faith
    and was the president of an organisation called AK.  Whilst in Pakistan
    the Appellant had  been  a  professional  cricketer  and  had  obtained
    celebrity status.  On 10th  October  2010  he  had  participated  in  a
    demonstration against  the  killing  of  Shias  by  a  Sunni  extremist
    organisation Lashkar Jhangvi ("LJ").  The  Appellant  had  subsequently
    received a threatening letter from that organisation  on  15th  October
    2010 referring to him as an infidel and having committed  heresy.   The
    letter also referred to the fact that the Appellant's wife, the  second
    Appellant, had converted to  being  a  Shia  Muslim.   He  subsequently
    received threatening phone calls in March and December 2010 telling him
    to cease his activities.  He informed the police of these  threats  but
    they did nothing.

3.   The Appellant moved from Karachi to Lahore but  could  not  stay  there
    because news of his activities on behalf of the Shia community was made
    public and LJ came to know of his work.  On 13th May 2011 men  from  LJ
    attended his home and fired shots and chanted slogans.   The  Appellant
    was not at home at the time but was informed  of  what  happened  by  a
    friend who had witnessed it.  The friend was too frightened  to  inform
    the police of the incident.  The Appellant left  Karachi  on  27th  May
    2011 and travelled to the United Kingdom where almost three years later
    on 19th February 2014 he made an application for asylum saying he could
    not return to Pakistan because of the danger to  his  life  from  Sunni
    extremists.  After the Appellant made a  television  programme  in  the
    United Kingdom about the  Shia  killings  the  Appellant's  brother  in
    Pakistan received a phone call from LJ.

4.   The Respondent did not accept the credibility of the Appellant's  claim
    to  have  received  threats.  The  Appellant's  credibility  had   been
    undermined by the length of time it had taken him to claim asylum.   In
    any event there would be a sufficiency of protection available  to  the
    Appellant if he were returned to Pakistan.

The Determination at First Instance

5.   At paragraph 56 the Judge  began  his  conclusions  in  the  case.   He
    accepted the Appellant to be  an  honest  and  credible  witness.   The
    Appellant was of the Shia faith  and  was  a  well-known  international
    professional cricketer.  The Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    received threatening letters and phone  calls  from  LJ  and  that  the
    Appellant's wife, the second  Appellant,  had  converted  to  the  Shia
    faith.  The  Appellant  had  been  president  of  AK,  founded  by  the
    Appellant's father in 1957.  The Appellant had  used  his  position  as
    president of this Shia organisation and his position as a high  profile
    cricketer to promote the welfare of Shias and protest against killings.
     The Appellant had taken part  in  a  rally  in  London  in  aid  of  a
    religious event and was featured in photographs of that  demonstration.
    The Appellant had been in touch with his brother who had  informed  him
    that LJ were still interested in the Appellant.

6.   At paragraph 68 the Judge considered the issue of  internal  relocation
    albeit somewhat briefly.  The Judge wrote:

         "I found that as the Appellant was a high profile public figure the
         possibility of relocation will not  be  open  to  him.   I  further
         considered on the basis of the evidence that there would be a  real
         risk that he would be attacked  and  that  there  would  not  be  a
         sufficiency of  protection  to  prevent  this  from  happening.   I
         accepted the  Appellant's  account  that  when  he  had  previously
         brought the threats to the attention of the police there  had  been
         no action taken on any investigation into his complaint".

    He allowed the appeal under asylum  grounds  and  did  not  proceed  to
    consider the matter under Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Respondent appealed against that decision on  three  grounds.   The
    first was the Judge had made a material error of law in failing to give
    any or any adequate findings for  accepting  the  Appellant's  account.
    The second ground was that the Judge had failed  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate findings that there was  an  insufficiency  of  protection  in
    Pakistan and the third ground was that there were  no  or  no  adequate
    findings that the Appellant could not internally relocate.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge Chohan on 13th July 2015.  In granting permission  to  appeal  he
    wrote:

         "The Judge's findings are set out in paragraphs 55 to  79.   It  is
         quite apparent that the Judge has accepted much of the  Appellant's
         account but it does seem that the Judge has not given  adequate  or
         full reasons for accepting the Appellant's account.  In other words
         it does seem that there is a  lack  of  reasoning  in  the  Judge's
         decision for accepting the Appellant's  account  and  allowing  the
         appeal".

9.   The Appellant filed a reply to the  grant  of  permission  pursuant  to
    Rule 24 dated 2nd November  2015.   This  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had had  the  benefit  of  hearing  the  Appellant  give  live
    evidence.  The Respondent's grounds alleged a  lack  of  reasons  only.
    The Tribunal had properly directed itself on the law and given  reasons
    why the Appellant had been accepted as honest and credible. These  were
    the demeanour and manner of the Appellant as a  witness,  his  previous
    immigration history,  the  many  pages  of  documentary  evidence,  the
    plausibility of the conduct ascribed to the Appellant's friend. In  any
    event the Appellant's account had been considered in the round.  It was
    open to the Tribunal to find that upon acceptance  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence of the nature of those whom he  feared,  the  Appellant's  own
    public profile and no prior sufficiency of protection for the Appellant
    when in Pakistan he would not be afforded a sufficiency  of  protection
    in the future upon return to Pakistan.

10.  The reply continued that it ill-befell the Respondent to rely upon  her
    own  refusal  letter's  analysis  of  the  sufficiency  of   protection
    available in Pakistan because that had stated in terms that the  police
    had been unable to stem the tide of targeting  killings  especially  of
    members of the minority Shia  and  Christian  communities.   There  was
    nothing in the  refusal  letter  to  justify  the  statement  that  the
    authorities were able to offer  protection  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    circumstances he had described.  Given that the Appellant was  a  well-
    known international professional cricketer he would  be  easily  found.
    There was no error of law.

The Hearing Before Me

11.  The Respondent relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    arguing that the First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasoning on the issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation.  The refusal letter had set out a number of reasons for not
    accepting the Appellant's  account  of  past  persecution.   Where  the
    discrepancies were so serious they undermined the Appellant's claim  it
    was imperative for the Judge allowing an  appeal  to  explain  how  his
    conclusions were reached.

12.  Paragraph 68 on the  sufficiency  of  protection  was  almost  entirely
    unreasoned.  The background evidence cited at paragraphs 36  to  44  of
    the refusal letter had showed that  there  was  an  organised  security
    service in Pakistan but the Tribunal had failed to take  that  evidence
    into account or consider  the  Horvath  standard  of  protection.   The
    option of internal relocation had also only been briefly dealt with  at
    paragraph 68.  The  finding  that  the  Appellant  could  not  relocate
    because he was a high profile public figure was not properly  reasoned.
    The refusal letter had set out a number of points which had argued that
    it was reasonable for the Appellant  to  relocate  to  Islamabad.   The
    Appellant's fear was only in one part of Pakistan and that was Karachi.
    By contrast Pakistan had a landmass of almost 800,000 square kilometres
    and a population of over 187 million people.

13.  The Judge's findings on how well known  the  Appellant  was  were  also
    insufficiently  reasoned.  The  last  match  the  Appellant  played  in
    Pakistan was on 5th April 2009  eighteen  months  before  his  problems
    began.  There were articles from Pakistan about the Appellant in  2003,
    2005, 2006 but they did not refer to the Appellant's faith.  There  was
    only limited and sporadic coverage of the Appellant.  Islamabad  itself
    had a population of 1.7 million people and it was considered reasonable
    the Appellant could relocate there.  He had  skills  he  could  utilise
    upon return.

14.  In response Counsel for the Appellant relied  on  the  Rule  24  reply.
    The case of Malaba [2006] EWCA Civ 820 relied upon by the Respondent in
    arguing  that  there  was  an  insufficiency  of   reasons   could   be
    distinguished from the instant case.  In Malaba the Judge had  not  had
    the advantage of seeing the Appellant give evidence which was  why  the
    Judge had to address specifically  the  discrepancies  in  the  refusal
    letter. There was nothing in the background information  cited  by  the
    Respondent at paragraphs 36 to 44 to justify the assertion  that  there
    was a sufficiency  of  protection.   Whilst  there  might  not  be  any
    specific country guidance on the risk to Shias per se, there was a risk
    to this particular Appellant. Internal  flight  was  not  possible  and
    there was evidence before the Tribunal of  the  Appellant's  cricketing
    career.  He had played for Pakistan against England, it was not true to
    say he was not an international cricketer.

15.  In response the Respondent argued that  the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    subject to further media attention in Pakistan.  The articles which  he
    had produced were from the period 1992 to 1996.

16.  At this point in the case I indicated to  the  parties  that  the  core
    issues in this case were the sufficiency or otherwise of protection  in
    Pakistan, the possibility of internal relocation and whether the  Judge
    had correctly addressed them.  I referred the parties to the case of AW
    [2011] UKUT 31.  In AW it was stated that the test set out  in  Horvath
    [2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal with the ability  of  a  state  to
    afford protection to the generality of its  citizens.   Notwithstanding
    systemic sufficiency of state protection a claimant may  still  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution if authorities know or ought  to  know
    of circumstances particular to his/her case giving rise  to  the  fear,
    but are unlikely to provide the additional  protection  the  particular
    circumstances  reasonably   require.    In   considering   whether   an
    Appellant's particular circumstances give rise to a need for additional
    protection, particular account must be taken of  past  persecution  (if
    any) so as to ensure the question  posed  is  whether  there  are  good
    reasons to consider that such persecution (and past lack of  sufficient
    protection) will not be repeated.

17.  For the Respondent it was argued that one still  had  to  look  at  the
    individual  circumstances,  in  particular  whether  an  applicant  had
    already been subject to harm.  The Appellant in  this  case  had  never
    been subject to harm in Pakistan. At question  93  of  the  substantive
    asylum interview the Appellant had denied he had ever  been  physically
    harmed in Pakistan, adding that he  had  never  been  in  trouble  with
    either the police or the government in that country.   By  contrast  in
    the case of AW also a case involving Pakistan the police had failed  to
    provide the required level of protection.  When the Appellant  in  this
    case had been asked in interview if he had  told  the  police  who  was
    responsible he said for the threats he did not.   Any  lack  of  action
    from the police was not as a result of an unwillingness to  investigate
    the matter but rather the lack of information given to  the  police  by
    the Appellant on his own account.  The background  information  in  the
    refusal  letter  demonstrated  sufficiency  of   protection   and   the
    willingness to operate the system.  There was no evidence of  religious
    extremism amongst senior police officers and  there  was  a  complaints
    procedure if the police did not fulfil their duties.

18.  In conclusion Counsel referred to paragraph 7 of his skeleton  argument
    citing again the refusal letter that the police had been unable to stem
    the tide of targeting killings of Shias.  The Appellant was a member of
    a minority Shia community.  He had received  threats  in  the  form  of
    letters and telephone calls.  The police had  done  nothing  about  the
    Appellant's complaints.  He had attempted to move but had to return and
    his home was targeted and shot at.  The  Appellant's  evidence  of  the
    inefficiency of the state apparatus to protect him was in line with the
    evidence quoted by the Respondent of the inability  of  the  police  to
    protect minority communities.

The Error of Law Stage

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I indicated  that  I  found  there
    was a material error of law in the Judge's determination such  that  it
    fell to be set aside and the matter reheard.  The Judge's  findings  of
    fact of the past persecution which the  Appellant  complained  of  were
    preserved but the issues to be dealt with  were  whether  the  Pakistan
    authorities could offer a sufficiency of protection  to  the  Appellant
    and/or whether he could internally relocate.

20.  The Appellant's fear was of non-state actors and therefore  he  had  to
    demonstrate an insufficiency of protection.  The Judge  had  failed  to
    engage with the lengthy submissions  made  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    refusal letter on  this  point.   His  treatment  of  insufficiency  of
    protection and  internal  relocation  was  inadequate  as  it  was  not
    possible to see from the very brief contents of paragraphs 68 and 69 of
    the determination the basis  on  which  the  Respondent  had  lost  the
    appeal.  That the Appellant had suffered persecution in  the  past  was
    not of itself enough to say that there  was  an  insufficiency  without
    some further explanation.  If the Judge was basing his argument on  his
    acceptance of the credibility of the Appellant's account he  needed  to
    make it clear why that meant there was a future risk  but  he  had  not
    done so.  Insufficient reasoning in this case amounted  to  a  material
    error of law.

21.  That being the case  I  asked  the  representatives  whether  in  those
    circumstances it was  necessary  to  hear  further  oral  testimony  or
    whether on the basis that the Judge had made findings which I preserved
    submissions only were sufficient.  Neither side sought  to  demur  from
    that position and were content for me to  proceed  there  and  then  on
    submissions.  I did not consider it necessary to remit the matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal in view of the fact that the factual  matrix
    of the case had been found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  I  had
    preserved.

The Rehearing

22.  In concluding remarks the  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  submissions
    made at the error of law stage and reiterated that  the  Appellant  had
    not been the subject of physical harm.  He had gone to the police.   It
    was accepted that he was an international cricketer but  there  was  no
    recent evidence of him having a high profile, the most recent  evidence
    being 2006 which was as far as the articles went.

23.  In closing for the Appellant Counsel relied on the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  There was  further  background  material  on  the
    plight of the Shia community in Pakistan in the form  of  a  report  on
    "Shia Genocide a Crisis in Pakistan" commissioned by Lord Avebury Vice-
    chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Human Rights  Group.   The  report
    had stated that in an attempt to undermine and destabilise any sense of
    security for Pakistan's Shia community a systematic spate  of  killings
    targeting well-respected Shia professionals had been carried  out.   LJ
    was regarded as one of the most active Sunni sectarian groups operating
    in Pakistan and was held responsible for scores of  brutal  attacks  on
    Shia targets.  Despite being  banned  by  the  Pakistan  Government  in
    August 2001 and having their leader killed by the police  in  May  2002
    the group's activities had dramatically increased in recent years.  The
    present chief of the organisation had been  in  and  out  of  Pakistani
    jails.  State  institutions  had  acted  with  a  concerning  level  of
    inefficiency, even apathy towards LJ.   Judicial  reform  was  urgently
    required in Pakistan but there was intimidation of Judges, lawyers  and
    witnesses involved in cases against militant leaders.  There  had  been
    accusations of active collusion and support for those who  are  causing
    harm to  Shias  on  the  part  of  the  Pakistan  Government.  Although
    supposedly banned, LJ enjoyed free space throughout Pakistan.   Support
    for this sectarian group did not stem from the civilian government  and
    its   representatives   but   from   Pakistan's    powerful    security
    establishment.

24.  The Appellant had been targeted before and given the nature  of  LJ  he
    had a fear of persecution or death.   The  state  had  been  unable  to
    protect the Appellant in the past which enabled the Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider future persecution might arise.  The Appellant's appeal should
    be allowed.

Findings

25.  The Appellant's claim in this case is that he fears  non-state  actors.
    He does not indicate that he fears the Pakistan Government itself.  The
    Appellant has been subject to threats and his house was attacked  while
    he himself was absent.  He has not suffered any physical harm.  He does
    not consider that the authorities would  offer  him  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in the future and he denies that he can internally  relocate
    within Pakistan for example to Islamabad the capital because  he  would
    be found wherever he went due to his high profile status  as  a  former
    international cricketer.

26.  As the case of AW makes clear the  question  of  sufficiency  of  state
    protection which arises when the fear is  of  non-state  actors  breaks
    down into two parts.  The first is whether there is in fact a  systemic
    sufficiency of state protection at all.  If there is then the  Tribunal
    must go on to consider in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's  particular
    circumstances whether he is unlikely  to  be  afforded  the  additional
    protection his particular circumstances require.

27.  In AW decided in 2011 the Upper Tribunal held that  it  was  proper  to
    have regard to guidance given  in  a  2002  country  guidance  case  AH
    (sufficiency of protection - Sunni extremists)  Pakistan  [2002]  UKIAT
    05862 and as commented on in Hussain [2005] CSIH 45.   In  those  cases
    the starting point was that it had been held by the Tribunal that there
    was a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan.  AW appears not to  depart
    from that, what AW is concerned about is the effect on  sufficiency  of
    protection cases of the ratio in Bagdanavicius, in particular the Court
    of Appeal decision in that case at [2005] EWCA Civ  1605.   Sufficiency
    of state protection meant a willingness and ability on the part of  the
    receiving state to provide through its legal system a reasonable  level
    of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum has a
    well-founded fear.  The effectiveness of the system provided was to  be
    judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent  the
    form of persecution of which there is a risk, not just punishment of it
    after the event.   Notwithstanding  a  systemic  sufficiency  of  state
    protection in the receiving state an Appellant may  still  be  able  to
    establish an Article 3 claim if he can show that the authorities  there
    know or ought to know of particular circumstances likely to expose  him
    to a risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.

28.  In this case the Appellant makes two  arguments.   The  first  is  that
    there is in fact no systemic sufficiency of protection and he prays  in
    aid an extract from the Respondent's own refusal letter  together  with
    the All-Party Parliamentary Committee report on the  plight  of  Shias.
    The second part of the Appellant's argument is that even  if  there  is
    otherwise a systemic sufficiency of protection, given  the  Appellant's
    particular  circumstances,  namely  his  high  profile  as   a   former
    international cricketer and someone who has worked for  the  rights  of
    Shias, he would be targeted in such a way that the authorities would be
    unable to afford him the necessary level of protection (over and  above
    that which would be otherwise available to any other Pakistan citizen).
    In either case he cannot relocate.

29.  The Respondent relies on  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report
    extracts of which were cited in the refusal letter.  It is important to
    note that paragraph 38  of  the  refusal  letter  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant begins with the  sentence  "Pakistani  police  are  regularly
    charged with quelling sectarian violence  and  investigating  cases  of
    religious intolerance".  The paragraph goes on to say that whilst there
    had  been  attacks  against  Shias  during  the   month   of   Moharram
    particularly  in  Shia  processions  marking  Ashura,   Ashura   passed
    peacefully in most of the country on account of the  security  measures
    put in  place  by  Pakistan's  law  enforcement  authorities.   Several
    suspected militants were  arrested  in  Karachi  and  security  cameras
    helped prevent terrorist activity in Lahore.  There  were  improvements
    in police professionalism during the year.  The Respondent's  view  was
    that Pakistan had a willing and organised security  service  which  was
    deployed to protect the citizens  of  Pakistan.   In  relation  to  the
    complaint of inaction by the police the Respondent cited evidence  from
    the Country of Origin Information Reports that  there  were  complaints
    procedures and redress in civil courts where most  cases  were  settled
    out of court. As against that the Appellant  argues  that  the  picture
    painted by the All-Party Parliamentary Group  suggests  that  there  is
    widespread persecution of Shias.

30.  As has been commented  upon  there  is  no  specific  country  guidance
    authority on the position of Shias or the risk which they face as such.
     The evidence such as it is from  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report is that where the police make a specific effort  persecution  of
    Shias by fundamentalist Sunni groups can be prevented.  Indeed the All-
    Party Parliamentary Group appears to suggest that organisations such as
    LJ are not in fact sponsored by the civilian government of Pakistan but
    appear to have links with rogue elements of  the  security  forces.   A
    past leader of LJ has been killed by  the  security  forces  and  other
    members have been jailed. This evidence does not in my view demonstrate
    that the Pakistan authorities are complicit  with  the  persecution  of
    Shias such that there is a risk per se.  Rather it shows that Shias can
    be protected by the police force in Pakistan and there is  therefore  a
    systemic sufficiency of protection.

31.  As AW makes clear that of course is not  the  end  of  the  case.   The
    burden is on the Appellant to the lower standard to show that there  is
    nevertheless a real risk of harm  to  him  because  of  his  particular
    circumstances and the fact that he would need protection over and above
    that available to ordinary citizens.  He bases this on his  past  as  a
    cricketer, his activities for the Shia community and the  fact  of  the
    past persecution.

32.   The  Appellant  was  accepted  by  the  Judge  as   having   been   an
    international cricketer in the past.  It is fair to point  out  however
    as the Respondent does that the Appellant's cricketing days were twenty
    years ago.  It is not at all clear why the Appellant  should  be  at  a
    heightened state of risk now wherever he might move  in  Pakistan.   Of
    course where the Appellant was being targeted by an extremist group  he
    would  need  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  Pakistan
    authorities but given the lack of information  which  he  gave  to  the
    authorities (as evidenced in his interview) it is difficult to see what
    more the authorities could have done to  specifically  help  him.   The
    Appellant was not physically harmed but was the subject of threats made
    in his local area.  Those  threats  were  not  acted  on  in  terms  of
    physical attacks or  attempts  on  the  Appellant's  life.   Given  the
    violent nature of LJ as stated in the All-Party  Group  and  given  the
    length of time over which the Appellant complains he  received  threats
    from that organisation it is hard to avoid the conclusion that  LJ  did
    not harm the Appellant physically because they did not intend to do so.
     They had ample opportunity to do that if they wanted to.   If  as  the
    Appellant says he was a well-known figure  because  of  his  cricketing
    career, he could have been easily found by them and yet  they  did  not
    harm him.

33.  In those circumstances I do not consider that the  Appellant  had  such
    particular  circumstances  that  he  did  require  an  extra  level  of
    protection of the sort envisaged in Bagdanavicius. The All-Party  Group
    makes it clear that LJ are prone to acts of violence against members of
    the Shia faith but they  have  not  perpetrated  violence  against  the
    Appellant's person.  As AW makes clear it is important to consider  the
    nature of the past persecution which an  Appellant  has  suffered  when
    assessing future risk in a sufficiency of state  protection  case.   In
    the instant case before me the level of  persecution  suffered  by  the
    Appellant and accepted  by  the  Judge  was  not  such  as  to  require
    additional measures peculiar to the Appellant's circumstances.

34.   Furthermore  the  Appellant's  account  referred  to  difficulties  in
    Karachi and the fact that he could not remain  in  Lahore  because  his
    involvement with a meeting had been made public.  However the localised
    nature of these threats would not necessarily mean they  were  relevant
    in  the  capital  city  Islamabad  where  the  Appellant  could  access
    protection from state officials.  It is  important  to  note  that  the
    Appellant's case was that he came from a family of  Shias,  his  father
    having been a prominent Shia in Pakistan.  And yet when  the  Appellant
    was asked at question 135 in  his  interview  whether  his  sister  and
    brother who still lived in Pakistan had been attacked by LJ he  replied
    no (question 135).  That evidence underlines the fact that there is not
    a risk in Pakistan to Shias per se, it also shows that members  of  the
    Appellant's family have not suffered as a  result  of  the  Appellant's
    activities.  I would agree with the comments made in the refusal letter
    that there is no reason why the Appellant could not internally relocate
    to Islamabad.  It is significant to note that at page 15  of  the  All-
    Party Parliamentary Group they refer to a worrying surge of violence in
    Karachi, Lahore and Quetta but not Islamabad.

35.  The Appellant could internally relocate to  Islamabad  if  he  did  not
    wish to live in Karachi or Lahore.  There is  a  sufficiency  of  state
    protection and there are no particular circumstances pertaining to this
    Appellant which would require particular methods of protection over and
    above those which other Pakistani citizens would expect to receive. The
    second Appellant is dependent upon the Appellant's appeal.  As  I  have
    found that there is a sufficiency of state protection for the Appellant
    and that he could internally relocate I  also  find  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection for the second Appellant  and  that  she  too
    could internally  relocate.   It  follows  from  my  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal that the second Appellant's appeal must also fail. I
    therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I have remade the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


                                       Signed this 27th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal  has  been  dismissed  I  make  no  fee
award.


                                       Signed this 27th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
