
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01808/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     E M
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. W. Bhebhe of Freeman Harris Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  promulgated  on  18  June  2015  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    asylum was dismissed.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
         "I am further satisfied that there is an arguable error of  law  in
         the decision in that following a finding that the Appellant may  be
         stopped and questioned at the airport the Judge  goes  on  to  find
         that she will not be subjected to serious ill-treatment.  This does
         not  take  account  of  the  two-stage  process  identified  in  HS
         (Zimbabwe) CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 and TM (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA  Civ
         916.  In addition if she stopped and questioned at the airport  the
         Judge failed to identify whether she would fall in a risk category.
          I am satisfied that there  are  arguable  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision."

 3. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Bhebhe relied on the grounds and the skeleton argument.

 5. Ms Isherwood relied on the Rule 24 response.  She submitted that  there
    was no material error of law in the decision.  The Appellant had made a
    number of applications to remain and her last report  of  call  was  an
    asylum application.  I was referred to paragraph [31] which referred to
    the  previous  decision.   In  paragraph  [33]  the   judge   correctly
    identified that it was  necessary  for  him  to  consider  whether  the
    situation was different today.

 6. The judge had considered the cases of HS (Zimbabwe)  (paragraph  [37]),
    EM and others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)  (paragraph
    [40]), and CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
    00059 (IAC) (paragraph [18]).  She referred to  paragraph  [1]  of  the
    headnote to HS (Zimbabwe).  The Appellant had not been found  credible.
    She referred to paragraph [3] of  the  headnote.   As  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim had not been accepted, she would be returning as a  failed
    asylum seeker and would not be of any interest to the authorities.

 7. I was referred to paragraph [38] of the decision.  The Appellant  would
    not proceed to the next stage as set out in HS  (Zimbabwe)  beyond  the
    initial screening.  The judge's findings in paragraph [39] were open to
    him based on the case law before him.  I was referred to paragraph  [7]
    of the skeleton argument.  Nowhere in caselaw did it state that  length
    of residency in the United  Kingdom  put  an  Appellant  at  risk.   In
    relation to paragraph [8] of the skeleton argument, the Appellant had a
    low level profile.  In relation to paragraph [10] and the  case  of  HS
    (Zimbabwe), the Appellant did not fall within the category who would be
    subject to the second stage interrogation.  She would not have to lie.

 8. In conclusion she submitted that it was  a  sustainable  decision  with
    reasoned findings and the grounds were a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge.

 9. In response the Appellant's representative referred to  paragraph  [38]
    of the decision and the risk of  being  subjected  to  screening.    He
    submitted that it was an intelligence led investigation  and  therefore
    the authorities would know who was arriving on the plane.  He submitted
    that the Appellant's name could be found on the  internet  today  as  a
    critic of the regime.  She was anti-Zanu PF.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge needed to assess what would happen at the airport.  It was agreed
    that activities which were political and adverse to  the  regime  would
    raise the alert at a screening interview.  The Appellant would then  be
    taken to the more intensive second stage  interrogation.  He  submitted
    that the CIO would not have read her asylum decision  and  the  finding
    that the article written by the Appellant was an attempt to bolster her
    asylum claim.   All  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  would  see  was  the
    Appellant's name on the internet associated with anti-regime views.  It
    was therefore likely that she would  be  taken  for  the  second  stage
    interrogation which involved the risk of  serious  mistreatment  and  a
    breach of Article 3.

10. He submitted that the situation had not changed since  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe.  The reaction of  the  security  agents
    and operatives at the airport was  unknown  and  was  arbitrary.   They
    would be alert to anyone who had condemned or  criticised  the  regime.
    The judge's approach was materially flawed and the decision contained a
    material error of law.  The Appellant's risk of persecution was  highly
    likely.

Error of law

11. I have carefully considered the grounds and the decision, together with
    the caselaw referred to above.

12. The judge sets out his approach in paragraph [37].
         "37. As well as assessing any risk to  the  Appellant  in  Zimbabwe
         generally, I  must  also  consider  what  would  happen  at  Harare
         airport.  I must consider whether or not on arrival  the  Appellant
         would be identified as someone who was of interest to  the  regime.
         If she were to be so identified and questioned about her  political
         activities in the United Kingdom, I must consider  whether  or  not
         those questioning her would  accept  a  truthful  answer  from  the
         Appellant along the lines that she engaged  in  the  activities  to
         bolster her asylum claim and whether they would therefore  let  her
         go on her way or, alternatively, whether she would face a real risk
         of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment.   In  considering  these
         matters,  I  have  regard  to  the  country  guidance  case  of  HS
         (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094."

13. At paragraphs [38] and [39] he sets out his conclusions as a result  of
    his consideration of the caselaw:
         "38. Although far  from  inevitable,  there  is  a  risk  that  the
         Appellant would be subjected to a  screening  interview  at  Harare
         airport and that any internet  search  may  reveal  her  sur  place
         activities and the  article  that  she  wrote  for  the  Zimbabwean
         newspaper.  However, I also find that any checks at Harare  airport
         are  likely  to  be  intelligence   led.    An   intelligence   led
         organisation, having carefully considered the evidence, would  come
         to the conclusion that, notwithstanding her sur place activities in
         2013, the Appellant is no more than a low level activist  who  does
         not appear to be particularly active  at  the  present  time.   She
         wrote the newspaper article almost two  years  ago.   She  has  not
         provided evidence of any further  articles  that  she  has  written
         since.  It has been nearly two years since the ACTSA  News  booklet
         was published  with  the  Appellant's  photograph  in  it  and  the
         photographs of the Appellant  attending  demonstrations  also  date
         back to 2013.  I therefore find that the Appellant is  unlikely  to
         be perceived as a person  with  anything  other  than  a  low-level
         profile at the time.
         39.  In addition, if the  intelligence  agencies  have  infiltrated
         anti-regime organisations in the UK as suggested by the  Appellant,
         they will know very well who the serious activists are and  equally
         that this Appellant is a low level MDC  member  who  engaged  in  a
         burst of activity in 2013 in order to bolster her asylum  claim  in
         the UK.  I therefore find that in the event that she is stopped and
         questioned at the airport, she  is  unlikely  to  be  subjected  to
         serious ill-treatment and will be allowed  to  carry  on  with  her
         journey unharmed.  I therefore find  that  the  Appellant  has  not
         shown to the low standard that she would be at real risk at  Harare
         airport."

14. Paragraph 3 of the headnote to HS (Zimbabwe) states:
         "The process of screening returning passengers is  an  intelligence
         led process and the CIO will generally  have  identified  from  the
         passenger manifest in advance, based upon such intelligence,  those
         passengers in whom there is any possible  interest.   The  fact  of
         having made an asylum claim abroad is not something that in  itself
         will give rise to adverse interest on return."

15. Paragraph 11 of TM (Zimbabwe) states:
         "Although the Central Intelligence Organisation ("CIO")  had  taken
         over responsibility for monitoring returnees at Harare airport, the
         AIT found that the conclusion in HS remained valid;  the  CIO  were
         only concerned to detect those who  were  adverse  to  the  regime,
         principally those perceived to be politically active  in  the  MDC,
         although the AIT in HS accepted that critics of  the  regime  would
         also be of interest."

16. I have considered paragraph [34] of HS which sets out the  analysis  of
    the tribunal in AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2006]
    UKAIT  00061  regarding  the  procedure  on  return  to  the   airport.
    Paragraph 249 of AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe states:
         "The purpose of the initial interview is to establish  whether  the
         deportee is of any interest to the CIO or  the  security  services.
         The deportee will be of interest if questioning  reveals  that  the
         deportee  has  a  political  profile  considered  adverse  to   the
         Zimbabwean regime."  Paragraph 250  of  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary
         returnees) Zimbabwe provides that an individual will be taken  away
         for interrogation "if such a political or relevant military profile
         is suspected".

17. It is apparent that that there need only be a suspicion of a  political
    profile in order for an individual to be  taken  away  for  the  second
    stage  interrogation.   The  headnote  to  HS  (Zimbabwe)   refers   to
    passengers in whom there is "any  possible  interest".   TM  (Zimbabwe)
    refers to those "perceived"  to  be  politically  active,  as  well  as
    critics of the regime.  AA (Risk for  involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe
    refers to those how are "suspected" of having a political profile.

18. The judge finds in paragraph  [38]  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the
    Appellant would be subjected to a screening interview.  He  finds  that
    an internet search may reveal her activities and the article  that  she
    wrote.  However he then finds that "on a careful consideration  of  the
    evidence", the CIO would come to the conclusion that she  was  no  more
    than a low level activist.

19. The two-stage process set out in HS (Zimbabwe), following AA (Risk  for
    involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe,  does  not  refer  to  any  "careful
    consideration" of the evidence but rather a suspicion  of  a  political
    profile.

20. The judge does not refer to this two-stage  process  in  the  decision.
    He refers only to the checks at the airport which he finds would reveal
    her sur place activities and the article.   Following  the  caselaw,  I
    find that he was required to consider whether, on  discovery  of  these
    sur place activities and the article, there was a reasonable likelihood
    that the Appellant would be subject to the second stage  interrogation.
    In order for this to be the case, all that the Appellant needs to  show
    is that there is a suspicion of a political profile.

21. In paragraph [39], there is no reference to the two-stage process,  but
    only to being stopped and questioned at the airport.  I therefore  find
    that the decision involved the making of an error of law insofar as the
    judge failed to take account of the two stage process  set  out  in  HS
    (Zimbabwe) and AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe.

Remaking

22. The judge finds in paragraph  [38]  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the
    Appellant would be subjected to a screening interview.  He  finds  that
    an  internet  search  may  reveal  her  activities  and  the   article.
    Paragraph 250 of AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe  provides
    that an individual will be taken away  for  interrogation  "if  such  a
    political or relevant military profile  is  suspected".   I  find  that
    there is a reasonable likelihood that the Appellant will be taken  away
    for interrogation following the discovery of the article  and  her  sur
    place activities.  I find that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that
    this information would be enough to cause the CIO to suspect  that  she
    has a political profile.

23. Following  HS  (Zimbabwe)  and  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary  returnees)
    Zimbabwe, the second stage of interrogation "carries  with  it  a  real
    risk of serious mistreatment  sufficient  to  constitute  a  breach  of
    article 3."  I therefore find that by being taken for the second  stage
    of interrogation, there is a real  risk  that  the  Appellant  will  be
    seriously mistreated contrary to Article 3.

24. Paragraph 251 of AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe goes on:
         "If the reason for suspicion is that the deportee has  a  political
         profile considered to be adverse to the Zimbabwean regime  that  is
         likely to be sufficient to give rise to a real risk of  persecutory
         ill-treatment for a  reason  that  is  recognised  by  the  Refugee
         Convention."

25. It is therefore necessary to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  has  a
    political profile considered to be adverse to  the  Zimbabwean  regime.
    The judge based his conclusions on the fact that the authorities  would
    accept would accept a "truthful answer from  the  Appellant  along  the
    lines that she engaged in these activities to bolster her asylum claim"
    [37].  Mr. Bhebhe submitted that there  was  no  reasonable  likelihood
    that the CIO will have read the decision where it was  found  that  her
    activities were undertaken to bolster her asylum  claim.   Neither  are
    there any grounds for believing that the authorities would accept  this
    explanation.

26. I was referred to the case of RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  Paragraphs
    [71] and [72] state:
         "71. As a general proposition, the denial of refugee protection  on
         the basis that the person  who  is  liable  to  be  the  victim  of
         persecution can avoid it by engaging in mendacity is one that  this
         court should  find  deeply  unattractive,  if  not  indeed  totally
         offensive. Even more unattractive and offensive is  the  suggestion
         that a person who would  otherwise  suffer  persecution  should  be
         required to take steps to evade it by fabricating a loyalty,  which
         he or she did not hold, to a brutal and despotic regime.
         72.  As a matter  of  fundamental  principle,  refusal  of  refugee
         status should not be countenanced where the  basis  on  which  that
         otherwise undeniable status is not accorded is a  requirement  that
         the person who claims it should engage in  dissimulation.  This  is
         especially so in the case of a  pernicious  and  openly  oppressive
         regime such  as  exists  in  Zimbabwe.  But  it  is  also  entirely
         objectionable  on  purely  practical  grounds.   The   intellectual
         exercise (if it can be so described) of  assessing  whether  (i)  a
         person would - and could reasonably be expected to - lie; and  (ii)
         whether that dissembling could be expected to succeed, is not  only
         artificial, it is entirely unreal. To attempt to predict whether an
         individual  on  any  given  day,  could   convince   a   group   of
         undisciplined and unpredictable militia of the fervour  of  his  or
         her support for Zanu-PF is an impossible exercise."

27. The judge found that the Appellant had engaged in political activity in
    the  United  Kingdom,  by  joining  the  MDC  and  the  Zimbabwe  Vigil
    Coalition.  Although he found that  this  was  to  bolster  her  asylum
    claim, he accepted at [36] that "opportunistic activities sur place  is
    not an automatic bar to asylum".  He found that it  was  unlikely  that
    she would be perceived as a person "with  anything  other  than  a  low
    level profile at the present time" [36].  In paragraph [37]  he  states
    that they will know "that this Appellant is a low  level  MDC  member".
    He has found that she has a profile, albeit low level.

28. I find that, given that there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant will be taken for the second stage  of  interrogation,  given
    that the reason for the suspicion will be that  she  "has  a  political
    profile considered to be adverse to the Zimbabwean regime"  given  that
    she is a member of the MDC, following paragraph 251  of  AA  (Risk  for
    involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe I  find  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that she will face a real risk of persecutory  ill-treatment
    for a Convention reason.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and I set it aside.

I remake the decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds.


Signed   Date 26 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
