
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                              Mr Wakeel Alizada
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gibson-Lee of Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrews promulgated on 4 June 2015 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 5 January 2015  refusing  to
    grant further leave to remain and to remove him from the UK.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He arrived  in  the  UK  in
    September 2009 and claimed asylum.  His  application  was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  3
    February 2010.  At that time the Appellant's age was disputed.  He gave
    his date of birth as 1 January 1994.   The  RFRL  of  3  February  2010
    refers to  an  age  assessment  conducted  by  Croydon  Council  Social
    Services in which the Appellant was assessed to be  18  years  old  and
    accorded a date of birth of 1 January 1991.  This  date  of  birth  and
    concomitant age is used for the purposes of  the  RFRL  of  3  February
    2010.  Notwithstanding the assessment referred to in the RFRL, there is
    on file a copy of an age assessment conducted by Croydon Council on  12
    January 2010 which assessed the  Appellant  to  have  been  born  on  1
    January 1992.

3.    The  Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  to  remove  him   in
    consequence of the refusal of asylum.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller in a decision promulgated  on  19  May
    2010.  The basis of the Appellant's claim in summary was that following
    the death of his parents he had inherited  land  but  had  got  into  a
    dispute whilst still a child with the tenants who  stopped  paying  him
    rent.  In consequence he says that he was held for fifteen days by some
    farmers, who it is said were relatives of an influential  commander  so
    he could not avail himself of police protection.  The Appellant claimed
    that during his detention by the farmers he  was  mistreated  by  being
    beaten with sticks: see further in this  regard  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision of Judge Andrews which quotes  paragraphs  11  to  15  of  the
    decision of Judge Miller.

4.   Judge Miller "did not find the Appellant's account to be credible  even
    allowing for the comparatively  low  standard  of  proof  and  did  not
    believe  the  Appellant  has  left   Afghanistan   because   he   fears
    persecution" for the reasons then set out over the next  two  pages  of
    his decision: see Judge Miller's decision at paragraph 33.

5.   In respect of the Appellant's age Judge Miller said, also at  paragraph
    33, immediately preceding his stated conclusion on credibility:

         "Whatever the actual age of the Appellant I found that  he  had  no
         difficulty in answering the questions put to him at the hearing and
         there  was  no  evidence  of  his  being  under  any  stress.    In
         considering his claim however I have taken account of the fact that
         whatever his true age he is still comparatively young."

6.   Judge Miller also referred to the Appellant's age at paragraphs 35  and
    36 of the determination.  At paragraph 36 he concluded in these terms:

         "Having regard to all that I have stated above, and the fact that I
         was unable to accept most of the central parts of  the  Appellant's
         story, I do not believe he has told the truth  concerning  his  age
         and I find that the Appellant is 18 years old on all  the  evidence
         before me."

7.   I pause to note  that,  in  my  judgment,  it  is  apparent  from  that
    paragraph that Judge Miller's conclusion on age  was  informed  by  his
    assessment of the Appellant's overall credibility.  It was not the case
    that the dispute on age informed the credibility assessment itself.

8.   Be that as it may, on 17 January 2011  it  appears  Croydon  reassessed
    the Appellant's age on the basis of documents provided by the Appellant
    and concluded that he was born on  15  May  1994.   The  Appellant  was
    consequently granted  discretionary  leave  by  the  Respondent  as  an
    unaccompanied minor until 15 November 2011.

9.   On 8 November 2011 the Appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
    supported  by  a  personal  statement  dated  1  November  2011.    The
    application was refused for reasons set out in an RFRL dated 5  January
    2015, and a decision to remove the Appellant taken in consequence.  The
    Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrews
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  her
    decision.

10.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  introduced  further
    elements to his  asylum  claim  not  mentioned  previously,  which  are
    summarised at paragraphs 12 and 13 of the decision  of  Judge  Andrews.
    For present purposes it is to  be  noted  in  particular  that  it  was
    claimed that the Appellant  had  been  sexually  assaulted  during  the
    period he was held by farmers - as is emphasised by the  Appellant  and
    his representatives in the  grounds  of  challenge  to  this  Tribunal.
    Judge Andrews did not accept the credibility of the Appellant's account
    and otherwise found that the Appellant had not  established  his  claim
    for  international  surrogate  protection  and  dismissed  his   appeal
    accordingly.

11.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 23 June  2015  but  subsequently
    granted on renewed application by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  10
    August 2015.  Permission to appeal was essentially granted on the basis
    that:

         "It is arguable that the judge, in reaching  her  findings  on  the
         appellant's  credibility  failed  to  adequately  factor   in   the
         appellant's accepted age of 16 at the date  of  his  first  hearing
         rather than aged 18 as considered to be at that time and the effect
         this may have had on the findings of the judge at that time."

12.  In this context the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  as  adverted  to
    above, also took particular issue  with  findings  in  respect  of  the
    claimed sexual abuse:

         "The appellant's case in 2015 was different as he chose as an adult
         to reveal the sexual abuse he had suffered  prior  to  arriving  in
         2009.  The appellant stated that he was embarrassed to  reveal  the
         same before.  Medical expert evidence was provided  along  with  an
         expert report from the country expert which confirmed what he said.
          J[udge] Andrews found all the new evidence was a mere  attempt  to
         bolster his claim thereby rejecting the appellant's assertion  that
         he was too embarrassed  to  admit  what  happened  before.   It  is
         plausible and in fact highly likely that a 16 year old boy would be
         ashamed to admit sexual abuse."

13.  I pause to note that permission to  appeal  was  expressly  refused  in
    respect of the challenge based on Article 8 of the ECHR on  the  ground
    that the Appellant's representative before the First-tier Tribunal  had
    withdrawn any reliance upon Article 8.



Consideration

14.  I turn then to a  consideration  of  Judge  Andrews'  approach  to  the
    issues that are at  the  core  of  the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the
    conclusion in his appeal.

15.  It is apparent from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Judge directed herself to the case of Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR
    -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka*  [2002]  UKIAT  00702:   see
    paragraph 26 of Judge Andrews' decision.  The decision in the  case  of
    Devaseelan is  a  matter  of  record  and  it  is  also  reproduced  in
    significant part in the Appellant's grounds of appeal in support of the
    application for permission to appeal and accordingly it is  unnecessary
    for me to set out the guidelines here.

16.  The basis of the Appellant's submissions in respect of  the  Devaseelan
    guidelines and the contended approach that Judge Andrews was invited to
    take in respect of the  decision  of  Judge  Miller  is  summarised  at
    paragraph 38 of the decision of Judge Andrews in the following terms:

         "Following  Devaseelan   guideline   (1),   Judge   Miller's   2010
         determination is my starting point, as the authoritative assessment
         of the Appellant's status at the time that determination was  made.
         [Counsel for the Appellant] invited me to consider myself not bound
         by Judge Miller's 2010 determination for three reasons: (i) because
         the appellant was very young in 2010, (ii) because proof of torture
         was not before Judge Miller in 2010, and (iii) because of the night
         letters."

17.  The 'night letters' is  a  reference  to  various  documents  that  the
    Appellant had produced in support of his second appeal  which  had  not
    been before Judge Miller and which are addressed by Judge Andrews under
    the heading "Taliban announcements" from paragraph 32.

18.  At paragraph 38 the Judge went on to address each of the  three  points
    raised by the Appellant's advocate - and rejected each of them in turn.
     What is stated at paragraph 38 in  respect  of  each  of  these  three
    points is essentially a summary of the analysis  that  appears  in  the
    preceding paragraphs, in particular from paragraph 29.

19.  As regards the Appellant's age, the Judge gave  consideration  to  this
    at paragraph 29 in the following terms:

         "The 2015 Reasons for Refusal Letter says that,  in  January  2011,
         the London Borough of Croydon reviewed  their  age  assessment  and
         concluded that the appellant's date of birth was 15 May  1994.   At
         the hearing, [the Presenting Officer] did not seriously argue  that
         the appellant was older than this.  I  accordingly  find  that  the
         Appellant was born on 15  May  1994,  and  that  Judge  Miller  was
         mistaken in finding him to be 18 years old in May  2010.   However,
         Judge Miller states at [33]:

             'Whatever the actual age of the Appellant I found that he  had
             no difficulty in answering the questions put  to  him  at  the
             hearing, and there was no evidence  of  his  being  under  any
             stress.  In considering  his  claim,  however,  I  have  taken
             account of the fact that whatever his true  age  he  is  still
             comparatively young.'

         Judge Miller was therefore alive  to  the  disagreement  about  the
         appellant's age, and clearly took account of the appellant's  young
         age in making his determination.  For this reason I do not consider
         that Judge Miller's mistake about the appellant's age should  cause
         me to veer from his 2010 determination, or that it should  diminish
         the weight I attach  to  that  determination  when  making  my  own
         findings.  I take this view particularly in light of paragraph [37]
         of Devaseelan which says: 'it is not the second Adjudicator's  role
         to consider arguments intended to undermine the first Adjudicator's
         determination'."

20.  I interject at this stage to observe that one of the avenues of  remedy
    that Mr Gibson-Lee referred to during the  course  of  his  submissions
    this morning was the possibility that the Appellant might yet  make  an
    out-of-time application to  challenge  the  decision  of  Judge  Miller
    (promulgated in May 2010), and indeed it was  part  of  his  submission
    that consideration might reasonably be given to that in the context  of
    a rehearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  consequent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal now finding an error of law - possibly as 'preliminary  issue'
    discussions on the approach to be taken  to  Judge  Miller's  decision.
    Necessarily that goes some way to seeking to utilise these  proceedings
    as a vehicle to secure time and meaningful opportunity to  challenge  -
    some years after the event - the decision of Judge Miller.  Be that  as
    it may, that was clearly not a submission canvassed or amplified before
    Judge Andrews, and necessarily Judge Andrews cannot be  criticised  for
    not having had any regard to it.

21.  Continuing the quotation from paragraph 29 of Judge Andrews' decision:

         "As the Devaseelan guidelines make clear, a tribunal that  hears  a
         claim closer in time to the events on which it was based  is  in  a
         better position to make general findings  of  fact  and  to  assess
         credibility than a tribunal which, as here, is going over much  the
         same ground some years later.  Taking  all  this  into  account,  I
         attach a great deal of weight to Judge Miller's 2010 determination.
          I particularly highlight his statements at [36], 'I was unable  to
         accept most of the central parts of the Appellant's story'  and  at
         [33], 'I did not find his account to be credible, even allowing for
         the comparatively low standard of proof, and I do  not  believe  he
         has left Afghanistan because he fears persecution'."

22.  In my judgment that was an approach entirely  open  to  Judge  Andrews.
    Judge Andrews was clearly alive to the issues in respect of the dispute
    over the  Appellant's  age  before  Judge  Miller  and  the  change  of
    circumstance in that a post-appeal age assessment  had  reassessed  the
    Appellant's age to be closer to that which he had  all  along  claimed.
    Judge Andrews was clearly alive to  the  approach  required  under  the
    guidelines in Devaseelan and essayed an application of those guidelines
    to the particular facts  and  circumstances  of  this  appeal.   In  my
    judgment Judge Andrews reached an evaluation as to how those guidelines
    should be applied to this appeal that was entirely within the remit  of
    her judgment.

23.  Moreover it is clear that Judge Andrews identified and  recognised  the
    differences that were advanced in the Appellant's account compared with
    the way in which the case had previously been put before the First-tier
    Tribunal: she summarised those differences at paragraph 30  under  sub-
    paragraphs (i) to (iv).  Crucially the Judge then said this:

         "These are significant discrepancies.  In particular, I consider it
         extremely unlikely that [the Appellant] would have failed  to  tell
         Judge Miller that he was told to carry out a  suicide  bombing,  or
         about the above manner of  his  escape  from  detention,  if  these
         things were true.  In  terms  of  the  claimed  sexual  abuse,  the
         appellant told me he was too embarrassed  and  ashamed  to  mention
         this before.  While I recognise that victims of sexual abuse can be
         reluctant to disclose what has happened to them, this appellant has
         been represented by  different  lawyers,  and  previously  appeared
         before a Tribunal.  Taking this into account, I  am  not  persuaded
         that this late disclosure of sexual abuse is because of  shame  and
         embarrassment.  I consider it more likely that all  the  above  new
         claims were made to attempt to bolster a story that had  previously
         been rejected by Judge Miller."

24.  Moreover and in any event the Judge - having emphasised  that  she  had
    considered all  of  the  evidence  'in  the  round'  (for  example  see
    paragraphs 25 and 26), and specifically that "credibility is  a  matter
    for me to decide on the totality of the evidence" (paragraph 33) -  set
    out further analysis in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  by
    reference to supporting documents (see paragraphs 32 and  33),  leading
    her to the adverse conclusion at  paragraph  34,  which  even  then  is
    prefaced with a note of caution  about  the  nature  of  a  credibility
    assessment.

25.  In my judgment Mr Gibson-Lee's argument that Judge Andrews should  have
    disregarded Judge Miller's findings is essentially a disagreement  with
    the  Judge's  evaluation  of  the  approach  to  be  taken  within  the
    Devaseelan guidelines.  It does not, I find, identify an error of  law.
    In all those circumstances I find that the decision of Judge Andrews is
    not in any way flawed for error of  law  but  in  fact  is  a  thorough
    attempt to address all of the issues raised by the Appellant, including
    in particular the approach to be taken to Judge  Miller's  decision  in
    light  of  the  changed  premise  in  respect  of  his  age,  and  also
    specifically in respect of the  likely  or  possible  reluctance  of  a
    victim of sexual  abuse  to  speak  freely  about  such  abuse  in  any
    particular circumstance.

Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands.

27.  The appeal remains dismissed.

28.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
