
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 4 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                                     P A
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed Linga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a Sri  Lankan  citizen,  was  refused  asylum,  and  her
    appeal was subsequently dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton,
    following a hearing in October  2014.   The  judge  reached  a  general
    adverse credibility finding in connection with the appellant's  central
    claim that she had been tortured by state agents whilst in detention in
    a camp in Sri Lanka.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge V A
    Osborne, on 15 December 2014.  The grounds were concerned with the
    judge's approach to a medico-legal report from the Medical Foundation
    Medico-Legal Report Service.

3.   The judge granting permission noted that credibility was entirely
    within the province of the judge but that it was an arguable error of
    law that there had been a failure to place the appropriate value on a
    report of this kind.

4.   The appellant was present at the hearing before me, but it  was  agreed
    that she could wait outside, because she was feeling unwell.

5.   I heard submissions from both representatives.  A letter responding  to
    the judge's decision was also provided.  This was by Dr  Juliet  Cohen,
    the head of the Medical Foundation Medico-Legal Report Service and  was
    dated 13 February 2015.  It was unclear whether  the  letter  had  been
    served in advance of the hearing, but Mr Avery, for the respondent, did
    not object to it being presented.

6.   Ms Jegarajah, for the appellant, concentrated entirely on  the  judge's
    approach to the medico-legal report.   She  referred  to  the  detailed
    sexual torture claim at  interview  (questions  195  to  247);  and  to
    various aspects  of  the  medico-legal  report,  which  diagnosed  post
    traumatic stress disorder and moderate depression, and which considered
    and rejected the idea that the symptoms could have been  fabricated  in
    support of a false allegation.  She also referred to  the  sections  of
    the report dealing with the extent of the appellant's  trauma  and  the
    difficulties that she would face in giving evidence.  It was  submitted
    that the report amounted to  significant  corroborative  evidence,  and
    that there had been a requirement  to  bear  in  mind  the  appellant's
    vulnerability as a witness when assessing credibility.   As  a  result,
    the judge's treatment of the report, which was  rejected  in  only  two
    sentences,  was  inadequate.    The   judge   had   misunderstood   and
    underestimated the expertise of the Medical Foundation, and the  author
    of the report, Dr Henna Bashir, as detailed in Dr Cohen's letter of  13
    February 2015.

7.   Mr Avery, for the respondent, submitted that the judge was entitled  to
    give little weight to the report; that the assessment in the report was
    based solely on the account given by the appellant; that there were  no
    physical scars; and that the rest of the  judge's  decision  gave  good
    reasons for the adverse credibility finding.

Error of Law

8.   As I indicated at the hearing I have decided that the judge did err  in
    law, in a manner material to the  outcome,  in  her  treatment  of  the
    medico-legal report.

9.   The judge gave two reasons for giving  little  weight  to  the  report.
    The first was that it had  not  been  prepared  by  a  psychiatrist  or
    psychologist; and  the  second  was  that  it  consisted  of  what  the
    appellant had told the doctor.  In  my  view  these  reasons  are  both
    unsustainable, and the overall treatment is inadequate, and  represents
    a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of a report of this  sort,
    and of its potential role in credibility assessment.

10.  Both the Medical Foundation and the Helen Bamber Foundation are  widely
    recognised as having particular expertise in the assessment of  torture
    cases.  As noted in Dr Cohen's letter the Secretary of State recognises
    in official guidance to  decision  makers  that  clinicians  and  other
    healthcare  professionals  from  both  Foundations  are  objective  and
    unbiased.  The Secretary of State in the same guidance also  recognises
    that medico-legal reports are expert evidence, and not simply a  report
    on credibility.  It is not clear what the judge's notion that a  report
    of this sort, prepared by a doctor trained by the  Medical  Foundation,
    should be given less weight because it was not by a psychiatrist  or  a
    psychologist, is based  on;  but  it  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be
    sustainable.  It may be that it reflected a submission made  on  behalf
    of the respondent at the hearing, but if so it is clearly one that  the
    judge should not have accepted (and in view of the  guidance  mentioned
    above no Home Office representative should in any event have made  such
    a submission, since it would be at odds with guidance).

11.  The second point, about  the  report  being  based  only  on  what  the
    appellant had told the doctor, represents a failure to engage with  the
    contents of a lengthy and detailed expert  report,  and  a  fundamental
    misunderstanding of its evidential nature.  I accept the point made  by
    Dr Cohen that it is clear from reading the  report  that  the  doctor's
    professional opinion was not based solely on  the  history  related  to
    her.  There was an additional point, namely that the appellant had been
    independently assessed by another  service  provider  as  a  victim  of
    sexual assault; and in addition the  author  of  the  report  correctly
    engaged with the possibility of a  false  allegation  of  torture,  and
    provided a well reasoned conclusion rejecting this.

12.  There is an additional point of concern, namely that  the  judge  dealt
    with the report at paragraph 63 of her determination only after  having
    reached the general adverse credibility finding, but the  above  points
    are sufficient, in my view, to show that the  approach  to  the  report
    amounted to a material error of law.  As noted by  the  judge  granting
    permission, matters of weight were for  the  judge,  but  it  is  well-
    established that high quality medico-legal reports of this sort require
    proper consideration.  If they are to be rejected, proper and  detailed
    reasoning is required, and a report of this quality cannot  be  brushed
    aside in this manner.

13.  An additional area of concern arises from the decision, but it  is  not
    necessary, in my view, for this to be opened up to justify the disposal
    below.  The concern is that the judge went to considerable  lengths  to
    prevent  the  appellant  from  being  cross-examined  about  the   rape
    allegations, or from them being mentioned in any way.  It appears  that
    she even went to the lengths of instructing the interpreter as to  what
    wording  should  or  should  not  be  used  in  connection  with  these
    allegations.  This approach would have been  entirely  appropriate,  in
    recognition of the appellant's traumatised state, if the judge had been
    minded to accept that it was reasonably likely that the rapes had taken
    place.  If, on the other hand, she was minded to find that these were a
    fabrication, then fairness  would  have  demanded  that  the  appellant
    should have had the opportunity to have her central  allegation  tested
    in evidence.  As a  result  of  the  judge's  approach  she  reached  a
    sweeping adverse credibility  finding  about  the  rapes  without  ever
    having heard the appellant respond to a  single  question  about  them,
    having arranged the hearing in such a way that  gave  every  indication
    that she did regard the appellant as a traumatised rape victim.

14.  The rapes were at the  heart  of  the  account,  and  the  medico-legal
    report was significant supporting evidence in  relation  to  them.   It
    appears to me to  be  clear  that  there  is  no  possibility  here  of
    separating any adverse credibility findings  that  can  be  maintained.
    There is no alternative, as was agreed by the parties,  to  the  appeal
    being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, with  no
    findings preserved.

15.  No reference was made to anonymity but, in view of the report,  I  have
    decided that an anonymity order is appropriate in this appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The judge's decision dismissing the appeal is set aside on  the  basis  that
there was a material error of law in the credibility assessment.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing,  with
no findings preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
