
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01790/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2014                          |On 14 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                   M A A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20 June 1987.  He  was
       granted permission to appeal the decision made by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Froom, who dismissed his appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
       respondent made on 18 March 2014 to refuse to grant him asylum in the
       UK.


  2. At a hearing before me on 1 July 2014, I found that the judge made  an
       error of law and therefore his decision could not stand.  I made  the
       following decision:


       "2.    The judge accepted that the appellant is gay.  He accepted the
           appellant's account in its entirety.  He  is  a  Muslim  from  a
           rural  area  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge   considered   various
           background materials and found that the appellant would  not  be
           at risk of persecution if he were to be returned to Sri Lanka.


       3. The judge had regard to HJ (Iran) and HT  (Cameroon)  [2010]  UKSC
           31.  However, I find that the judge did not consider the  second
           and third questions posed by the Supreme Court in its assessment
           of risk on return.  Having accepted that the appellant  is  gay,
           the judge should have considered whether he was satisfied on the
           available evidence that gay people who live openly in Sri  Lanka
           would be liable to persecution, and if so,  what  the  appellant
           would do if he were returned to Sri Lanka.  The judge's  failure
           to consider  these  issues  led  to  an  error  of  law  in  his
           decision."


  3. At the hearing,  Mr  Yeo  placed  reliance  on  the  judge's  accepted
       findings.  They are the appellant is a Muslim.  He is gay  and  lives
       an open lifestyle in the UK.


  4. The issue before me is how the appellant will behave in Sri Lanka.  If
       he is discreet, will it be because of social pressure or  persecution
       because of his sexuality.  Mr Yeo acknowledged that  social  pressure
       without a threat of persecution will not be sufficient to  bring  the
       appellant within the Refugee Convention.


  5. Mr Yeo placed reliance on the witness statement of Mr D dated 17 March
       2014.  Mr D was in court but did not give oral evidence.


  6. I heard oral evidence from the appellant.  He spoke  through  a  Tamil
       interpreter.


  7. The appellant relied on the witness statements he made on 14 May  2012
       and 12 August 2014.


  8. In cross-examination the appellant said that his family in  Sri  Lanka
       did not know that he was claiming asylum in the UK.  He speaks to his
       family three times a week.  They used to send him money  but  do  not
       anymore because his partner is helping him.  Prior to coming  to  the
       UK, he was bullied by his colleagues because his ways were like  that
       of a female.  He worried about his sexuality.  He saw people like him
       being arrested.  He  knows  that  in  Sri  Lanka  being  gay  is  not
       accepted.  It is illegal. The police threaten and extort  money  from
       gay people.  He is not aware of any organisation which  supports  gay
       people in Sri Lanka.


  9. The appellant said that if he were to return to Sri  Lanka,  he  would
       have to return to the family home.  He was staying  with  his  sister
       when he was in Sri Lanka.  He would like to work with his father  and
       continue his father's business.   His family does not know he is gay.
        He would have to tell them.  It  would  be  difficult  for  them  to
       accept him as a gay person.  Homosexuality is not accepted  in  their
       culture.




  10.    He said he would like to continue the lifestyle he has acquired in
       the UK in Sri Lanka.  He has a lot of gay friends he goes with to the
       cinema.  He is able to visit gay websites.  He has sex with other gay
       people as well as staying with his partner three days a week. He  and
       his partner have not discussed going to live in Sri Lanka.  They  are
       committed to each other. His partner is in a civil  partnership  with
       another partner with whom he is living.


  11.     Miss  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  objective  evidence  taken
       cumulatively did not show that  homosexuals  are  persecuted  in  Sri
       Lanka.  She  first  took  me  through  the  respondent's  documentary
       evidence.   The UKBA  document  entitled  "Sri  Lanka  -  Country  of
       Concern" said with regard to LGBT rights that  homosexuality  remains
       illegal under Sri Lankan law.  The British High Commission in Colombo
       marked  International  Day  Against  Homophobia  in  May   with   the
       presentation of a cheque to Equal Ground, a  non-profit  organisation
       seeking rights for the LGBT  community.   The  High  Commission  also
       supported LGBT rights activities by raising concerns over harassment.
        A document issued by Equal Ground, Sri Lanka in December 2013,  gave
       an example of two gay men who were arrested by  police  at  a  public
       restroom in Colombo and taken to a police station.  At  the  station,
       the police officers explained  their  reason  for  the  arrest  using
       derogatory terminology for gay individuals and accused the two men of
       having sex in the restroom.  The police then drove  the  two  men  to
       another location, where the men were forced to pay the police a bribe
       to be released.  The same  document  says  that  notwithstanding  the
       guarantees of freedom  of  expression  and  information,  freedom  to
       peacefully assemble and associate with others, the  Sri  Lankan  LGBT
       human rights defenders and their organisations have been subjected to
       harassment and threats designed to suppress their  advocacy  efforts.
       These attacks, for which  no-one  has  been  charged,  prosecuted  or
       otherwise sanctioned, have had the effect of  curtailing  freedom  of
       expression, assembly  and  association.   Equal  Group  gave  another
       example of attacks on LGBT activists and  their  organisations  which
       took place in June 2013 in the town of Galle.  The organisation  also
       gave an example of assaults on freedom  of  expression  and  assembly
       involving a  series  of  workshops  on  HIV/AIDS  which  led  to  the
       crackdown which began on  17  August  2013  when  a  state-controlled
       newspaper, Lakbima, printed  an  article  titled  "Male  prostitution
       brothels run by homosexual groups".  After the  publication  of  this
       article officers from the Criminal Investigations Department  visited
       the office of the partner organisation and questioned  its  executive
       director about the workshop and specifically about  the  topics  that
       had been covered.  The officers told the executive director  that  he
       could continue the workshops only on the condition that he would  not
       discuss homosexuality, and human rights or Section 365A of the  penal
       code.  This ban effectively shut down the organisation's  partnership
       with Equal Group in the district for a period of time.  Ms  Isherwood
       said that this evidence did not amount to persecution.


  12.    Ms Isherwood referred to a document entitled "Traveller Resources:
       Sri Lanka" issued by the LGBT  Group,  Utopia  Asia.   This  document
       gives an overview of travel by gay people  and  gay  couples  to  Sri
       Lanka for a holiday.  The same  document  gives  a  list  of  meeting
       places for gay travellers which, Miss Isherwood said contradicts  the
       appellant's evidence that there are no such facilities for gay people
       in Sri Lanka.  The document also mentions that Negombo  is  the  only
       city in Sri Lanka with relaxed everyday gay life.  It is  a  peaceful
       Oceanside resort just fifteen minutes'  drive  north  from  Colombo's
       International Airport.


  13.    The respondent's bundle contained an article  from  The  New  York
       Times regarding a LGBT perspective "31 places to go to in 2010".  Sri
       Lanka is described as this small, beautiful island  national  of  the
       southern tip of India as an active LGBT  community  working  hard  to
       change laws and attitudes.  Ms Isherwood referred to information from
       Equal Ground that there was a Rainbow Pride beach  party  on  7  June
       2014.  She also referred to a document entitled "Ceylon Today"  which
       features  Rosanna  Flamer-Caldera,  founder  of  Equal   Ground,   an
       organisation seeking  human  and  political  rights  for  the  LGBTIQ
       community of Sri Lanka.  She states that Equal Ground is hosting  the
       Colombo Pride once more for the eighth consecutive year in 2012 to be
       held from 7 to 14 June at a time  when  vibrant  rainbow  kites  over
       Mount Lavinia Beach and Colombo comes alive with  music  and  colour.
       The weeklong celebrations  include  an  art  photo  exhibition,  film
       festival, party and kites  festival;  all  guaranteed  to  entertain,
       educate and bring together anyone  and  everyone  in  solidarity  and
       peace.  A youth workshop based on future leadership within the LGBTIQ
       community is an addition to the agenda this year.  The  article  goes
       on to say that when they celebrated the first Colombo Pride in  2005,
       it was only a party.  But they still had 350 attendees and the  event
       was a big success.  After that they have  been  holding  the  Colombo
       Pride annually for  the  past  seven  years.   It  gives  the  LGBTIQ
       community a chance to  stop  being  afraid  and  hidden  away.   They
       provide a safe space for everyone to come together.


  14.    Ms Isherwood submitted that  although  homosexuality  carries  ten
       years' imprisonment in Sri Lanka,  the  law  is  not  enforced.   She
       relied on HL (Malaysia) [2012] EWCA Civ 834 in  which  the  Court  of
       Appeal considered  HJ  (Iran).   She  submitted  that  HL  (Malaysia)
       decided that the Convention does not guarantee universal  rights  and
       that the Convention was not directed to reforming the level of rights
       in the country of origin.  Indeed Lord Hope said that the  Convention
       is not there to safeguard or  protect  potentially  affected  persons
       from having to live in regimes where  pluralist  liberal  values  are
       less respected, even much less respected, than they are here.  It  is
       there to secure international protection to the extent agreed by  the
       contracting states.


  15.    Ms Isherwood referred  to  an  article  entitled  "The  Status  of
       Lesbians, Bisexual Women and Transgender Persons in Sri Lanka"  which
       was prepared by Women's Support Group.  The article stated that on 25
       June 2010, The Daily Mirror in  Sri  Lanka  carried  a  news  article
       quoting the Prime Minister as having said that "it is not  wrong  for
       the gay community to seek rights but we must know what  exactly  they
       want.  They must communicate to us."  However, to this date they have
       not received a response to their letter.  In light of  this  evidence
       Ms Isherwood said that the government was not ignoring gay rights.


  16.    She referred to a document which gives an analysis  of  the  legal
       protection for LGBT in Sri Lanka.  The analysis conducted a total  of
       109 interviews in thirteen districts of Sri Lanka.  She also referred
       to a research conducted by Equal Ground and an analysis of  the  data
       collected with the aid of a questionnaire from 119 LGBT  individuals.
       The document said that there was a lack of information about the LGBT
       community of Sri Lanka.  This  study  was  not  concerned  only  with
       whether or not discrimination harms LGBT people but also  the  levels
       at which discrimination is prevalent in  this  minority  group.   The
       report said that state-sanctioned discrimination remains prevalent in
       Sri Lanka.  Coupled with cultural, religious and  social  ideologies,
       LGBT persons remain extremely challenged, faced with  discrimination.
       Out of the 119 people that were questioned, only 7.56% said they were
       unemployed.  More than half were in full-time education.  40% were in
       a committed relationship  and  some  of  them  were  in  a  long-term
       relationship.  84% said that they had never been excluded from social
       activities.  103 of them said that they had never been excluded  from
       religious places or activities in the past two years.  93% said  that
       they had not been excluded from family activity  and  45%  said  that
       they had experienced verbal insults, harassment and/or threats a  few
       times.  95 of them said that  they  had  never  experienced  physical
       abuse.  90 of them said that they had not changed residence  or  were
       unable to rent accommodation in the last two years.  One of five said
       that they had never been refused a promotion or have had  the  nature
       of their work or job description changed.  The section on  access  to
       healthcare and services said that LGBT people's rights to employment,
       housing,  education  and  healthcare  is  challenged   although   the
       challenge in health services and education is less  experienced  than
       that of employment and housing.  44.54% of these families  have  been
       victims of stigma.  Only 17.64% of the respondent's families have not
       faced any form of discrimination or  stigma  based  on  their  sexual
       orientation and/or gender identity in the last 24 months.


  17.    Ms Isherwood relied on paragraph 3.14.8 of  the  respondent's  OGN
       which states that homosexuality is illegal in Sri Lanka but there  is
       no  evidence  of   systematic   state   persecution.    Opportunistic
       targeting, societal hostility and discrimination against LGBT persons
       does exist and in individual cases may reach the Article 3 threshold.
        However, given the level of social hostility, internal relocation in
       such places is unlikely to be a viable alternative.  The  OGN  states
       that the personal circumstances of the individual applicant should be
       considered carefully when assessing whether it would be unduly  harsh
       to  expect  them  to  do  so.   Ms  Isherwood  argued  that  although
       homosexuality is illegal in Sri  Lanka,  homosexuals  have  not  been
       persecuted for 50 years.  She submitted that the appellant is from  a
       middle class family who live in Kandy.  We have no evidence  of  what
       his family's reaction to  his  homosexuality  would  be.   There  are
       facilities in Sri Lanka where his current lifestyle can be  conducted
       in Sri Lanka.  On this evidence the  appellant  has  not  established
       that on return to Sri Lanka the discrimination he might  suffer  will
       reach the persecution threshold.


  18.    Mr Yeo relied on extracts  from  his  bundle  of  documents  which
       contrast the extracts relied on by Ms  Isherwood.   He  relied  on  a
       report in the USSD Country Report on Human Rights  Practices  in  Sri
       Lanka 2013.  The report states  that  according  to  country  reports
       2010, events for the LGBT community are held throughout the year.  In
       particular, Pride events are held every year.   However,  ILGA  notes
       that Pride events are held "without parades or demonstrations" noting
       that the public event involves flying rainbow kites in the park.


  19.    Mr Yeo asked me  to  accept  that  the  appellant  has  given  his
       evidence in good faith.  The appellant's experience of being  gay  in
       Sri Lanka is authentic.  He knows more about it than we do.  He  said
       that there is underreporting of attacks  and  discrimination  against
       gay people.  The FCO report in the respondent's  bundle  sounds  like
       there is recognition in that gay  people  suffer  discrimination  but
       there is no suggestion that things are getting  better.   The  travel
       organisation was shut down in 2010 after harassment and  intimidation
       of its workers and police action.  He said that  the  information  in
       the Traveller Resources by Utopia Asia is  directed  to  gay  western
       tourists.  We do not know what  research  went  into  producing  this
       document.  It is aimed at an entirely different  audience.   He  said
       that the word "persecution" is not used because it is not  a  refugee
       document.  At paragraph 9 of the appellant's first witness  statement
       he said that he would often go to internet cafes and would watch  gay
       porn movies.  He would pay 20 rupees for an hour and would get a  box
       room so that no-one could see what he was watching.  Despite  how  he
       felt he knew he could do nothing about his attraction to men  because
       he feared being arrested.


  20.    Mr Yeo also  referred  to  the  report  entitled  "The  Status  of
       Lesbians, Bisexual Women and Transgender Persons in Sri Lanka". It is
       a report by the NGO to the Committee on the Elimination of All  Forms
       of Discrimination against Women.  The document was  earlier  referred
       to by Ms Isherwood for its report that on  25  June  2010  The  Daily
       Mirror in Sri Lanka had carried a  news  article  quoting  the  Prime
       Minister as saying that it was not wrong for  the  gay  community  to
       seek rights but the government must know what exactly they want.   Mr
       Yeo relied on the extract for its assertion that the WSG  along  with
       two other organisations working on  LGBT  rights  in  Sri  Lanka  had
       responded to this news article by writing a letter dated 1 July  2010
       to the government requesting an appointment with the  Prime  Minister
       but to date they have not received a response to  their  letter.   Mr
       Yeo referred to other articles which he said point to the  fact  that
       things are getting worse for homosexuals in Sri Lanka.  According  to
       the Gaystarnews report dated 7 September 2013  Sri  Lanka  had  begun
       systematic  targeting  of  gays.   The  present  government  is   now
       orchestrating a smear campaign against the community to  project  its
       members as criminals and paedophiles and  alienate  them  from  civil
       society, according to human  rights  defenders.   Rights  groups  had
       informed the Geneva Meet that the LGBT community in Sri  Lanka  faced
       rape, battery,  discrimination  and  exclusion  from  social  events.
       Equal Ground says that  the  more  visible  the  LGBT  are  the  more
       increase there is for homophobia.  He relied on paragraph  6  of  his
       skeleton which highlighted passages from various reports.


  21.    He also relied on paragraph 3.14.8  of  the  respondent's  OGN  in
       which the respondent accepts that some claims may reach the Article 3
       threshold.  He said that this matches the UNHCR guidelines that LGBTI
       individuals may, depending on their individual circumstances,  be  in
       need of international refugee protection.  He  took  me  through  the
       various reports of instances of violence and abusive treatment  meted
       out to homosexuals which will amount to persecution for a  Convention
       reason.


  22.    Mr Yeo then referred to the private study which  he  said  was  an
       anthropological and social study of a small group of homosexuals.  He
       submitted that the breakdown of the  report  was  according  to  age,
       ethnicity, religion, education and employment.  The analysis was  not
       representative of the general LGBT population  or  gay  lifestyle  in
       general.  The analysis does not tell us what the people have done  to
       achieve no exclusion or from being ostracised  by  society  or  their
       families.  According to HJ (Iran) if they are living discreetly  then
       they are refugees whether they are in  employment  or  not.   Mr  Yeo
       submitted  that  the  objective  evidence  is  enough   to   generate
       persecution and well-founded fear of  persecution  if  a  gay  person
       lives openly and has a gay lifestyle.  The  police  would  react  and
       arrest and beat up that person, blackmail and  seek  sexual  favours.
       Homosexuals face discrimination, being ostracised by  their  families
       and live a miserable lifestyle.  The appellant cannot now live in the
       closet now that he is out of it.  There is a real risk that he  would
       be exposed to persecution and discrimination on  his  return  to  Sri
       Lanka in order to avoid persecution.


       Evidence of Appellant and Mr D


  23.    In his witness statement dated 14 May 2012 the appellant said that
       he was born in Kandy  and  lived  there  with  his  parents  and  two
       sisters.   His father owns a restaurant in Kandy. He  worked  in  his
       father's restaurant when he was at college and  continued  to  do  so
       after he completed his studies.  He then went to live with his sister
       Rushda who had moved to Colombo when she got married.  He lived  with
       his sister in Colombo for about  4  years.   From  2005  to  2007  he
       studied HND in Computing.  He graduated in 2008.  In 2009 he  applied
       for a visa to come and study BSc Computing in the United Kingdom.


  24     He did not have any relationships in Sri Lanka because he knew  it
       was illegal.  He was afraid that  he  would  be  put  in  prison  and
       worried that he might be raped in prison.  Because of  this  fear  he
       did not tell anyone about his sexuality and did not  enter  into  any
       relationships.  There was one occasion in Colombo when he went to the
       public toilet and saw  two  men  who  he  thought  were  having  sex.
       Suddenly the  police  entered  and  arrested  the  men.   After  that
       incident he did not go to the public toilets as often because he  was
       afraid that he would be arrested for either being gay or suspected of
       being gay.  He would often go to internet cafes and  watch  gay  porn
       movies.  He would pay 20 rupees for an hour and would get a box  room
       so that no one could see what he was watching.   He  would  sometimes
       spend an hour or two hours, two to three times a week  watching  porn
       at the internet caf�.  Despite how he  felt,  he  knew  he  could  do
       nothing about his attraction to men because he feared being arrested.


  25.    He was granted a student visa from December 2009 to  May  31  2010
       initially to study BSc Computing but did not complete the course  for
       various reasons.  He was granted a year's leave to study  Travel  and
       Tourism from 15 June 2010 until 15 June 2011.  He half completed  the
       course and could not pass the exam.  Prior to the expiry of his  last
       leave he made a further application to study but  this  was  refused.
       He asked his solicitors if there were any other options  for  him  to
       remain in this country as he could not return to his country.  He did
       not tell his solicitor about his sexuality because he did  not  think
       it was relevant.   His  solicitor  advised  him  that  if  he  had  a
       girlfriend, he could marry her and obtain leave to  remain.   He  did
       not have a girlfriend.  By this time he had already had a  number  of
       sexual encounters in the United Kingdom.  He  was  relieved  that  he
       could finally express himself as a gay man.


  26.    At the end of 2010 he bought an iphone which he used  to  download
       the  GRINDR  application  and  met  even  more  people  through  this
       application.  He had lots of casual  relationships  and  one  night's
       stands.  He met a fellow Sri Lankan at work and it was  a  relief  to
       have someone he could talk to about his sexuality.


  27.    In May 2011 he moved to Norwich where he  met  people  and  became
       more active on Grindr.  On 1 April 2012 he met Mr  D  and  they  have
       become close.  Mr D is his boyfriend.


  28.    On 20 March 2012 he married Tania who was from Portugal and had an
       EU passport. He and Tania did  not  live  together  in  a  subsisting
       relationship.  Nevertheless with the help of  solicitors  he  applied
       for a residence card.  His application was refused following a  visit
       by the Home Office who believed that he was in a  sham  marriage.  He
       knew this was the case but he was desperate to remain in  the  United
       Kingdom so he appealed the respondent's decision.  Tania attended the
       hearing with him.  His appeal was dismissed by a judge.   He  made  a
       fresh  application  for  a  residence  card  with  the  help  of  his
       solicitor.   Eventually,  he  was  arrested  and  detained   by   the
       respondent with  the  intention  of  removing  him  from  the  United
       Kingdom.  Mr D visited him while he was in detention and  arranged  a
       solicitor for him.  The solicitor made an application for  asylum  on
       his behalf on the basis that if he returned to Sri Lanka he would  be
       persecuted because of his sexuality.


  29.    Mr D submitted  a  witness  statement  dated  17  March  2014.  He
       confirmed that he has known the appellant since  1  April  2012  when
       they met on a gay application called Grindr. Over the past two  years
       he and the appellant have become very close. The appellant visits him
       at his house in Oak Hill Farm, Suffolk and stays over.  Mr D said  he
       has a partner called Mr J and they have an  open  relationship.   His
       partner Mr J has met the appellant on  many  occasions.   Mr  J  also
       occasionally sees other people and he is aware and  comfortable  with
       the strength of his feelings for the appellant.  Mr  D  said  he  was
       concerned about the appellant's application to  regularise  his  stay
       and although he was not trying to hide it, he did not think that  the
       appellant genuinely knew or understood what his solicitors were doing
       to help him.


  30.    Mr D said that appellant told him around October 2013 that he  had
       married on 20 March 2012 and that the marriage had ended.   Prior  to
       that the appellant told him nothing about his  wife  or  about  their
       relationship.  At no point did he suspect that the  appellant  had  a
       wife or even that he was heterosexual.  The appellant made  it  quite
       clear from the onset of their relationship that he  was  gay.   Mr  D
       also mentioned the appellant's arrest and  detention  by  Immigration
       Officers; his visits to the appellant in detention and obtaining  the
       services of Fadiga & Co solicitors to assist him with his application
       for asylum.  Mr D ended his statement by saying that he would be very
       upset if the appellant is returned to Sri Lanka.  He  is  desperately
       worried about him and would request that  the  appellant  is  granted
       asylum.


  31.    In his witness statement dated 12 August 2014 the  appellant  said
       that he was in an open relationship with Mr D.   He  is  happily  and
       openly living freely in the United Kingdom and is able to express his
       sexuality.  He did not even know if there were any gay clubs and pubs
       in Sri Lanka.  If there were any, they would be hidden or not  really
       something gay people would be openly aware of. Celebrations like  Gay
       Pride do not take place in Sri Lanka. He went to Gay Pride this  year
       on 26 July.   He does not believe that there is any way  for  him  to
       express his sexuality which is an integral part of who he is, in  Sri
       Lanka.


  Findings


  32.    I find from the evidence that the appellant was  prepared  to  use
       deception with the help of solicitors to enable him to remain in  the
       United Kingdom.  I do not accept Mr D's evidence that  the  appellant
       did not know or understand what his solicitors  were  doing  to  help
       him.  The appellant's evidence at paragraph 25 of his  first  witness
       statement indicated that he knew exactly what he was  doing  when  he
       got Tania to help him.  Tania had agreed  and  gone  ahead  with  the
       marriage in the full knowledge that she and  the  appellant  did  not
       have a genuine and subsisting marital relationship.  He said  he  and
       Tania had never lived together and yet they  maintained  the  charade
       throughout the court proceedings and through the further applications
       he made with the help of solicitors in his desperation to  remain  in
       the United  Kingdom.  I  find  that  the  appellant's  behaviour  was
       thoroughly dishonest.


  33.    It has been accepted that the appellant is gay.  I accept that  he
       has not told his family about his sexuality.  I also accept  that  he
       was not open about his sexuality when he was in Sri Lanka.  He  lived
       discretely because of his fear of being arrested by the  police.   He
       gave the example of witnessing the arrest of two gay men at a  public
       toilet by the police.  His account mirrors the example given by Equal
       Ground of the arrest in December 2013 of two gay men arrested by  the
       police at a public restroom in Colombo.  According to  Equal  Ground,
       the men were subsequently released after they were forced  to  pay  a
       bribe to the police.


  34.    The appellant is now living an open gay lifestyle in  the  UK.   I
       accept that he is in an open relationship with Mr D.  He is  able  to
       meet other gay people and have gay relationships and  freely  express
       himself without any fear.  He would like to replicate this  lifestyle
       in Sri Lanka.


  35.    My attention was drawn to a wide variety  of  objective  material.
       I accept in  the  light  of  paragraph  3.14.8  of  the  respondent's
       Operational Guidance Note (OGN) and  other  objective  evidence  that
       homosexuality is illegal in Sri Lanka. The OGN goes on to say however
       that there is no  evidence  of  systematic  state  persecution.   The
       respondent accepts that individual cases  may  reach  the  Article  3
       threshold because opportunistic  targeting,  societal  hostility  and
       discrimination against LGBT persons do exist. It  matches  the  UNHCR
       guidelines that LGBTI individuals may, depending on their  individual
       circumstances, be in need of international refugee status.


  36.     In  his  skeleton  argument  Mr  Yeo  submitted  that  there   is
       considerable  evidence  that  some  gays  in  Sri  Lanka   experience
       persecution and, probably, that more would if they  were  open  about
       their sexuality.  He relied on the Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
       Practices 2013 in Sri Lanka. The report states that  members  of  the
       LGBT community face  social  discrimination  and  some  instances  of
       official harassment, and same-sex sexual  activity  is  criminalised,
       though  rarely  prosecuted.   The  same  report  states  that  police
       harassed and extorted money or  sexual  favours  from  lesbian,  gay,
       bisexual  and  transgender  (LGBT)  individuals  with  impunity   and
       assaulted gays and lesbians.  The same report  states  that  although
       same-sex sexual activity is punishable by a prison sentence of up  to
       10 years, in practice, the criminal provisions were rarely  enforced.
         Consequently, I find that if the appellant were to be  arrested  in
       Sri Lanka for living an open gay lifestyle, he is not  likely  to  be
       prosecuted.  The most that will happen to him is harassment from  the
       police, extortion, sexual favours or assault.   I  am  not  persuaded
       that this ill-treatment  amounts  to  persecution  for  a  Convention
       reason or reaches the high threshold of Article 3 ill-treatment.


  37.    It was apparent from the appellant's  evidence  that  he  has  not
       researched the facilities that are available to  gay  people  in  Sri
       Lanka.  The founder of Equal Ground said in 2012  that  Equal  Ground
       was hosting the Colombo Pride for the eighth consecutive year from  7
       to 14 June.  Equal Ground is an organisation that  is  seeking  human
       and political rights for the LGBTIQ  community  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
       Colombo Pride involved flying rainbow kites over Mount Livinia Beach.
        The founder said that Colombo comes alive  with  music  and  colour.
       The weeklong celebrations  include  an  art  photo  exhibition,  film
       festival, all guaranteed to entertain,  educate  and  bring  together
       anyone and everyone in solidarity and peace.   It  gives  the  LGBTIQ
       community a chance to stop being afraid and hidden away and  provides
       a safe space for everyone to come  together.   I  find  that  Colombo
       Pride is not comparable to the  Gay  Pride  event  that  takes  place
       annually in London.  However, the fact that Colombo Pride takes place
       at all in a country where homosexuality is illegal shows a degree  of
       tolerance by the authorities and the society in general. I also  find
       the quote from the Prime Minister which appeared in the Daily  Mirror
       in Sri Lanka also indicates that the government is not  ignoring  the
       issue.  Mr Yeo submitted that according  to  the  Gaystar  News,  the
       government is now orchestrating a  smear  campaign  against  the  gay
       community.  According to rights groups the LGBT community faced rape,
       battery, discrimination  and  exclusion  from  social  events.   This
       evidence does not match the conclusions of the anthropological study.
       I accept that the anthropological and social study  was  of  a  small
       group of homosexuals and that it may not  be  representative  of  the
       general LGBT population but it is informative in  that  most  of  the
       people in the group did not suffer exclusion  or  discrimination  and
       were not ostracised by society or their families.  The majority  were
       able to lead a normal life in Sri Lanka.


  38.    A document entitled "Travel &  Resources:  Sri  Lanka"  issued  by
       Utopia Asia this year,  advises  that  although  Homosexual  activity
       between consenting adult males remains  technically  illegal  in  Sri
       Lanka, gays are move visible than ever in culture, politics and local
       sidewalk cafes.  It gives an overview of travel by gay people and gay
       couples to Sri Lanka for a holiday. It also gives a  list  of  places
       where gay  people  can  meet  including  gay-friendly  nightlife  and
       lodging options.   In 2010 Sri Lanka was the New  York's  No.1  pick.
       The article said that although officially Sri Lanka is not very  gay-
       friendly, it described Sri Lanka as a small beautiful  island  nation
       off the southern tip of India  that  has  an  active  LGBT  community
       working hard to change laws and attitudes.    The  document  mentions
       that Negambo is the only city in Sri Lanka with relaxed everyday  gay
       life.  It describes Negambo  as  a  peaceful  Oceanside  resort  just
       fifteen minutes' drive north from  Colombo's  International  airport.
       In light of the objective evidence  above,  I  find  that  there  are
       facilities for gay people who want to live an open  lifestyle  to  do
       so.  I accept that Equal Ground has said that the  more  visible  the
       LGBT are the more increase there is for homophobia.   However,  I  do
       not find on the documentary evidence that the homophobia has  led  to
       the persecution of gay people.


  39.    The appellant has  not  told  his  parents  about  his  sexuality.
       Therefore we do not know what their reaction might be;  whether  they
       will ostracise him or not.  He has not  said  that  his  parents  are
       putting pressure on him to marry.  It may be the reason for  this  is
       that they know of his marriage to Tania.  This is speculation  on  my
       part.  In any event the appellant is an educated  man.   He  did  not
       complete his studies in the UK.   He  has  a  qualification,  HND  in
       Computing which he obtained in Sri Lanka.  If he is not able to  work
       with his father in his  restaurant,  he  should  be  able  to  obtain
       employment on his return to Sri Lanka.  On the  documentary  evidence
       he would not have to live discretely as  a  gay  man.  While  he  may
       suffer some form of discrimination and harassment from the police,  I
       do not find that the discrimination and harassment identified in  the
       objective  evidence  reaches  the  threshold  of  persecution  for  a
       Convention reason or the high threshold in Article 3 of the ECHR.


   40. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 13 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







