
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01237/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neale, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of Egypt. He arrived in the  UK  on  26
         June  2014  and  claimed  asylum.  The   Respondent   refused   his
         application for asylum in a letter dated 5 December 2014 and made a
         decision to remove him as an illegal entrant under  section  10  of
         the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The Appellant appealed against
         that decision and his appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Coaster on 19 June 2015.  The Appellant sought permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was granted on 18 August 2015 by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers.  He  considered  that  it  was
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law when finding
         that the Egyptian authorities would have no record of the Appellant
         having been present during the  massacre  in  Rabaa  Square  on  14
         August 2013 and that there was a possible failure to  make  further
         reference to the country evidence relating  to  Muslim  Brotherhood
         members in Egypt.

    The Grounds

      2. Ground 1 asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
         Appellant was in Rabaa Alawadiya Square during the massacre  on  14
         August 2014 and that he was injured in a gas canister explosion but
         found erroneously, that the authorities would not know that he  was
         at the demonstration. It is said that the Appellant  could  not  be
         expected to know  how  the  authorities  collected  information  on
         opponents. Evidence was submitted to show that  the  Appellant  had
         spent a week in hospital being treated for serious  burns  and  the
         documents from the hospital were submitted  at  the  hearing  which
         stated that he claimed to have been injured at Rabaa square.  There
         was therefore documentary evidence within the health system linking
         the Appellant to Rabaa Square. This was referred to  by  the  Judge
         who had  provided  no  reasons  for  ignoring  this  evidence  when
         concluding that the authorities had no record  of  the  Appellant's
         attendance at Rabaa Square.

      3. Ground 2 asserts that the Judge found that  the  Appellant  had  no
         profile and was not being sought by the  Egyptian  authorities  but
         made no reference  to  the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
         Guidance on Egypt and  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.  This  information
         stated   that   being   politically   active,    particularly    in
         demonstrations, may put someone at risk of persecution. It is  also
         said that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to  aspects
         of the country guidance before her, namely that the authorities had
         detained "thousands of rank-and-file members  and  other  perceived
         sympathisers". According to the background  evidence,  someone  who
         was a perceived supporter of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  would  face
         imprisonment  and  members  who  vocalised  their  opinions  in   a
         classroom or on Facebook were also at risk.

      4. It is said that the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with  this
         evidence and appears to have assumed  that  the  Appellant  had  no
         profile without considering  the  background  evidence  as  to  the
         profile of those who had been arrested. This ran  contrary  to  the
         background evidence  and  she  was  obliged  to  give  reasons  for
         rejecting.

      5. Ground 3 asserts that in finding that the Appellant came to the  UK
         to follow his girlfriend she  did  not  consider  the  girlfriend's
         statement that the Appellant came to the UK on her request  because
         of the injuries he  had  sustained  and  the  risk  of  arrest.  An
         application to submit her evidence by telephone was refused by  the
         Tribunal and the Appellant was therefore unable to provide  witness
         evidence on his reasons for coming to the UK.  The  grounds  assert
         that it was unfair to make findings on  a  disputed  point  without
         given the Appellant an opportunity to present evidence  or  without
         considering the evidence that was before Judge in  the  form  of  a
         written statement.

    The R24 Response

      6. The Respondent argues that the First-tier Tribunal provided  cogent
         reasons why  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  any
         connections with the Muslim Brotherhood including the fact that  he
         had lived in Egypt for  five  years.  The  Judge  had  given  sound
         reasons for rejecting his claim to of interest to the authorities.

         The Hearing

      7. Mr Neale submitted that Grounds  1  and  2  raised  common  issues.
         Essentially the Judge accepted that the Appellant was in the Square
         and injured in an explosion as claimed and went on to find that  he
         was not at risk because she did not think that the authorities were
         looking for. At paragraph  45  it  was  accepted  that  he  was  in
         sympathiser activity. It was not clear whether  she  accepted  that
         the police visited his home. In his submission having found that he
         was at the square she had overlooked a number  of  aspects  of  the
         evidence. Ground 1 related to the medical record which she accepted
         as genuine. A written record existed and this needed to be assessed
         in  terms  of  the  background  evidence.  The   authorities   were
         interfering with hospitals  and  hospital  evidence.  She  had  not
         considered the background evidence. She accepted  at  paragraph  45
         that he was injured in  gas  canister  explosion.  At  p  CA62  the
         background evidence showed  that  two  people  were  killed  in  an
         explosion. It was also worth noting  that  according  to  the  same
         background  evidence  a  large  number  of  people  were   detained
         overnight (CA 73). Her conclusions in relation  to  the  fact  that
         they would not know how  he  existed  did  not  take  into  account
         evidence regarding the hospital. She did not make  any  credibility
         findings on questions 66 to 67 of asylum interview. She found  that
         he  was  a  sympathiser  but  had  not  considered  the  background
         evidence. There had been an all-encompassing crackdown. She did not
         seem to have considered the fact that this could have put him under
         suspicion. She was not obliged to accept  it  but  was  obliged  to
         consider it. At was clear from evidence at C3 that it was not  just
         political or electoral activity but also humanitarian activity. The
         authorities were taking  people  with  headscarves  and  beards  as
         extremists and targeting them. She should have made  findings.  She
         seemed to have accepted that he expressed support  on  Facebook  in
         Greece. There was background evidence regarding social media at C2.
         The authorities could monitor social media posts. She had not taken
         it into account. She was obliged to make findings on it.

      8. The Judge did express scepticism about the police not visiting.  It
         was not clear from paragraphs 33 to 44 whether she found  that  his
         evidence was truthful. If she did not accept that, it was  in  part
         contingent on her conclusions and core to her overall  findings  on
         credibility and risk. One could not be sure that she would not have
         reached a different overall conclusion. There was a failure to take
         account of three material aspect of the evidence. The three aspects
         were  social  media,  humanitarian  actors  and  that  the   Muslim
         brotherhood suffered a severe crackdown. Given her acceptance  that
         he was at the square her conclusions on risk were not sufficient. I
         could not be satisfied that she should not have allowed the appeal.



      9. With regard to Ground 3, the  Appellant's  partner  was  unable  to
         attend the hearing due to her father's conservative  attitude.  Her
         evidence  was  clearly  relevant  and  Judge   Coaster   had   used
         Appellant's relationship  for  s8  findings.  It  would  have  been
         relevant and it could not be said that the findings would have been
         the same  had  she  attended  the  hearing.  The  authority  of  AM
         (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 100  of  CA  showed  that  there  was  a
         discretion to receive evidence by telephone where the  evidence  is
         relevant to credibility. In Nare  (evidence  by  electronic  means)
         Zimbabwe  [2011]  UKUT  443  (IAC)  what  was  suggested  was  that
         arrangements should be made for the person to be identified. In  so
         far  as  the  refusal  was  concerned  it  said  that  it  was  not
         appropriate for the evidence to be given by phone but AM made clear
         that that it should be given consideration.  This  witness  was  of
         substantial relevance. What should have happened here was that  the
         court should have been able to make arrangements to  give  evidence
         through a  solicitor's  office.  As  it  was  the  application  was
         refused. That was not an adequate disposal  having  regard  to  the
         importance of this evidence. It may well be that  Mr  Neale  should
         have made an application for the matter to be adjourned. If he made
         a miscalculation due to the importance of this matter the Appellant
         should not be blamed. He had been prejudiced because witness should
         have been able to give evidence and had the Judge should have  been
         able to hear  evidence  the  matters  on  which  she  made  adverse
         credibility findings. There had been  procedural  unfairness  here.
         The two sentence refusal did not  involve  full  consideration.  He
         conceded that it was difficult  if  not  impossible  to  grant  the
         application without an arrangement. Whoever made  the  mistake  the
         Appellant was deprived of the opportunity to put  forward  relevant
         evidence.

     10. Mr Neale submitted that should I find an error of law the  findings
         to be preserved should be  the  Appellant's  attendance  at  Rabwah
         square  and  involvement  with  social  media  whilst  in   Greece.
         Otherwise there should be a de novo hearing.

     11. Mr Richards submitted that there had been no material error of law.
         The Judge said that she had considered all of the evidence but  did
         not refer to each and every piece of the evidence.  Having  weighed
         the whole of the evidence she came to a conclusion properly open to
         her for which she had  given  adequate  reasons  although  she  did
         accept that the Appellant was present at the square at the relevant
         time she did not accept that  the  authorities  in  Egypt  had  any
         interest in him and gave perfectly adequate and proper reasons  for
         coming to that finding. Her  conclusion  was  of  course  that  the
         Appellant  had  constructed  this  claim.  He  was  effectively  an
         economic migrant who had previously gone to Greece and stayed there
         for a number of years and having been unable to  remain  in  Greece
         his claim was constructed to have a better life here and to  follow
         his girlfriend.  She set this out in paragraphs 44 and 45 and  gave
         reasons for her conclusions for finding that there was no  interest
         in him. He was in hospital for a week. There was every  opportunity
         for the authorities to apprehend him and they made no attempt to do
         so. With regard to the  police  there  was  a  discrepancy  in  his
         evidence as to the number of visits they made. She made an  adverse
         finding here.  The grounds as to the Appellant's claimed  risk  not
         being fully assessed had no merit and the Judge did everything  she
         was required to do. It was clear to the Appellant why his claim was
         rejected. In terms of the last ground and the  potential  telephone
         witness, that decision formed no part of this determination. It was
         open to the Appellant to seek judicial review of the decision by Mr
         Poole not to admit that evidence and the Appellant  and  those  who
         represented him could have renewed the application before the First-
         tier Judge. That was not done. All that she was asked to do was  to
         come to a conclusion on the evidence before her. She dealt with the
         evidence  of  the  girlfriend  and  gave  sound  reasons.  In   the
         alternative, the decision to refuse permission to admit evidence on
         the telephone was in accordance with Nare which took  into  account
         the earlier case.  No  party  had  a  right  to  call  evidence  by
         electronic link. Paragraph 20 showed that the  evidence  should  be
         given from formal surroundings and a video link if available. There
         was no reason to think that Resident Judge Poole would  have  taken
         the judicial decision lightly and when he said that  there  was  no
         good reason why the witness could not attend that was  a  perfectly
         proper conclusion and no material error of  law  flowed  from  that
         decision taken properly within his  discretion.  In  conclusion  no
         material error of law identified.

     12. Mr Neale replied that in relation to his first point, although  the
         Judge had said she  had  considered  the  evidence,  the  items  of
         evidence were significant material aspects of the evidence. She had
         failed to take them into account  or  give  reasons  for  rejecting
         them. In his submission the reasons  given  could  well  have  been
         affected by the evidence raised. In relation to Ground  3,  it  was
         made clear to the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  girlfriend  could
         give evidence.  The  Judge  said  that  the  application  had  been
         refused.  The  Appellant  should  not  be  penalised.   There   was
         significant procedural unfairness. The two sentence refusal did not
         adequately deal with the importance of the  evidence.  He  was  not
         criticising Judge Poole but there was procedural unfairness to  the
         Appellant.

     13. Mr Richards submitted that if I were to find an  error  of  law  no
         findings should be preserved.

    Discussion and Findings

     14. In coming to my conclusions in this appeal I have had regard to all
         the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal as well as the
         grounds for permission to appeal, the skeleton  argument  submitted
         by Mr Neale and the submissions of both representatives.

         Ground 1

     15. The First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 45 of the decision  that
         the Appellant was in Rabaa Al Adawiya Square on 14 August 2014  and
         that he was injured by a gas canister exploding. She found however,
         applying the correct standard of  proof,  that  he  was  not  being
         sought by the Egyptian  authorities  as  a  result.  The  Appellant
         asserts that she failed to give any or  any  adequate  reasons  for
         finding there was no record of the Appellant at the massacre. In Mr
         Neale's skeleton argument he sets out the background evidence which
         he asserts the First-tier Tribunal should have and failed  to  take
         into account.

     16. It is clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  medical
         evidence submitted by the Appellant as genuine. That  evidence  was
         at A11-22 of the Appellant's  bundle.  According  to  the  hospital
         correspondence the Appellant was admitted to hospital on 16  August
         and discharged on 23 August  2013  and  attended  the  outpatient's
         clinic for a further 3 weeks. The First-tier Tribunal gave a number
         of reasons for finding that the Appellant was not at risk from  the
         authorities notwithstanding his involvement  in  the  demonstration
         and his treatment in hospital. The Judge found,  at  paragraph  42,
         that the Appellant had not explained how the authorities would know
         that the Appellant was at the demonstration. She noted in the  same
         paragraph that he was removed from the makeshift  hospital  quickly
         and transferred to another and the following day he  was  taken  by
         his brother to the hospital in  Al  Buhayrah  and  that  no  police
         attended the hospital looking for him.  She  rejected  his  account
         that his friends had informed him on returning from  hospital  that
         the police had called at his house. In paragraph 44 of her decision
         she sets out there was no visit to  the  Appellant  by  the  police
         before he left Egypt  in  September  2013.  There  was  no  witness
         statement from any member of his family about the  police  entering
         the Appellant's home before his discharge from hospital. There  was
         no arrest warrant, no official letter  or  summons.  She  concludes
         that the Appellant's  fear  was  based  entirely  on  a  report  by
         unidentified friends who they had seen the police visit  his  home.
         She further notes that the Appellant did not report what his father
         or brother said about the visit. Further, the  Appellant's  village
         was small and he stayed in the village  at  his  sister  and  other
         relative's homes without the police searching for him  or  visiting
         his home.  She further finds at  paragraph  46  that  there  was  a
         significant discrepancy in  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  the
         number of times the police allegedly visited his  home.  Whilst  in
         his interview he stated  it  was  from  time  to  time,  in  cross-
         examination he asserted that it was only once.

     17. I have considered the background evidence cited by Mr Neale in  his
         skeleton argument which is said should have been taken into account
         by the First-tier Tribunal. That evidence is contained in  a  Human
         Rights Watch Report of August 2014. The report sets out how, on  14
         August 2013, Special Forces  entered  Rab'a  hospital  and  ordered
         everyone out of the hospital (CA69). Reference is also  made  to  a
         report of one man being burnt to death in his tent  (CA62)  and  to
         the fact that several hospitals rejected dead or injured protesters
         coming from the square. Reference is also made to large numbers  of
         people being detained overnight (CA73).

     18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the evidence  that  she  took
         into account at paragraph 8 of her decision and  the  report  cited
         above was included there. She refers to the protest at  the  square
         at paragraph 41 of the  decision,  stating  that  a  total  of  600
         protesters and 8 police officers were killed in  the  violence  and
         thousands arrested over the course of the following weeks. She  was
         clearly therefore cognisant of the background to the  protests  and
         consequences for  those  involved.  Whilst  she  made  no  specific
         reference to the passages of the background evidence  cited  by  Mr
         Neale, I do not consider that this lead to a material error of  law
         in terms of her assessment of risk to the Appellant.  That evidence
         does not show that a demonstrator treated at Rab'a  hospital  would
         be at risk from the authorities. The evidence cited does  not  show
         and, no other evidence  was  referred  to  me  to  show,  that  the
         authorities checked the hospital records and used this evidence  to
         pursue demonstrators. I do not accept that  this  is  a  risk  that
         should be inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  police  raided  the
         hospital on the day  of  the  demonstration.  It  does  not  follow
         therefore from the Judge's finding that the Appellant  was  treated
         at Rab'a hospital that he would be at risk. It was  therefore  open
         to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that the Appellant  had  not
         explained  how  the  authorities  would  know   he   was   at   the
         demonstration.

         Ground 2

     19. The Appellant also argues that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
         consider  relevant  background  evidence   in   relation   to   the
         Appellant's support  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal set out the Appellant's claim in relation  to  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood at paragraph 16, noting that he was  a  sympathiser  of
         their charity policies and not a registered member or a  documented
         or recorded supporter. She records that in Egypt he had assisted  a
         local group in distributing food  to  the  needy.   She  states  at
         paragraph 41 that the Egyptian authorities continue to crackdown on
         Muslim Brotherhood members and supporters. She was clearly aware of
         the factual basis of his case.

     20. I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  clear  and  sustainable
         reasons for concluding that the Appellant would not be perceived to
         be "have any profile" with the Egyptian authorities.  It  is  clear
         that she took account of his claim to have assisted a  local  group
         but found that there was no evidence to show that  the  authorities
         considered him to be involved. She  rejected  his  claim  that  the
         authorities would know that he was involved in the demonstration at
         Rabaa Al Adawiya Square and I have found that her findings in  this
         regard were sound. She  gave  clear  and  sustainable  reasons  for
         finding that he had not shown that the authorities were  interested
         in him and made sustainable adverse credibility findings  based  on
         the evidence before her.  It was open to her to find that there had
         been a contradiction in the Appellant's evidence with regard to the
         police visits to his home, that the police had not demonstrated  an
         interest in  him  either  whilst  he  was  in  hospital  or  as  an
         outpatient and that there was no  official  documentation  to  show
         that the authorities were involved.

     21. It is argued that the Appellant's former Facebook  activity  whilst
         living in Greece should have been  considered  as  a  risk  factor.
         However, on the Appellant's own case he had not  used  Facebook  to
         post about the Muslim Brotherhood since the incident in the  square
         and his Facebook account was closed (A5).  The First-tier  Tribunal
         considered the evidence in relation to Facebook at paragraph 45  of
         her decision. She gave clear and adequate reasons for rejecting his
         claim to have a profile in relation to the Muslim Brotherhood.  Her
         findings that he had no on-line presence since arriving in Egypt in
         2013 or since leaving Egypt, that the authorities  were  not  aware
         that he was involved in the demonstration on the  square;  that  he
         had no contact with the local group and that there was no  evidence
         that the local group and been questioned or arrested by the  police
         were sufficient to lead to  a  conclusion  that  he  would  not  be
         perceived as a Muslim Brotherhood supporter.

     22. In view of her findings that the Appellant  had  no  profile  as  a
         Muslim Brotherhood supporter she was not obliged  to  set  out  the
         passages from background evidence relied on by the Appellant in the
         grounds of appeal and skeleton argument. In view of the  fact  that
         she found that he would not be perceived to be a supporter she  did
         not need to engage with the evidence relating to risk to  perceived
         supporters.

         Ground 3

     23. Ground 3 asserts that in finding that the Appellant came to the  UK
         to follow his girlfriend the First-tier Tribunal did  not  consider
         the statement submitted by the girlfriend that the  Appellant  came
         to the UK at her request because of the injuries he  had  sustained
         and the risk of arrest. It is argued that  due  to  refusal  of  an
         application to submit the girlfriend's evidence  by  telephone  the
         Appellant was unable to provide witness evidence on his reasons for
         coming to the UK.

     24. The Appellant applied for a direction on 17 June 2015 for a witness
         to give evidence by telephone. That  witness  was  the  Appellant's
         girlfriend. The reason it was said that she could  not  attend  the
         hearing was set out in her statement and was due to  the  fact  her
         father did not know about the relationship with the  Appellant  and
         she did not want to talk to him about it for fear  of  jeopardising
         it. She asserts that she could not  find  an  explanation  for  the
         absence caused by her return journey from Middlesbrough to Newport.



     25. The First-tier Tribunal refused that application on 18 June 2015 in
         the following terms: "It  is  not  appropriate  to  have  witnesses
         giving evidence by phone. In any event, I see no  good  reason  why
         the witness cannot attend".

     26. The Appellant did not make an application for an adjournment at the
         substantive hearing. At paragraph 9 of the decision the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge notes the refusal of the request  made  on  17  June
         2015 and states that she confirmed that she  would  attribute  such
         weight as  she  deemed  appropriate  to  the  statement.  She  then
         considered the statement at paragraph 37 and stated that  according
         to the Appellant's testimony, she had encouraged the  Appellant  to
         come to the UK illegally and had  deceived  her  father  about  the
         Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom. She concluded that  the
         Appellant had written the statement deceitfully and she  attributed
         little weight to it.

     27.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  not
         adjourning the appeal because there was no such application  before
         her. It was open to  the  Appellant  to  seek  judicial  review  of
         Resident Judge Poole's refusal to issue a direction  but  this  was
         not  done.  I  have  considered  the  case  law  submitted  by  the
         Appellant. Mr Neal relies in his skeleton argument on the cases  of
         AM (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 100 and Nare (evidence by  electronic
         means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 443 (IAC) and submits that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's discretion is wide enough to allow evidence  to  be
         given  by  phone,  and  the  Tribunal  could  have  directed   that
         arrangements be made for her to evidence from a court  or  Tribunal
         centre closer to her home. It is  said  that  the  refusal  of  the
         request did not properly apply the guidance and the Tribunal  could
         have requested more information about the arrangements.

     28. It is clear that the application for a direction on  17  June  2015
         did not follow the guidance in Nare. No  indication  was  given  of
         what arrangements had been made provisionally at  distant  site  or
         whether any investigations had been  made  to  use  a  court  or  a
         Tribunal hearing centre. There is no  evidence  to  show  that  the
         application was served on  the  Respondent.  It  was  not,  as  the
         skeleton argument appears to  assert,  incumbent  on  the  Resident
         Judge who refused the  application  to  make  such  inquiries.  The
         responsibility was clearly the Appellant's and it was  not  carried
         out. In the circumstances Judge Poole's refusal  was  a  reasonable
         judicial response. He was entitled to conclude,  given  the  reason
         for application was for the witness to practice a continued  deceit
         as to the relationship with the Appellant on father, that there was
         no "good reason" why she could not attend.   In the circumstances I
         consider that there was no procedural unfairness.

     29. Further, I find that it was open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
         attach little weight to the girlfriend's evidence. It  is  said  at
         paragraph 15 of the grounds that had the girlfriend  been  able  to
         give evidence the First-tier Tribunal may  have  reached  different
         credibility findings. The girlfriend, in a  short  statement,  sets
         out that she knew the Appellant  was  going  to  Raba'a  Square  to
         demonstrate and that she discovered from his brother the  next  day
         that he was in hospital. She spoke to him by telephone and he  used
         to stay in different places. She told him that he needed to come to
         the UK.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  Appellant  was
         at Rabaa Square and in hospital. The First-tier Tribunal's  adverse
         credibility findings with regard to the risk to the Appellant  were
         made without reference to the girlfriend's evidence.  At  paragraph
         47 the Judge found that he was not at risk and then considered that
         his motivation in coming to the UK was due to having  a  girlfriend
         here. In the circumstances I also find that  the  absence  of  oral
         evidence from the girlfriend cannot be said  to  have  led  to  any
         substantive unfairness. I find no error of law  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision.

     30. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of  law.  I  do  not  set
         aside the decision and the appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  Rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014. I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




    Signed Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
