
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01873/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 3 March 2016                      |On 19 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     S U
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national. He claimed asylum in the United
    Kingdom on 18 June 2013. The Respondent refused to recognise him  as  a
    refugee and on 19 January 2015 made a decision  to  remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The
    Appellant appealed against this decision under s82 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss and in a decision promulgated on 10  June  2015  he
    dismissed the appeal. He found that the Appellant was  not  a  refugee,
    did not qualify for humanitarian protection and that his removal  would
    not breach his rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  on  29  June
    2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge's findings on the
    risk on return were irrational in the face of his findings in  relation
    to the Appellant's account of what happened to him  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka in 2013.

    The Grounds

 3. The grounds assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appeared  to
    accept the Appellant's evidence that he had been ill-treated between 20
    April 2013 and 24 May 2013 due to his actual/past political opinion. He
    found  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible   and   plausible   witness.
    Nevertheless, relying on the country guidance case of  MP  (Sri  Lanka)
    and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829, the Judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was not a Tamil activist and was not working  to  destabilise
    the Sri Lankan state and would  not  be  subject  to  ill-treatment  on
    return. It is submitted that in so doing the Judge failed to take  into
    account that the Sri Lankan authorities had operated a "watch" list  in
    2013 when the Appellant visited Sri Lanka and  the  Appellant  was  not
    then, nor now, a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  Sri  Lankan
    state. He was nevertheless detained and tortured. The  Judge  therefore
    did not take into account the fact  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    might regard him as posing a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka was a
    single state even in the absence of evidence that he had been  involved
    in  diaspora  activities.  It  is  submitted  that  his  findings  were
    irrational and/or that he failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that he would not be subject to ill-treatment on return.

    The Rule 24 Response

 4. The Respondent submits that the finding by the  First-tier  Judge  that
    the Appellant would not be viewed as a threat to the unitary Sri Lankan
    state was open to him and that the grounds are  merely  a  disagreement
    with the findings of fact.

    The Hearing

 5. I heard brief representations from both advocates. Mr Mills informed me
    that he did not  maintain  the  Respondent's  stance  in  the  Rule  24
    Response. He agreed with the Appellant that there was an error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal had
    accepted that the Appellant had  been  detained  and  tortured  on  his
    return to Sri Lanka in May 2013. The Appellant had been detained  after
    the civil war ended in May 2009 and  therefore  fell  in  to  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ and others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319. Further, in the light of the findings of fact
    made the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be reversed and the
    appeal allowed on asylum grounds.




    Discussion and Findings

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 14, that the Appellant  was
    a credible and plausible witness. He accepted that a medical report  in
    relation to the Appellant's  injuries  claimed  to  be  the  result  of
    torture was "well-balanced, careful and generally credible". The expert
    concluded that the physical evidence strongly supported his account  of
    torture in Sri Lanka (paragraph 16).  However,  at  paragraph  17,  the
    First-tier Tribunal concluded that the latest country guidance made  it
    clear that the Appellant would not in future face  such  ill-treatment.
    He came to this conclusion on the basis that the  Appellant's  diaspora
    activities were not sufficient to put him at risk.

 7. The Appellant was, on the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, detained
    and subject to ill-treatment in May 2013 which was within the scope  of
    the evidential period of the country background information covered  in
    GJ and others. In the light of the fact that he was found to have  been
    detained and ill-treated in this period the only conclusion open to the
    First-tier tribunal  was  to  find,  in  accordance  with  the  country
    guidance and MP (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829   that  the
    Appellant was perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as
    a single state or that the evidence showed that  the  Government  might
    regard him as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as
    a single state even in  the  absence  of  evidence  that  he  had  been
    involved in diaspora activism.  There was  no  evidence  to  show  that
    there was a change of country circumstances preventing  this  happening
    again. In the circumstances the First-tier Tribunal's finding that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk of persecution on return was  irrational
    and on the findings made his appeal must be allowed.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on  asylum  grounds  and
under Article 3 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Date 19 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
