
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01184/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 20 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           MASTER TAWABULLAH SAFI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, and a minor.  He claimed to
    have arrived in this country  on  or  about  9  October  2011,  and  he
    subsequently claimed asylum at  the respondent's Asylum Screening  Unit
    in Croydon on 23 November 2011.  At that time, he claimed to have  been
    born on 3 August 1998, but it is apparently acknowledged that he is  in
    fact a year older, having been born on  1  August  1997.   For  present
    purposes, it is immaterial whether he was born in August 1997 or  1998.
    At all material times he was, and remains, a minor.

 2. The appellant's  asylum  claim  (or  in  the  alternative  a  claim  to
    humanitarian protection) was refused by the respondent  on  20  January
    2012, but in line with the respondent's discretionary policy  to  grant
    leave to unaccompanied minors, he was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules until 20 January 2015.

 3. The appellant appealed against the refusal to grant him asylum and this
    appeal is accordingly  an  upgrade  appeal  under  Section  83  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal is limited to
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

 4. The appellant's appeal was originally heard before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge St J Wiseman,  on  14  March  2012,  who  dismissed  his  appeal.
    However, this decision was subsequently set aside by the Upper Tribunal
    and the appeal was remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    further hearing de novo by another First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. The appeal then  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson,
    sitting at Hatton Cross on  27  March  2013,  but  in  a  determination
    prepared on 8 April 2013, and  promulgated  shortly  thereafter,  Judge
    Hodgkinson again dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 6. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission  to  appeal
    having been  granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 23 May 2013.



Basis of Appellant's Appeal

 7. The basis upon which  the  appellant  now  appeals  can  be  summarised
    briefly.  Judge Hodgkinson's finding that the appellant would not be at
    risk on return and that his best interests lay in being  reunited  with
    his family in Kabul, followed on from the adverse credibility  findings
    which he made.  It is submitted on the appellant's  behalf  that  these
    findings were founded at least in part on answers  given  in  a  cross-
    examination which was inappropriate having regard to the  guidance  set
    out at paragraph 351 of the Immigration Rules  with  regard  to  cross-
    examination of minors, and which  was  also  in  breach  of  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines.

 8. The core of the appellant's claim is set out  at  paragraph  4  of  the
    appellant's original application for permission to appeal, but was  not
    accepted  by  Judge  Hodgkinson.   It  is  his  case  now  that   Judge
    Hodgkinson's reasons for  rejecting  his  claim  are  tainted   by  his
    reliance  on  answers  given  in  the   cross-examination   which   was
    inappropriate.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson set out his reasons for granting permission
    to appeal as follows:

         "The renewed grounds challenge the judge's approach in the light of
         the appellant's age (he was born on 1  August  1997  and  so  [was]
         therefore 15 at the date of hearing on 27 March  2013)  as  to  the
         correctness of the cross-examination and the  application  of  para
         351.  Reliance  is  also  based  on  the  grounds  before  the  FtT
         referring to para 351 and the  questionable  expectation  regarding
         the rationality of persecutors supported by authorities listed.

         The judge gave clear reasons why he rejected the core  account.  He
         also disbelieved the appellant  ...  about  the  attempts  to  make
         contact with his mother  whom  he  found  to  be  living  with  the
         appellant's maternal uncle in Kabul where he would not be at risk.

         It is just arguable that in coming to his  conclusions,  the  judge
         did not make sufficient allowance  for  the  appellant's  age  when
         considering the credibility of the risks that it is  claimed  arose
         from the death of his father (when he  was  about  10  years  old).
         More significantly the reasons why the judge did  not  ....  accept
         the evidence why the appellant had not been  able  [to]  make  more
         recent contact [with] his family in Kabul arose in part out  of  an
         assessment of the appellant's performance in cross-examination.  It
         is arguable that the judge did not make  sufficient  allowance  for
         the appellant's age when rejecting the account he heard at [76]."



The Hearing

10. I heard submissions from Ms Cohen on behalf of the appellant  and  also
    submissions on behalf of the respondent from Mr Allan.  In  the  course
    of her submissions, Ms Cohen relied upon the  skeleton  argument  which
    she had submitted prior to the  hearing.  As I recorded the submissions
    contemporaneously,  and  these  are  contained  within  the  Record  of
    Proceedings, I shall not set out everything which was said  during  the
    course of the hearing, but shall refer below only to such parts of  the
    submissions as are necessary for the purposes of this determination.  I
    have, however, had regard to everything which was said to me during the
    course of the hearing, as well as to all the documents contained within
    the file, whether or not these are referred to specifically below.



Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

11. Ms Cohen's primary submission was that the  "overriding  principle"  in
    this case was that, in accordance with paragraph 351 of the Immigration
    Rules, more weight should be given to objective evidence rather than to
    a child's state of mind and understanding of the situation.   Ms  Cohen
    then referred to the relevant extracts  from  the  respondent's  policy
    guidance, at paragraph 9 of her skeleton, and to the UNHCR Guidance, at
    paragraph 10.  She explained the reasons why this  was  the  overriding
    principle, and the way in which that principle should be approached  in
    a hearing.

12. Turning to the determination itself, although at  paragraph  41,  Judge
    Hodgkinson  had  noted  the  principles  to  be  applied,  it  was  the
    appellant's case that he had failed to apply them.  As was set  out  in
    the skeleton argument, the judge had not applied the guidance which was
    set out in Rule 351.

13. Whilst one might forgive a Presenting Officer for asking  some  of  the
    questions, the difficulty in this case is  that  the  approach  adopted
    permeated the entirety of the majority of the cross-examination, before
    she went on to cross-examine the appellant about tracing.

14. Although it  was  accepted  that  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence were not entirely irrelevant, because of  the  limited  weight
    which could be placed  on  this,  it  was  not  proper  to  concentrate
    exclusively  on  this  in  cross-examination.   Even  if   the   cross-
    examination was approached in this way, and that was  the  respondent's
    case, as a matter of law, the judge should not have attached more  than
    limited weight to the appellant's answers.

15. Although no objection was taken to the form of cross-examination  while
    that cross-examination was taking place, this  was  raised  before  the
    judge in submissions.  Ms Cohen had not considered  it  appropriate  at
    that time to jump in in the middle of cross-examination, which  is  why
    she waited to make her submissions to this effect until the  completion
    of the cross-examination.  It was the appellant's case that  the  judge
    had placed undue weight on answers given during this cross-examination.
     Although the judge had noted the principles to be applied, he had  not
    applied them.  As an example, at paragraph 56, the judge  had  referred
    to the appellant's evidence about why he had been forced  to  join  the
    Taliban, which  was  a  reference  to  his  state  of  mind  about  his
    situation.

16. Then again at paragraph 57, the appellant had  been  asked  why  Zekria
    (the man who it was claimed had had a land  dispute  with  his  father)
    could not simply have gone to Pakistan in order to kill the  appellant;
    this flew in the face of the approach which should be taken with regard
    to minor applicants claiming asylum.  Although no  objection  had  been
    taken to this question at the time, the judge should  not  have  placed
    any weight on this part of the cross-examination in his  determination.
    Questions as to the appellant's understanding of the situation were not
    appropriate.  A similar point was made with regard to what was set  out
    in paragraphs 59 and 60 of the determination.

17. In answer  to  a  question  from  the  Tribunal  as  to  where  in  the
    determination Judge Hodgkinson had relied on the appellant's  inability
    to give sensible answers to  the  questions  he  was  asked,  Ms  Cohen
    referred to paragraph 61.  As I noted at the time, this appeared to  be
    a reference  to  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  account,  the
    relevant extract from paragraph 61 being as follows:

         "I find it wholly to lack credibility that, on the  one  hand,  the
         appellant states that Zekria wished the appellant to be  killed  in
         battle and, on the other hand, that he did not kill  the  appellant
         sooner  because  he  wanted  the  appellant's  thumb  print  on   a
         document."

18. Judge Hodgkinson continued as follows:

         "I reiterate that there is no reference earlier in the  appellant's
         evidence to Zekria wanting  any  kind  of  thumb  print  or  formal
         acknowledgment from the appellant in relation to the land.  I would
         reiterate that, in the appellant's earlier  evidence,  he  did  not
         even make mention of Zekria actually having taken any land;  simply
         to a  land  dispute.  I  find  the  appellant's  evidence,  in  the
         circumstances, and even  having taken  into  account  his  cultural
         background, lack of education and  young  age,  to  be  lacking  in
         credibility in material respects."

19. It was Ms Cohen's submission, on behalf of the appellant, that although
    the judge had referred to the appellant's failure to mention  the  land
    dispute earlier, it had always been his evidence that there had been  a
    land dispute. The appellant's failure to clarify who took the land at a
    later stage was plausible, in light of the  fact  that  he  had  always
    maintained that there was a land dispute.  It was the appellant's  case
    that the judge's finding as to the reason why  the  appellant  had  not
    been able to make more recent contact with his family in Kabul depended
    on his reliance to answers given in cross-examination which went beyond
    what was appropriate.  This arose out of an assessment of  his  earlier
    cross-examination.

20. With regard to the appellant's evidence as to why he had not been  able
    to contact his family in Afghanistan, the judge had failed to take into
    account the appellant's evidence that he did not know that  his  mother
    was still in Kabul, such that his  inability  to  get  through  to  her
    subsequently in Kabul was credible.

21. With regard to the judge's reliance on the  apparent  inconsistency  in
    the appellant's evidence such that on the one hand he said that someone
    had picked up the telephone and told  him  he  had  dialled  the  wrong
    number, but on another occasion he had said it was  a  computer  voice,
    it was  asserted  that  "the  earlier  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence permeated the judge's assessment of this evidence."



Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Allan first reminded the Tribunal  that
    no objections had been raised on behalf  of  the  appellant  while  the
    cross-examination had been taking place.  Ms Cohen's primary  assertion
    was that because the cross-examination had been inappropriate,  insofar
    as the judge's findings had been  founded on answers given during cross-
    examination, he should not have placed any reliance on these answers.

23. The Tribunal accordingly had to consider first whether or not the cross-
    examination was inappropriate, and it  was  the  respondent's  position
    that it was not.  The policy itself was set out at paragraphs 8, 9  and
    10 of the skeleton argument prepared on behalf of  the  appellant,  and
    the key matter which needed to be highlighted was the distinct  absence
    from  any  guidelines  that  a  Tribunal  could  not  have  regard   to
    inconsistency.  At no point was it said that allowance should have been
     made for inconsistent accounts having been given.  Indeed, although it
    was said that allowance should have been made for variations in  levels
    of understanding of a minor, and with regard to a  minor's  ability  to
    interpret or understand detail, it is not said that children are likely
    to be internally inconsistent in their accounts. In that  context,  the
    cross-examination was entirely appropriate.  For example, at  paragraph
    61, the judge referred to how the appellant had embellished his earlier
    evidence, and the purpose of cross-examination had  been  precisely  to
    test the consistency of the appellant's account.  That  was  where  the
    failure to object during the course of the  hearing was  material.   It
    was not that Ms Cohen was incapable of objecting during the  course  of
    the evidence; indeed, at paragraph 31 of his determination,  the  judge
    refers to the challenge she had made with regard  to  the  interpreter.
    So, clearly, if the appellant's Counsel  had  considered  the  line  of
    questioning to be inappropriate at  the  time,  this  could  have  been
    challenged.

24. What follows from this is that the real meat of the challenge was  that
    the judge had placed too much weight on the answers given, so what  the
    appeal really came down to was a  challenge to the weight given to  the
    findings of fact.

25. It was the respondent's  submission  that  the  judge's  findings  with
    regard to credibility of the appellant's account were open to him.  The
    findings were not based on inappropriately obtained evidence  and   his
    view was a broad one with regard to  credibility.   He  had  based  his
    assessment not on the level of detail which the  appellant  had  given,
    nor on his understanding, but on inconsistencies within  his  evidence.
    Because this was the basis of the  judge's  findings,  the  grounds  in
    effect amounted to no more than a disagreement with these findings.

26. The Tribunal also had to have in mind that the question which had to be
    determined was not whether it agreed with the findings which the  judge
    had made, but whether these findings had been open  to  him.    Plainly
    they were.

27. In reply, Ms Cohen submitted that the  findings  that  the  appellant's
    evidence had been inconsistent had  been  founded  on  improper  cross-
    examination.  Although objection had not been taken during  the  cross-
    examination  itself,  objection  had  been  made  during  the   closing
    submissions.  It had been argued on behalf of the appellant  that  more
    weight should be given to the objective indications, rather than to the
    appellant's understanding or state of mind.  Insofar as the appellant's
    Counsel should have objected during cross-examination, Ms Cohen  relied
    upon the decision in FP  (Iran),  where  it  was  made  clear  that  an
    applicant should not be blamed for the fault of Counsel.







Discussion

28. The issue before this Tribunal is a discrete one.  Did the  judge  make
    an error of law by making findings which were partly founded on answers
    given  during  the  course  of  a  cross-examination  which  had   been
    inappropriate?

29. The difficulty with this submission is that Ms Cohen accepted that  she
    could not argue that no questions could be asked of the appellant which
    touched on the areas to which regard should not be had.  Rather, having
    not objected during cross-examination itself, it was  only  after  that
    cross-examination, she says, that she realised that most of the  cross-
    examination had been directed to areas which, in the  case  of  minors,
    were with hindsight inappropriate, because they went to  his  state  of
    mind  rather  than  the  objective  evidence.   That  was  why  in  her
    submissions to the judge, she had made this point.

30. I do  not consider this argument to be tenable.  It is clear  from  his
    determination that the judge understood clearly  the  allowances  which
    had to be made with  regard  to  the  appellant's  evidence.   So,  for
    example, at paragraph 41, he said in terms that:

         "In assessing the appellant's evidence, I confirm that I have  done
         so by taking into account fully his young  age  at  the  time  when
         certain claimed events would have occurred in Afghanistan, and also
         his relative youth at the time of the  hearing  before  me,  and  I
         have made appropriate allowances, because of his age,  in  relation
         to the appellant's ability to recall and understand recent events."

31. Then,  again,  at  paragraph  61,  in  the  course  of  making  adverse
    credibility findings, the judge made clear  that  these  findings  were
    made even after giving appropriate allowance for the appellant's age:

         "I find the appellant's evidence, in the  circumstances,  and  even
         having  taken  into  account  his  cultural  background,  lack   of
         education and young age, to be lacking in credibility  in  material
         respects."

32. It is clear  from  the  determination  that  the   judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence because of the inconsistencies in  that  evidence,
    and with regard to his account generally, and these inconsistencies are
    fully set out  in  the  determination.   Essentially,  therefore,  this
    appeal, although very attractively argued, does not in substance amount
    to anything more than a challenge to findings of fact which  the  judge
    was entitled to make.  Ms Cohen is correct that great care  has  to  be
    taken when assessing the evidence of young people,  but  as  the  judge
    made  clear  in  his  determination,  he  did  take  great  care,   but
    nonetheless felt obliged, for the reasons which he has given, to reject
    substantial parts of the appellant's evidence despite his young age.

33. Accordingly, I do not consider  that  the  determination  contains  any
    error of law, whether material  or  otherwise,  and  this  appeal  must
    accordingly be dismissed.



Decision

There being  no  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Date: 20 November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
