

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01870/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 17 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DSG
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Beckford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Jessica Pacey that was promulgated on 18 November  2015.   Judge  Pacey
    found the appellant was a refugee from Afghanistan on  account  of  his
    Sikh religion.

 2. After listening to Mr  Mills  and  Mr  Bedford,  I  realised  that  the
    question I am asked to resolve is in effect  whether  Judge  Pacey  had
    proper regard to the Upper Tribunal's country guideline  case,  TG  and
    others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595  (IAC).
    Judge Pacey refers to this case at [42].  She did not hear  submissions
    in relation to this case because it was reported after the  appeal  was
    heard but before Judge Pacey issued her decision.

 3. Mr Mills submits that Judge Pacey failed to make relevant  findings  in
    relation to the third and  fifth  head  notes.   In  its  guidance,  he
    argues, the Upper Tribunal had reminded judges of the  need  to  assess
    each case on its own facts to decide whether a Sikh would face  a  real
    risk of persecution on return and whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect a Sikh to relocate within Afghanistan.  Mr Bedford  argues  that
    the judge was clear in her finding that she found the appellant  to  be
    credible and therefore she needed to do no more.

 4. Mr Bedford argues that  it  is  difficult  to  identify  how  the  Home
    Office's complaints amount to an error of law.  Although I  agree  that
    in hindsight the Home Office could have presented  its  arguments  more
    cogently, I do not agree that there is no merit in the complaints.   Of
    course the Home Office cannot rely on an  argument  that  a  judge  had
    erred simply for being brief since brevity is to be commended.  But  it
    is clear that the complaints are not in fact about brevity but focus on
    whether Judge Pacey made adequate findings.

 5. It is evident to me that Judge Pacey gives her key findings in relation
    to TG from [45]  to  [48].   She  examined  the  appellant's  financial
    circumstances and concluded that it was reasonably likely the appellant
    would not have access to basic accommodation for the reasons  described
    in TG and that the appellant's son would not have access  to  education
    in Afghanistan because the appellant himself  had  not  been  educated.
    The judge also concluded that it would be impractical for the appellant
    to relocate because  of  the  general  situation  in  Afghanistan.   In
    reaching her conclusions, Judge Pacey had regard to  the  circumstances
    of the appellant's father and identified they were different because he
    had taken a non-Sikh partner.  The judge found there was no  reason  to
    think the appellant would be able to  enjoy  any  protection  from  her
    presence and this is unchallenged.

 6. The Home Office challenges these findings on the basis that  the  judge
    has not explained how she came to them.  In  its  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, the Home Office  challenged  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    brother being kidnapped and their father selling his shop  to  pay  the
    ransom.  At no juncture has the judge explained why she  accepted  this
    account even though her conclusions at [45] rely on a positive  finding
    of credibility on these issues.  Although Judge  Pacey  considered  the
    appellant's credibility from [23] to  [36]  her  findings  therein  are
    focused on the question of whether the appellant is from Afghanistan (a
    matter that was in dispute but is no longer  disputed).   There  is  no
    assessment in the decision  and  reasons  statement  to  show  why  she
    accepted the appellant's account of his brother's kidnap.

 7. I am also concerned  that  the  judge  has  not  provided  reasons  for
    accepting  the  appellant's  general  credibility  and  therefore   her
    assessment  of  credibility  is  contrary  to  paragraph  339L  of  the
    immigration rules insofar as it has not properly considered s.8 of  the
    2004 Act.  The appellant's account was  not  supported  by  documentary
    evidence and therefore to assess credibility the judge had to  consider
    whether the five-point test was satisfied.  The analysis at  [35]  does
    not  consider  the  fact  the  appellant  was  handed  to  the   French
    authorities and remained in France  for  over  a  month.   The  judge's
    conclusions are only sustainable if it is assumed the appellant and his
    family travelled to the UK immediately after being  encountered  rather
    than in the circumstances actually established by the Home Office.

 8. I conclude that Judge Pacey had not made findings on  relevant  matters
    and therefore her assessments of the appellant's  credibility  and  his
    circumstances should he return to Afghanistan are not  sustainable.   I
    find there is an error on a point of law that requires the decision  to
    be set aside.  As further evidence  and  argument  will  be  needed  to
    resolve the issues, it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing where all issues can  be  considered.
    The hearing should be before any judge other than Judge Jessica Pacey.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jessica
Pacey contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  afresh
before any judge other than Judge Pacey.



                               Signed                     Date 16/08/2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
