

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/01936/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2013                               |On 15 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                SOMIRUN NESSA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  She claimed asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Following the refusal of her claim by the Secretary of
    State, she appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  She did not attend the
    hearing of the appeal;  there  was,  instead,  a  telephone  call  from
    somebody else, saying that she was not fit to attend.  Judge Archer was
    not persuaded that there was any good reason  for  her  non-attendance,
    and proceeded to deal with the matter in her absence on 2  April  2013.
    On 4 April 2013 he was sent a letter by a surgery which  the  appellant
    had attended (but which apparently had not seen her  previously).   The
    letter gave no support to the appellant's  claim  that  she  could  not
    attend the hearing.  The judge therefore  saw  no  reason  to  reach  a
    different view about whether it had been appropriate to continue in her
    absence.   He  completed  his  determination  on  15  April  2013.   He
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.    She
    applied  out  of  time.   Judge  Saffer  extended  time,  and   granted
    permission on the basis that:


          "It is arguable  that  the  Tribunal  should  have  adjourned  the
          hearing given she has established that she was ill on the  day  of
          the hearing and had attended her doctors in Swansea  that  morning
          whereas the hearing was in Newport and her credibility was  a  key
          issue in the case"

 3. It seems to us perfectly clear on the basis of the  material  that  was
    before Judge Saffer as it is before us, that Judge Archer was  entirely
    right not to adjourn the hearing.  The evidence was of a mild  illness,
    self-diagnosed,  and  the  doctor's  letter  also  indicated  that  the
    appellant had been seen walking down the road on the afternoon  of  the
    hearing.  There was simply no evidence that she was unfit to attend the
    hearing of her asylum appeal, which, if there is any truth in it, would
    be a matter of great importance to her.  We are confident that if  that
    had been the only issue in this appeal, it would not have  detained  us
    for very long.

 4. During the hearing before us, however,  another  issue  arose.   Doubts
    about the appellant's credibility have formed a  considerable  part  of
    the basis for the Secretary of State's refusal of  her  claim  and  the
    judge's dismissal of her appeal.  Those doubts arise in part  from  the
    claimant's history, as a person who came as a visitor with her children
    and claimed asylum only shortly before  the  expiry  of  her  visitor's
    visa, partly because the claim appeared to be in contradiction of  what
    had been said, and documented, in relation to the application  for  the
    visa, and partly because of other inconsistencies.  We  rehearsed  some
    of these with the appellant.  It became clear that certain parts of her
    interview must have been mistranslated; or, if there was  no  fault  in
    translation, the interviewer failed to respond to  what  the  appellant
    was saying.  The clearest example is in  questions  36  and  following,
    when the appellant is talking about a woman called Newarun  Nessa,  and
    the interviewer thinks she is talking about a man.  It may be that  the
    interviewer's assumption is justifiable, given that the questions  were
    about a man; but it is clear from the English transcript that  the  two
    of them were at cross purposes.

 5. We should not be understood to give any indication that the appellant's
    appeal should succeed.  It is for her to show that her word is entitled
    to credit.  In that context, however, it is important that factors such
    as those that we  have  indicated  are  taken  properly  into  account.
    Newarun Nessa is clearly a  woman's  name,  and  this  feature  of  the
    interview should have been identified by the judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We appreciate  that  it  is  much  easier  to  say  that  in
    retrospect and that he had no assistance  at  all  in  identifying  any
    defects of the interview record.

 6. Nevertheless, it appears to us that his decision  must  be  set  aside.
    This is an appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal and
    we have identified the appropriate date for a new hearing as 21  August
    2013.  We told the appellant of that date and that she must expect that
    the final decision of her appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  be
    taken following the hearing on that date.

 7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed: the  appellant's
    appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is  remitted  for
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal's  sitting  at  Columbus  House,
    Newport, on 21 August 2013 at 10am.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 15 August 2013
