
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          AA/01965/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field   House                                        Decision   &
                                             Reasons promulgated
On 3 March 2016       On 21 July 2016

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     P S
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Skinner of Counsel instructed by ATM Law.
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  N  Willocks-Briscoe,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Daldry promulgated on 11  November  2015  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  8  December  2014
      refusing the Appellant leave to remain in the UK  following  rejection
      of his asylum claim.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 12 June 1992.


   3. The background to the appeal  is  helpfully  set  out  in  summary  at
      paragraph 7  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
      following terms:

"The appellant's claim is that he is an Afghan national who fears  returning
      to Afghanistan because of work he carried out  for  a  company  namely
      Kamal  Khan  Mandoziai  Transport  (KKMT)  and  Aria  Target  Logistic
      Services (ATLS), these being  groups  associated  with  NATO  and  the
      foreign forces. The appellant  worked  as  an  interpreter  and  as  a
      consequence of this believes he would be at risk of  being  killed  or
      seriously harmed if he were to be returned to Afghanistan.  He  claims
      that he would be unable to safely relocate within Afghanistan and that
      he would not be afforded protection from the risks  to  which  he  was
      exposed by the authorities in Afghanistan."


   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted aspects of the claim,  but  was
      not satisfied that the Appellant was at risk of harm, or even  held  a
      genuine fear for his life.


   5. In particular the Judge accepted: that the Appellant  had  worked  for
      KKMT and ATLS from December 2008 until January 2010, being 16 when  he
      started and 17 when he left (paragraph 32); that the  Appellant  would
      likely have come to the attention of the Taliban, and it was  entirely
      plausible that his father  was  sent  letters  about  the  Appellant's
      employment (paragraph 35); that the Appellant's father was  threatened
      and imprisoned, and that money was paid to the Taliban (paragraph 36).


   6. The Judge noted, considered, analysed, and made findings in respect of
      the circumstances of the Appellant's father's detention and release by
      the Taliban, and the Appellant  ceasing  employment  and  leaving  for
      Pakistan to study and obtain an IELTS qualification  with  a  view  to
      applying  for  a  student  visa  to  the  UK.  This  analysis,  across
      paragraphs 37-40, concludes at paragraph 40 in these terms:

"I accept that there was some fear motivating the appellant in that  it  had
      become difficult for him in Afghanistan due to his employment and that
      his father had come to the attention of the Taliban as a result of his
      employment. However his own  account  of  his  reasons  for  going  to
      Pakistan did not suggest to me that he was a young man in fear of  his
      life. I note that he did not leave until after his father was released
      and in my finding this suggests that he himself was  not  in  fear  of
      direct reprisal from the Taliban  during  the  time  of  his  father's
      incarceration, nor was I presented with any evidence that  he  himself
      had been targeted at any time.  All  the  letters  sent  were  to  his
      father, his father was punished and then released and the  appellant's
      own evidence was that since that time,  there  has  been  no  specific
      threat  to  his  father  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  previous
      employment as a young  man  with  KKMT  and  ATLS.  I  note  that  the
      appellant did not claim asylum in Pakistan. Again this suggests to  me
      that he was not in fear for his  life  at  that  time.  He  stayed  in
      Pakistan for a year improving his English for the purposes  of  taking
      the IELTS test and there was no evidence to suggest that  during  that
      time his father was targeted. The evidence suggested to me  that  once
      the appellant was known to have left his employment  then  neither  he
      nor his family were of interest to the Taliban."


   7. The Judge also had regard to H and B v United Kingdom [2013] ECHR  298
      in reaching the conclusion "that as the appellant is no longer working
      in his former role and has not done so for over five years, then he is
      unlikely to be targeted by the Taliban" (paragraphs 41-43).


   8. The Judge further considered risk on return at paragraphs  48-50.  She
      acknowledged the State's weakness in providing protection to those who
      required it (paragraph 49), but did not consider  that  the  Appellant
      was reasonably likely at risk such that he  required  protection.  The
      Judge reiterated that she  found  there  to  be  an  absence  of  risk
      "because he is no longer working as an interpreter,  five  years  have
      now elapsed since he left Afghanistan and I have  not  been  furnished
      with evidence of continuing interest in him  specifically"  (paragraph
      49). The Judge also  stated  that  the  country  information  did  not
      suggest that the Appellant would be exposed to a risk of being  handed
      over to the Taliban by his father (paragraph 48), and that  there  was
      no risk to the Appellant's father -  "his  father  was  released  from
      prison and there has been, no specific and evidenced interest  in  the
      appellant since that time" (paragraph 49). The  Judge  concluded  that
      the Appellant  "would  be  returning  to  Kabul  as  an  educated  and
      resourceful young man who would be able to live independently there in
      my finding and that on this basis his  asylum  claim  should  fail  as
      should his Article 2 and 3 claims" (paragraph 50).


   9. In respect of the Appellant' s actual role as an  employee  the  Judge
      said this:

"[H]e was a young man when he  was  first  employed  and  he  described  his
      duties as clerical, answering a question about his job title by saying
      "it was like a clerk". He was a recent school leaver at  aged  sixteen
      and explained that the organisation needed someone  to  speak  English
      who was also familiar with a computer. It is clear that he was working
      for a NATO-related organisation and the COI report at the time of  the
      refusal (February  2013)  identified  that  people  working  for  such
      organisations were at risk, "according to the  AIHRC,  people  working
      with international forces are targeted  by  the  Taliban.  Translators
      working for US military or ISAF forces were  mentioned  by  the  AIHRC
      among the Taliban targets. As regards family members of people working
      for the international forces, there are examples that the Taliban  has
      intimidated their families and acquaintances, but the real risk is for
      the person working for the forces".
Therefore although the appellant was a young man at the time,  I  find  that
      because of the nature of the organisations he was working for, he  was
      likely to come to the attention of the Taliban regardless of the level
      of interpreting that he was actually carrying out." (Paragraph 33-34)


  10. I pause to note that it is clear from the Judge's  finding  that  what
      was considered to be  particularly  germane  in  the  Appellant  being
      targetted was the fact of work for the international forces in itself,
      rather than specifically the nature of that work.


  11. His appeal having been dismissed, the Appellant sought  permission  to
      appeal which was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford
      on 8 December 2015, but subsequently granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Connor on 15 January 2016.


  12. The grant of permission to appeal was in these terms:

"It is arguable that the FtT failed to make a  finding  as  to  whether  the
      appellant would obtain employment as an  interpreter  upon  return  to
      Afghanistan and, if so, whether (i) this would  put  him  at  risk  of
      being persecuted and (ii) he should lawfully be  required  to  refrain
      from taking such employment in order to avoid being persecuted.
All grounds may be argued."


Consideration

  13. The Appellant's grounds identify themselves as 'broadly' twofold: "(i)
      the Judge's treatment of the issue of risk  on  return  and  (ii)  her
      analysis of his  fear  in  Pakistan,  a  third  country"  (Grounds  at
      paragraph 5).


  14. Although the grant of permission to appeal indicated that "all grounds
      may be argued", there was no express or specific focus on  the  second
      of the broad 'topics'. It is to be noted that this line  of  challenge
      is advanced in a somewhat cautious way, the language  of  the  grounds
      seemingly uncertain as to their  own  premise:  "although  it  is  not
      entirely clear", "In so far as that is intended to mean",  "Whilst  it
      is accepted that it is not clear...". What is suggested in the grounds
      is that the Judge's conclusions in respect of the Appellant's state of
      mind whilst in Pakistan  -  that  he  was  not  in  fear  having  left
      Afghanistan and attempting to put himself in a position to be able  to
      apply for entry clearance to the UK as a student - was not a  relevant
      consideration  to  evaluating  the  Appellant's  subjective  fear   of
      persecution in Afghanistan.


  15. In my judgement it was entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      to conclude that the failure  to  claim  protection  in  Pakistan  and
      instead to seek to  arrange  to  enter  the  UK  indicated  a  primary
      motivation of study and improvement rather  than  seeking  protection,
      and that this was a relevant consideration in an overall evaluation of
      the Appellant's case  (paragraph  46).  It  is,  of  course,  entirely
      possible that a person seeking to enter the UK  for  the  purposes  of
      study might also have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  their
      country of origin. Whether or not that is indeed  the  situation  will
      require to be determined on the evidence and facts of  the  particular
      case. It was open to the Judge to conclude as she did at paragraph 46.
      I do not accept that the Judge considered the mere fact of  coming  to
      the UK to study as determinative in and of  itself,  but  reached  the
      conclusion in this regard on the evidence and facts of this particular
      case. The approach of the Judge was not materially different  to  that
      required by section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.


  16. More significantly, in my judgement this analysis - both by the  Judge
      and in turn in the challenge  raised  by  the  Appellant  -  does  not
      materially impact upon the  overall  assessment  of  actual  risk,  as
      opposed to the Appellant's subjective fear, in  Afghanistan.  Even  if
      there were an error in this regard - which I do not accept - it  would
      not be material to the overall outcome of the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.


  17. The primary ground of challenge, as  now  advanced  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal, is essentially based on two premises, which I observe do not
      appear to have featured in the articulation of  the  Appellant's  case
      before the First-tier Tribunal - e.g. see Skeleton Argument  dated  12
      October 2015 wherein the focus is on a risk on return by reason of the
      events of the Appellant's history rather than likely future conduct  -
      notwithstanding the unsupported, and seemingly undeveloped,  assertion
      in the Appellant's witness statement "If I  return  I  would  have  to
      continue such work..." (witness statement  8 October  2015,  paragraph
      34).


  18. The Appellant's case, as identified in  the  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal, does indeed now  focus  on  possible  future  conduct  by  the
      Appellant potentially giving rise to risk  subsequent  to  return,  or
      otherwise possible future restraint from conduct thereby impinging  on
      Convention rights. There are essentially two limbs to this challenge:

(i) That the Appellant would work again in  Afghanistan  as  an  interpreter
      for the representatives of foreign agencies; and

(ii) That the Appellant cannot - for the purposes of  the  Convention  -  be
      expected to modify his behaviour in this regard.


  19. The grant of permission to appeal reflects the approach articulated in
      MSM (journalists; political opinion; risk) Somalia [2015]  UKUT  00413
      (IAC) - to  the  effect  that  what  is  required  is  "an  evaluative
      predictive judgement" (paragraph 35) as to conduct on  return,  and  a
      consideration of whether an effective requirement to restrain  oneself
      from certain conduct would itself engage the Convention. The  analysis
      in MSM is informed by and draws  upon  in  particular,  RT  (Zimbabwe)
      [2012] UKSC 38 and HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.


  20. RT (Zimbabwe) saw the extension of the  HJ  (Iran)  principle  to  not
      expressing a political opinion. At paragraph 25  Lord  Dyson  restates
      "that there are no hierarchies of  protection  amongst  the  [Refugee]
      Convention reasons for persecution", before going on to observe:

"The Convention reasons reflect characteristics  or  statuses  which  either
      the individual cannot change or cannot be expected to  change  because
      they are so closely linked to his identity or  are  an  expression  of
      fundamental rights."

In this latter regard Lord Dyson goes on, at paragraph 27, to cite  his  own
      words from paragraph 110 of HJ (Iran):

"If the price that a person must pay in order to avoid persecution  is  that
      he must conceal his  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
      social  group  or  political  opinion,  then  his  being  required  to
      surrender the very protection  that  the  Convention  is  intended  to
      secure for him. The Convention would be failing in its purpose  if  it
      were to mean that a gay man does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution because he would conceal the fact that he is a gay man  in
      order to avoid persecution on return to his home country."


  21. In considering issues similar to those that arise herein, but  instead
      in the context of a journalist at  risk  in  Somalia  because  of  his
      perceived political  opinions,  the  Tribunal  in  MSM  made,  amongst
      others, the following germane observations.

"The Appellant's case on this issue was  supported  by  UNHCR,  intervening.
      The core submission of Ms Demetriou QC was that it is unlawful to deny
      an asylum applicant refugee status on the basis  that  they  could  be
      expected to conceal, or exercise discretion or restraint  in  relation
      to, one of the core protections provided  by  the  Refugee  Convention
      namely race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social
      group or political opinion, in order  to  avoid  persecution.  It  was
      argued that asylum cannot be refused  on  a  basis  which  expects  or
      requires the applicant to disavow a right, or status, protected by the
      Convention. This argument recognises that the practice of a particular
      profession  is  not  protected  by  the  Convention.  However,  it  is
      emphasised that political opinion is a protected ground and,  further,
      that the Appellant's chosen profession of journalism is  indissociable
      from his actual or imputed political opinion. As a result,  to  expect
      or require him to relinquish his profession contravenes the Convention
      as it directly undermines one of the protections  which  it  affords."
      (Paragraph 30).

"Thus the focus must be on the future conduct of the  person  concerned.  In
      all cases, this requires a finding or,  perhaps  more  accurately,  an
      evaluative predictive judgment which, we consider, is to be undertaken
      according to the civil standard  of  the  balance  of  probabilities."
      (Paragraph 35).

"We are prompted to repeat our observation above: protection  of  the  right
      in question must prevail. To this we would add that this  is  achieved
      by the grant of refugee status. The effect of such grant is to  enable
      the person concerned to exercise the right freely in  the  country  of
      refuge." (Paragraph 37).


  22. It may be seen that it is not intended that the Refugee Convention  be
      an instrument that protects the right  to  pursue  any  profession  or
      engage in any employment. Indeed as much is expressly acknowledged  in
      MSM at paragraph 50: "We acknowledge at this point  the  Secretary  of
      State's argument that the Refugee  Convention  does  not  protect  the
      right to pursue a profession of one's  choice".  The  Convention  will
      only be engaged if such pursuit, or the coerced  restraint  from  such
      pursuit, impacts upon the types of rights that are the object  of  the
      Convention.


  23. With these matters in mind, I turn to the two limbs that  have  become
      the focus of proceedings.


  24. The first relates to the requirement to make an 'evaluative predictive
      judgement' of the Appellant's  conduct  in  the  event  of  return  to
      Afghanistan, and specifically whether he would obtain employment as an
      interpreter upon return.


  25. The criticism of the Judge's failure in this regard - and  it  is  not
      and could not reasonably be disputed  that  the  Judge  made  no  such
      express finding - is to some extent unfair given that this  aspect  of
      the case that has assumed core relevance before the Upper Tribunal was
      not apparently articulated before the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed  if
      this were a key element  of  the  Appellant's  claim  one  would  have
      expected to see substantially more in the evidence before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal than the seemingly passing reference at paragraph 34  of
      the witness statement (quoted above) - which  was  not  referenced  or
      otherwise amplified or developed in the Skeleton Argument.


  26. Be that as  it  may,  the  guidance  in  MSM  suggests  that  such  an
      evaluation is nonetheless required. I pause to express my doubt as  to
      whether the Tribunal was ruling that that is inevitably  so  in  every
      case, or whether it is only really a requirement in the likely limited
      number of cases in which there is a potential risk from future conduct
      (rather than past conduct), and in circumstances where it is  apparent
      that the conduct, or restraint from such conduct, is of a nature  that
      engages a Refugee Convention reason. In particular, the categories  of
      job where refraining from taking employment equates to refraining from
      expressing a political view or practising a particular religious faith
      or pursuing a lifestyle based on a particular sexuality, are likely to
      be few.


  27. On the facts of this particular case I observe the following:

(i) The only reference to possible future conduct in respect  of  employment
      in the entirety of the evidence that I  am  able  to  identify  is  at
      paragraph 34 of the Appellant's witness statement of  8  October  2015
      where he states: "The only job I have had in Afghanistan was  the  one
      with KKMT and ATLS. If I return I will have to continue such work  and
      I and my family will be in  danger."  Even  in  the  context  of  this
      paragraph the Appellant goes on to describe alternative  scenarios  in
      which he does not take such employment, but instead relocates.

(ii) This statement is now articulated  into  the  following  submission  of
      fact in the Grounds of appeal: "[A]s his work as a translator was  the
      only job he  had  had,  he  would  continue  such  work"  (grounds  at
      paragraph 7.2).

(iii) Such a submission is  devoid  of  logic  both  generally  and  in  the
      particular circumstances of this case.

(iv) In general terms, the fact of  having  previously  taken  one  type  of
      employment does not render it inevitable  that  the  same  or  similar
      employment would be undertaken in the future. Nor does it  indicate  a
      fitness for only one type of employment.

(v) There is  nothing  in  the  Appellant's  particular  circumstances  that
      indicates either that he would be unsuited to any sort  of  employment
      that did not  involve  assisting  foreign  agencies  (whether  in  the
      context of acting as a translator or otherwise), or that he could only
      find such employment if returned to Afghanistan.

(vi) There is nothing  in  the  Appellant's  particular  circumstances  that
      indicates a dedication or drive to develop a career as a translator or
      interpreter, or otherwise to develop  a  career  working  for  foreign
      agencies in Afghanistan.

(vii) Moreover the logic of  the  Appellant's  submission  is  fundamentally
      defeated by the findings of the Judge. Bearing in mind that the  Judge
      has acknowledged the risk to those working for foreign  agencies,  her
      conclusion at paragraph 50 that the Appellant could  return  to  Kabul
      "as an educated and resourceful young man who would be  able  to  live
      independently there" is implicitly premised upon a  finding  that  the
      Appellant would be able to find and obtain some alternative employment
      to support his independent existence without resorting to resuming the
      same or similar employment as he had previously undertaken. This is to
      reject the substance of the Appellant's  unsupported  and  undeveloped
      assertion at paragraph 34 of his witness statement.

(viii) Although, as noted above, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that
      the adverse interest shown in the Appellant by the  Taliban  arose  by
      reason of the fact of his employment assisting foreign agencies rather
      than specifically because of his role as a translator, it is the  role
      as a translator that the Appellant has  sought  to  emphasise  in  his
      appeal. In my judgement it is transparent  that  he  has  done  so  by
      reason of the widespread publicity and campaigning in support  of  the
      grant of protection to some who worked directly alongside UK and  NATO
      armed forces in Afghanistan as interpreters, for example communicating
      between troops and civilians during patrols, or in more sensitive work
      such as interrogation. It is clear that the Appellant has not acted in
      anything approaching that sort of role. Be that as it may, nothing  in
      the analysis herein turns upon  such  a  distinction  between  someone
      employed by a sub-contractor supplying transport services who  in  the
      context of that role acts as an occasional interpreter between the sub-
      contractor and the military end-user, and a person  employed  directly
      to assist and work alongside  the  military  on  operational  security
      manoeuvres and the military's engagement with the civilian  population
      and/or the enemy.

(ix) I note that the Appellant did  not  apply  specifically  to  become  an
      interpreter or translator:  such  work  as  he  has  undertaken  as  a
      translator appears to have been essentially incidental to his  primary
      role.

(x) There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that  the  Appellant's  work
      was  motivated  by  any  sort  of   ideology   either   generally   or
      specifically,  or  any  personal  drive  or  ambition  to  become   an
      interpreter. See for example the asylum interview at question 35:  "Q.
      Why did you decide to apply for the job? A. I was  a  student,  I  was
      educated, my father was an elderly man and I wanted  to  work.  That's
      why and I was fit for this job."

(xi) The Appellant had and still has no qualifications  as  an  interpreter,
      and has not sought to obtain any such relevant  qualifications  whilst
      in the UK. He has pursued a Diploma course in Business & Management in
      the UK. (Merely learning English and even passing English tests is not
      tantamount to training or qualifying as an interpreter.)

(xii) The Appellant's experience working as  an  interpreter  is  relatively
      limited. He worked for approximately 14 months  in  his  position,  in
      respect of  which  only  some  of  his  duties  involved  translation.
      Moreover it is to be inferred that his English was relatively basic  -
      he having thereafter studied for approximately one year in Pakistan in
      order to achieve the relevant IELTS standard to allow him to enter the
      UK as  a  student.  This  would  suggest  that  his  experience  as  a
      translator in Afghanistan was at a basic level of fluency, and one far
      removed from involvement in important operational matters.

(xiii) In the past  the  Appellant  was  sufficiently  intimidated  to  stop
      working for the foreign agencies. (See First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
      at paragraph 10.) This is a significant indicator that if he perceives
      a continuing threat in such work he would not seek to undertake it.

(xiv) Neither a job working in contact with foreign agencies, nor a  job  as
      an interpreter,  are  obviously  vocational  or  a  'calling'  in  the
      abstract.  More particularly I find that there was no evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that such work was considered to be
      vocational or a 'calling' for  the  Appellant.  There  is  nothing  to
      support the  notion  that  such  work  might  be  fundamental  to  the
      Appellant's sense of identity.

(xv) The Appellant has not demonstrated - or otherwise even  suggested  -  a
      wish to work as an interpreter in the  UK.  Accordingly,  in  echo  of
      paragraph 37 of MSM the Appellant has not demonstrated that a  benefit
      of a grant of protection would be "to enable the person  concerned  to
      exercise the right freely in the country of refuge."


  28. Taking  all  such  matters  together  I  have  reached  the  following
      conclusions. The Judge implicitly rejected the  Appellant's  assertion
      that he "would have to  continue  such  work"  as  he  had  previously
      undertaken if he  were  to  be  returned  to  Afghanistan  -  such  an
      assertion that was in any event illogical, unsupported  by  any  other
      evidence, and not developed before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Moreover
      the Appellant presented no evidence  -  whether  circumstantially,  or
      explicitly on point - that indicated he was  unfit  to  undertake  any
      other sort  of  employment,  or  that  he  had  a  vocational  calling
      fundamental to his own identity to work either in support  of  foreign
      agencies, or specifically as an  interpreter.  Bearing  in  mind  that
      there was no evidence of  a  vocational  calling,  the  most  reliable
      indicator as to future conduct was the fact  that  the  Appellant  had
      previously desisted from such employment.


  29. Accordingly, whilst it is to be acknowledged that the  Judge  did  not
      expressly undertake an  evaluative  predictive  judgement  as  to  the
      likelihood of the Appellant resuming the same  or  similar  work  upon
      return to Afghanistan, had she  done  so  there  would  have  been  no
      evidential basis to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  would  reasonably
      likely seek to take up such employment again. Indeed the best evidence
      - past conduct - powerfully indicated the opposite.


  30. In such circumstances the Judge's failure to make an  express  finding
      as to whether the Appellant would obtain employment as an  interpreter
      was not, in my judgement, material because there was no scope  on  the
      evidence before the  First-tier Tribunal to make  a  finding  that  he
      would. The overwhelming weight of evidence - that  the  Appellant  has
      not shown any vocation for such  work,  and  has  previously  left  it
      because of intimidation - indicates that the Appellant would not  seek
      such employment again; moreover the Judge concluded that the Appellant
      could  live  independently  without  putting  himself  in   the   same
      predicament of risk  that  had  prompted  him  to  quit  his  previous
      employment.


  31. This leaves the second limb of challenge: whether the Appellant can be
      expected to modify his behaviour in this regard; or,  as  put  in  the
      grant of permission to appeal, whether he should lawfully be  required
      to refrain from  taking  such  employment  in  order  to  avoid  being
      persecuted.


  32. It is clear from the authorities cited above that an applicant  cannot
      be expected to refrain from jeopardising conduct if that conduct is of
      a nature intended to be protected by the Convention - and that is  the
      case irrespective of whether such conduct might be reckless.  However,
      it seems to me equally clear that the authorities do not go so far  as
      to say protection is to  be  granted  to  persons  whose  conduct,  if
      restricted by fear of harm, does not involve an interference with  the
      freedoms protected by the Convention  -  and  indeed  the  authorities
      appear  to  specifically  recognise  that  the  Convention  does   not
      guarantee an absolute right to choose one's profession or employment.


  33. It seems clear  to  me  that  it  will  only  be  in  very  particular
      circumstances that a choice of employment is dictated by a fundamental
      innate characteristic, or is otherwise referable to a protected  right
      under  the  Refugee  Convention.  MSM  was  just  such  a  case.  More
      generally, however, I consider employment is more comparable  to,  for
      example, a wish to live in  a  particular  place  -  which  whilst  an
      important aspect of private life is not  inevitably  guaranteed  under
      the  Refugee  Convention  by  reason  of  the  principle  of  internal
      relocation. In other words, just as the Refugee  Convention  does  not
      protect a person's wish to live in a particular  town  or  region,  it
      does not, in  my  judgement  protect  a  person's  wish  to  pursue  a
      particular job - unless, perhaps, it might be said that such a job  is
      vocational to an extent  that  it  has  become  a  fundamental  innate
      characteristic of the individual, or that there are otherwise features
      that engage the categories of  protected  persons  under  the  Refugee
      Convention.


  34. Indeed the principle of 'internal relocation' significantly undermines
      the Appellant's reliance upon a submission based on  'modification  of
      conduct'. Even a person who is at risk for a Convention  reason  in  a
      particular area of his country is expected to modify  his  conduct  to
      the extent of relocating within the borders  of  his  own  country  if
      there is  a  place  of  internal  relocation  to  which  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect him to go and where he would not be  at  risk  of
      persecution. It is not difficult to imagine that such relocation might
      also involve a change of employment, and indeed a change of  the  type
      of employment.


  35. According I find that there is no absolute principle  that  an  asylum
      applicant cannot be expected to modify conduct to  avoid  risk  rather
      than being availed of international  surrogate  protection  under  the
      Refugee  Convention.  The  question,  as  it  seems  to  me  has  been
      consistently recognised in the recent authorities, is whether any such
      modification of conduct necessary to avoid risk in itself impacts upon
      rights protected by the Refugee Convention.


  36. On the facts here, and further to the analysis set out above, there is
      nothing in any of the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
      suggest that the Appellant's employment in Afghanistan related in  any
      way to matters intrinsic to his sense of identity, or important to him
      as a matter of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
      particular social group, or political  opinion,  or  was  otherwise  a
      manifestation of freedom of expression, or  sexuality,  or  any  other
      element  protected  under  the  Refugee  Convention.  There   was   no
      evidential  basis  to  show  that  refraining  from   taking   similar
      employment would impact upon  any  characteristic  or  status  closely
      linked to the Appellant's identity or  otherwise  impinging  upon  his
      fundamental rights.


  37. Accordingly, the answer to  the  question  which  may  be  posed  upon
      revisiting Lord Dyson's words in RT (Zimbabwe), in these terms:

      is the concept of working as an interpreter for foreign agencies -  or
           alternatively the concept of working  for  foreign  agencies  in
           itself in whatever capacity  (although  this   is  not  how  the
           Appellant has advanced his case before me)  -  a  reflection  of
           "characteristics or statuses which either the [Appellant] cannot
           change or cannot be expected  to  change  because  they  are  so
           closely  linked  to  his  identity  or  are  an  expression   of
           fundamental rights",  such  characteristics  or  statuses  being
           those identified as 'Convention reasons'?


is 'No'.


  38. The Appellant's mere assertion that he would have to do the same  work
      again because it was what he had done  before,  falls  well  short  of
      establishing that  it  is  a  matter  fundamental  to  his  Convention
      protected rights to be able to undertake such work. There was no other
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that such work  was
      of a significant nature to the Appellant that he could not be expected
      to modify it. Indeed the evidence powerfully indicates that such  work
      is of no particular significance to the Appellant.


  39. This is not to deny that interpreters and  those  who  otherwise  work
      alongside 'foreign' forces and agents in Afghanistan are comparable to
      journalists in Somalia in so far as they too might be characterised as
      having "become embroiled in the continuing conflict.  They  have  been
      sucked into it by reason of their occupations" (MSM paragraph 34).  It
      may be moot whether or not "Their occupation is the stimulus  for  the
      imputation to them of political opinions" (also paragraph 34) - it  is
      not clear that the Taliban ascribe to them an actual political opinion
      or motivation rather than simply being focussed upon conduct that runs
      contrary to their own objectives (although where someone  is  at  risk
      the persecutors' own political motivations may arguably be  enough  to
      supply the Convention reason).


  40. However, the distinction between this case and MSM is that in  MSM  it
      was found that any expectation  of  modification  of  the  appellant's
      behaviour would impact upon his fundamental protected  rights,  whilst
      in contrast, as I find, there was no evidential basis before the First-
      tier Tribunal that could have sustained such a conclusion  in  respect
      of the Appellant herein. The Appellant has not shown that he could not
      modify  his  behaviour  in  Afghanistan  without  impacting  upon  his
      fundamental protected Convention rights in order to avoid persecution:
      in short he has  not  demonstrated  an  entitlement  to  international
      surrogate protection because it would be reasonable to expect  him  to
      pursue alternative employment, and such an expectation does not impact
      upon his fundamental rights.


  41. I recognise that it  might  be  said  that  in  such  a  scenario  the
      aggressor wins - the aggressor succeeds in driving the Appellant  from
      his work. But that is to misunderstand  the  Refugee  Convention.  The
      Refugee Convention is not primarily designed to combat  aggression  in
      the sense of 'taking  on'  the  aggressor  -  it  is  a  mechanism  of
      protection, and moreover fundamentally not  a  mechanism  designed  to
      protect all and  any  victims  of  aggression.  Further,  a  grant  of
      protection would have much the same effect  on  the  aggressor  -  the
      aggressor would have still succeeded in  its  objective.  The  Refugee
      Convention does not itself  directly  combat  oppression,  but  rather
      offers protection of the oppressed in circumstances where they  cannot
      achieve  that  themselves  or  through  recourse  to   mechanisms   of
      protection in their own country.  The  combat  of  oppression  and  or
      aggressors may be sought to be achieved through other  means,  but  is
      not in any sense the role or purpose of the Refugee Convention.


  42. For completeness I note that during the course of his  submissions  Mr
      Skinner also emphasised the nature of the oath given by village elders
      to the effect that if the  Appellant  were  to  be  seen  working  for
      government again he would be punished according to their  tribal  code
      and surrendered to  the  Taliban,  and  that  there  was  no  temporal
      limitation on such an oath: see Grounds at paragraph 7.1 and  page  56
      of the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal. However,  it
      is to be noted that  the  possible  outcome  of  the  Appellant  being
      punished and surrendered to the  Taliban  by  the  village  elders  is
      contingent upon his resumed "cooperat[ion] with the  infidels  or  the
      government  as  an  interpreter"  -  employment  from  which  he   may
      reasonably be expected to refrain upon return to Afghanistan.


  43. Moreover, I am not persuaded  of  the  substance  of  the  Appellant's
      submissions in respect of the Judge's approach to the case of H & B. I
      do not  accept  that  the  Judge  did  anything  other  than  make  an
      individualistic assessment of the Appellant's case: the conclusion  of
      the Judge was not simply dictated by the outcome in H & B, but  rather
      H & B was appropriately taken into account in her overall assessment.


  44. In summary: The Judge failed to make a predictive  evaluation  of  the
      likelihood of the Appellant resuming the same  or  similar  employment
      upon return to Afghanistan. This seems in  large  part  to  have  been
      because it was not a point clearly articulated or otherwise  amplified
      and developed before the First-tier Tribunal. In any event, there  was
      no evidence to support the notion that the Appellant would  reasonably
      likely resume such employment. The Appellant's own assertion  that  he
      would have to resume such employment because that is what he had  done
      previously is illogical. This assertion was in  any  event  implicitly
      rejected in the Judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  could  live
      independently in Afghanistan (which implicitly would mean  not  taking
      up employment that the Judge accepted had put him at  risk).  As  such
      the Judge's failure to make a predictive evaluation in this regard was
      not material because it could not have been sustainably  concluded  on
      the evidence that the Appellant would act in a way that would put  him
      at risk. Even if it were otherwise, I would not choose to exercise the
      discretion  in  section  12(2)(a)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007 to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. In my judgement the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  in  his
      appeal in any event because he can lawfully and reasonably be expected
      to refrain from resuming such employment as previously put him at risk
      instead of availing himself of the international surrogate  protection
      of the Refugee Convention, because in so refraining there would be  no
      interference with, or contravention  of  the  Appellant's  fundamental
      Convention protected rights.


Notice of Decision

  45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
      law and stands.


  46. The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     20 July 2016



