
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01397/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 22 September 2015                   |                 On 28 September    |
|                                       |2015                                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     v M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. An anonymity direction has been made in these proceedings and I  direct
    that it continues.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5 July 1988. He  is  of
    Tamil ethnicity.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK as a student with entry clearance  from
    10 January 2010 to 30 January 2013.  He claimed asylum  on  28  January
    2013.   His  asylum  claim  was  refused.  Following  judicial   review
    proceedings the appellant made further submissions including a  medical
    report. The respondent made a fresh decision to refuse his asylum claim
    on 8 January 2015.  The appellant appealed that  decision;  his  appeal
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  ("the  FTTJ")  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds in a decision promulgated on
    1 June 2015.

 4. The appellant's claim before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that,  as  a
    former member of the LTTE and active member of the  Tamil  diaspora  in
    the UK,  he  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the  authorities  who  had
    approached his  mother  at  the  family  home  with  the  intention  of
    arresting him. Whilst the FTTJ accepted the appellant's evidence of his
    involvement with the LTTE and his activities in  the  UK,  he  did  not
    accept that the appellant was at risk on return, applying the  guidance
    in GJ. He did "not find that the appellant has or could be perceived to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    or renewal of hostilities" (paragraph  115).  He  found  there  was  no
    evidence the appellant was on a stop list (paragraph 116).  He  decided
    that the appellant's past history could not be construed in  the  light
    of GJ as  presenting  a  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or
    government. He described the appellant as a low-level supporter of  the
    LTTE who did not fight for the LTTE, did not  kill  anyone;  he  was  a
    schoolboy who was pressed into service by the LTTE largely against  his
    will.  The FTTJ noted at paragraph 119 the following:

         "Although the appellant has given two instances of  inquiries  made
         by the authorities into his whereabouts, once  to  his  mother  and
         once to his brother in law, I do not find these to  be  significant
         and do not find  that  they  justify  departure  from  the  Country
         Guidance in GJ".

    No reasons are given for this finding.

 5. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  and  the  matter  came
    before me and Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley, sitting as a panel, on  11
    August 2015. Both representatives accepted at  that  hearing  that  the
    FTTJ had failed to make clear and properly  reasoned  findings  on  the
    matters set out at paragraphs 50 and 52 of  his  decision,  namely  the
    questioning by the police of the appellant's brother-in-law in 2012  as
    to  the  appellant's   whereabouts   and   the   appellant's   mother's
    "interaction with the Sri Lankan  authorities".   Clear  findings  were
    required on the appellant's claim that the Sri Lankan authorities  were
    still interested in the appellant, in the  context  of  GJ  and  Others
    (Post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 000319  (IAC).  In
    the absence of such findings, the FTTJ had materially erred on a  point
    of law. We preserved the  findings  of  the  FTTJ  but  set  aside  his
    decision.  We directed that the findings of the FTTJ should  stand  and
    that the appeal be heard afresh with properly reasoned findings on  the
    evidence that the appellant was  of  continuing  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. The hearing was adjourned  and  the  appellant  was
    directed to produce a bundle of documents, if so advised.

 6.  The  appellant  then  lodged  a  supplementary  bundle  of  documents,
    including his own witness statement and  a  witness  statement  by  his
    brother-in-law. Also included in the bundle are various  news  articles
    which have not been translated into English;  there  are  also  various
    photographs which have been published in the Tamil press.

 7. Thus the appeal came before me at a resumed hearing.

 8. Both parties relied on the guidance in GJ and Others (Post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 000319 (IAC). In addition,  I  have
    taken into account the documents before the FTTJ and those produced for
    the hearing before me, including the appellant's  supplementary  bundle
    and MP (Sri Lanka) & Or v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

 9. Before me, the appellant and his brother-in-law gave oral  evidence  in
    Tamil through an  interpreter.  I  ascertained  that  they  each  fully
    understood each other.  It was confirmed to me that they did.

10. In examination-in-chief, the appellant was referred to an answer he had
    given in interview to the effect that  someone  had  given  information
    about him to the Sri Lankan police. He clarified  that,  after  he  had
    been arrested, whilst in detention he had been identified  as  LTTE  to
    his captors by a person with whom he had worked previously. He  thought
    this explained the police interest in him. He told me he was in regular
    telephone contact with his mother; his sister in the  UK  was  also  in
    contact with her and passed news of  their  mother  to  the  appellant.
    About a month before, the appellant's mother had told him  people  were
    still visiting her, asking where he was. She told him they referred  to
    his anti-government activities in London.

11. Under cross-examination, the appellant gave evidence about what he  had
    been told by his sister about his mother's arrest in February 2015.  He
    said he was not in contact with his brother in Sri Lanka;  he  did  not
    want to be reminded of "past incidents". He was challenged  about  this
    lack of contact but said he realised that his  mother  was  in  trouble
    with the authorities as a result of him and he did  not  want  this  to
    happen to his brother. He was asked why, if that was the case,  he  had
    become involved in attending demonstrations in this country and replied
    that these activities gave him some peace of mind,  knowing  that  this
    might contribute to peace in Sri Lanka.

12. The appellant's brother-in-law's evidence is that on 4 September  2015,
    his birthday, he spoke to the  appellant's  mother  who  told  him  the
    authorities had been to her house about two  weeks  earlier  and  asked
    about the appellant; they had told her they were aware of his  overseas
    activities and this was the  reason  for  their  visits.  Under  cross-
    examination he said there had been about five visits by the authorities
    to the appellant's  mother's  home  since  2012.  He  referred  to  the
    occasion in 2012 when they came to arrest  the  appellant  but  instead
    "arrested me". Under re-examination, he clarified  this  by  explaining
    that the authorities had attempted to arrest him but had  not  done  so
    when he produced his British passport.

13. Ms Holmes accepted in her submissions that I could not  go  behind  the
    findings of the FTTJ and that the error of  law  in  his  decision  was
    limited; the FTTJ had accepted that the  appellant's  mother  had  been
    arrested. She submitted that it was not credible that  the  appellant's
    mother was being harassed now: this was an easy claim  to  make;  there
    was no witness statement in support yet this  would  have  been  easily
    obtained. There was no adverse  interest  in  other  relatives  in  Sri
    Lanka. There was no reason for the appellant's mother  being  targeted:
    if the authorities knew the appellant was in  the  UK,  it  begged  the
    question why they wasted their resources on bothering her.  This  claim
    was also inconsistent with  the  findings  in  GJ,  paragraph  324,  as
    follows:

         "324. President Rajapaksa has stated, and  the  press  reports  and
         experts confirm, that the government has sophisticated intelligence
         concerning who is contacting the diaspora or seeking to revive  the
         quest for a Tamil homeland.  The government's intelligence includes
         monitoring of activities online,  on  mobile  phones,  and  in  the
         diaspora in the four hotspots:  London, Paris,  Oslo  and  Toronto.
         It has informers throughout the Northern and Eastern Provinces, and
         in  the  diaspora.   It   intercepts   electronic   and   telephone
         communications and closes down websites. Photographs are  taken  of
         demonstrations and the GOSL sponsors an image  recognition  project
         at Colombo University."

14. It was further submitted that the appellant would have been  of  little
    interest to the authorities, given that  he  only  joined  the  British
    Tamil Forum  in  February  this  year.  The  supporting  correspondence
    relating to his activities in the UK was vague and self-serving.   With
    the intelligence available to the authorities, according  to  GJ,  they
    would have identified that the appellant was doing little in the UK  to
    demonstrate he was committed to overthrowing the state or was a  danger
    to the state.  The  authorities  know  that  many  asylum  seekers  are
    economic migrants. The evidence  pointed  to  the  appellant  being  no
    danger to the state. In sum, his activities were  not  consistent  with
    the claimed level of interest shown in his mother. In that  regard  his
    evidence was not plausible or credible.

15. For the appellant, Mr Spurling  noted  that  the  evidence  of  adverse
    interest in the appellant had been accepted; this tribunal's  role  was
    to focus on the significance of that interest, not the fact of it.   He
    accepted  that,  without  evidence  of   interest,   this   appellant's
    activities in the UK, seen in the context of GJ,  would  not  alone  be
    sufficient to concern the authorities.  However, the evidence  is  that
    the authorities were interested in  the  appellant,  according  to  the
    findings of the FTTJ, and it extended to February 2015, over five years
    after he escaped detention. That was a preserved finding.

16. Mr Spurling referred me to MP (Sri Lanka) & Or v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    829, particularly the final paragraph, 50.  He relied on Underhill LJ's
    observation that

         "It is also clear that the [Upper] Tribunal believed that "diaspora
         activism", actual or perceived, is the principal basis on which the
         Government of Sri Lanka is likely  to  treat  returning  Tamils  as
         posing a current or future threat; and I agree that that too was  a
         conclusion which it was entitled to reach. But I do not read  para.
         356(7)(a)  of  its  determination  as  prescribing  that   diaspora
         activism is the only basis on which  a  returning  Tamil  might  be
         regarded as posing such a threat and  thus  of  being  at  risk  on
         return. Even apart from cases falling under heads (b)-(d) in  para.
         356(7), there may, though untypically, be other cases (of which  NT
         may be an example) where the evidence shows particular grounds  for
         concluding that the Government might regard the applicant as posing
         a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single  state
         even in the absence of evidence that he or she has been involved in
         diaspora activism".

    He submitted that interest of the kind shown in the appellant was of  a
    type envisaged by Underhill LJ. It was accepted  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    security services have intelligence on their opposition, as  identified
    in paragraph 324 of GJ. However, it did not necessarily follow that the
    security services had particular or accurate intelligence.  The  issue,
    as identified in headnote  7(a)  of  GJ,  was  the  perception  of  the
    authorities.  The threat by the authorities to arrest the appellant  on
    return should be taken seriously. The fact the appellant's  mother  had
    been arrested and a lawyer was required to get her  out  suggested  the
    authorities wanted to arrest and detain  the  appellant.  The  risk  of
    detention put him in need of protection.

17. I bear in mind the findings of fact of the FTTJ are preserved. The FTTJ
    accepted that the appellant had been involved with the LTTE  as  a  low
    level supporter, that the appellant had been active in the UK  as  part
    of the Tamil diaspora but did not find  that  the  appellant  could  be
    perceived as having a significant role  in  relation  to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism or renewal of hostilities.   He  found  there  was  no
    evidence  the  appellant  was  on  a  stop  list.  He  found  that  the
    appellant's past history could not be construed as presenting a risk to
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or government. The FTTJ also accepted that
    the appellant's brother-in-law had been subjected  to  enquiries  about
    the appellant's whereabouts in 2012 and that his mother  had  similarly
    been the subjected to enquires. The FTTJ referred at  paragraph  52  to
    the evidence provided by a notary to confirm the  appellant's  mother's
    arrest in February 2015.

18. It can be inferred from the FTTJ's findings that he found the appellant
    a credible witness; he accepted the appellant's account  of  events  in
    Sri Lanka and in the UK.  I have heard nothing to suggest it  would  be
    appropriate to depart from that  inference:  the  appellant's  and  his
    brother-in-law's evidence before me was almost wholly  consistent.  The
    only inconsistency was the appellant's  brother-in-law's  reference  in
    oral evidence to his being "arrested" whereas he later corrected  this,
    on re-examination, to say that the authorities had attempted to  arrest
    him but had not actually done so  when  he  had  produced  his  British
    passport. I do not consider this to be a significant  discrepancy:  the
    appellant's brother-in-law had referred to this event in  passing  when
    answering a question about what the authorities had said to his mother-
    in-law during the visits. This inconsistency does not detract from  the
    core evidence to the effect that the authorities had been  looking  for
    the appellant at the time.

19. I find  the  appellant  and  his  brother-in-law  wholly  credible  and
    reliable witnesses and accept that the  authorities  have  visited  the
    appellant's mother's home as recently as  early  September  this  year,
    looking for the appellant. I also accept that the authorities referred,
    during those visits, to the  appellant's  being  active  in  the  Tamil
    diaspora in the UK.

20. I agree  with  Mr  Spurling  that  the  issue  to  be  decided  is  the
    significance of the  visits  by  the  authorities  to  the  appellant's
    mother's home.

21. I bear in mind the guidance in PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 with regard to the reliability
    of documents from local lawyers: false documents are  widely  available
    in Sri Lanka. However, the FTTJ made no finding that  the  letter  from
    the notary who was instructed to deal  with  the  appellant's  mother's
    release was unreliable. That letter refers to  the  appellant's  mother
    having been arrested in February 2015 "to find  information  about  her
    son" and her release "on condition that she should  surrender  her  son
    before the CID at Batticaloa". I consider this letter and  its  content
    in the round with the remaining evidence.

22. I also consider it relevant, as submitted  by  Mr  Spurling,  that  the
    appellant was the subject of a specific arrest in August 2009 after the
    surrender. This arrest indicates he was of  adverse  interest  at  that
    stage. However, the timing of his arrest calls into question the nature
    and accuracy of the information  held  by  the  authorities  about  the
    appellant at that time, given that he was only a low-level supporter of
    the LTTE.

23. This is a case where several factors are in play: the authorities  know
    the appellant was involved  with  the  LTTE  (albeit  in  reality  that
    involvement was only at  a  low  level),  know  of  his  attendance  at
    demonstrations in the UK as part of the Tamil diaspora (albeit, also at
    a low level) and there have been  various  visits  to  the  appellant's
    mother's home for the purpose of locating the appellant as a result  of
    his activities in the UK.

24. I consider that the visits to the appellant's  mother's  home  and  the
    attempted arrest of the appellant's brother-in-law and  the  arrest  of
    his mother are significant factors and should be taken into account  in
    the round with the rest of the appellant's history, past  and  present.
    The point is well made by  the  respondent's  representative  that  the
    appellant's activities  throughout  have  been  low-level,  but  it  is
    appropriate to construe the authorities' perception of the  appellant's
    activities rather than rely solely on his actual activities.  The steps
    taken by the authorities in the past and  more  recently  suggest  that
    their perception of his past  and  current  activities  is  not  wholly
    accurate and does not reflect his actual activities.

25. Given that  the  appellant's  mother  has  herself  been  arrested  and
    released on condition of surrendering her son to the police,  I  accept
    that the appellant would, on return to  his  home  area,  be  similarly
    arrested. Given the  appellant's  past  detention  and  the  continuing
    interest in his activities and location, it is reasonable  to  conclude
    that he would be detained again.

26. I conclude therefore that the appellant is at real risk of  persecution
    in his home area, where his arrival will be  verified  by  the  CID  or
    police within a few days. Internal relocation is not an option for  the
    appellant because the government controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka  and
    Tamils are required to return to a named address after passing  through
    the airport.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award
No fee was paid or is payable and there can be no fee award.





Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



