
[pic]
IAC-BH-JLS-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01158/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 1st February 2016                       |On 13th April 2016              |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                          Mr anwer abdulkrim yousif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lane, of Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a renewed  application  for  leave  to  appeal  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, permission was granted to the appellant to appeal against the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E. M. M. Smith in which he
    dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human  rights  protection
    to the appellant an adult citizen of Sudan.

 2. The grounds of application to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  adopt  the
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal, argue that the Judge was  wrong  to
    reach conclusions undermining the expert opinion  of  Mr  Peter  Verney
    concerning the ability of the appellant to speak the  Zaghawa  or  Beri
    dialect.  Further it was  contended  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons  for  rejecting  the  expert  evidence  in  relation   to   the
    appellant's knowledge of the Zaghawa Tribe.   Additionally,  the  Judge
    failed to take into consideration that, in addition to  the  expert  at
    the interview, a  member  of  the  Zaghawa  Community  Association  was
    present so any deficiencies in the appellant's ability to speak Zaghawa
    would have easily been identified.

 3. Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that  it  was
    arguable  that  the  expert's  language  ability  was  not  a  material
    consideration  in  the  light  of  his  qualifications  and   expertise
    generally.   A  decision  to  reject  that  evidence  was  inadequately
    reasoned.

The hearing and submissions

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Lane  relied  upon  his  skeleton  argument
    which  re-emphasises  the  points  already  made  in  the  grounds   of
    application.   Additionally,  it  is  indicated  that  the   respondent
    accepted before the First-tier Tribunal  that,  if  the  appellant  had
    proved that he is a Zaghawi, he would, without more, have been entitled
    to international protection by reference  to  MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00010 although the previous country  guidance  case  of  AA
    (Non-Arab Darfuris-  Relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UK  AIT  was  also
    relevant.

 5. Mr Lane also emphasised that permission had been granted on  the  basis
    that Mr Verney's language ability  was  not  a  material  consideration
    bearing in mind his qualifications and expertise generally.

 6. Mr Lane also referred to representative's application to admit evidence
    that was not before the First-tier Tribunal applying the provisions  of
    Rule 15 (2A) of the Procedure  Rules  for  the  Upper  Tribunal.   This
    evidence was in the form of a supplemental report of Mr Verney of  22nd
    May 2015, a report by Professor Wendy James of  the  same  date  and  a
    further letter from the ZCA (Zaghawa Community Association) of 30  June
    2015.  Whilst acknowledging that all of this evidence  post  dated  the
    decision Mr Lane submitted that it was  to  show  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law  in  dealing  with  the  assumptions  and
    findings of the expert and that the wrong methodology  was  applied  by
    the Judge.  It did not merely "add to and answer" the findings of  fact
    made by the Judge.

 7. Other comments in  the  skeleton  contend  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the detail of Mr Verney's credentials,  failed  to  appreciate
    that parts of the interview of the appellant had been conducted in Beri
    (as indicated in Mr Verney's report at paragraph 6) and that there  was
    a member of the ZCA present  during  the  interview.   Further,  it  is
    argued that the Judge did not take  into  consideration  wider  factors
    relating to the Appellant's ethnicity as commented  on  in  significant
    areas of the expert's report and about which  the  appellant  had  been
    asked numerous questions in interview.

 8. Mr McVeety reminded me of  the  response  under  Rule  24  although  he
    conceded that this was written without  a  copy  of  the  grounds.   He
    considered that the grounds amounted to simply a disagreement with  the
    Judge's reasons and conclusions.  Put simply,  Mr  Verney  was  not  an
    expert on language and it was outside his remit  to  comment  upon  the
    appellant's ability to speak Beri.  The expert could only recognise odd
    words.  Certainly the respondent would be  unable  to  rely  upon  such
    expertise rejecting a claim on the basis of language.  Mr McVeety  also
    criticised the expert report on the basis that it was wrong to  comment
    on the credibility of the appellant's claims when that was the function
    of the Court.

 9. He also contended that the Judge did not need to consider  every  point
    raised  in  the  report  but  gave  other  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    credibility of the appellant's claims.

10. In conclusion, Mr Lane pointed out that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    given the opportunity to speak his own language at the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. This was  because  an  Arabic,  North  African
    interpreter had been provided.

Conclusions

11. In relation to the application to submit further evidence under Rule 15
    (2A) submitted to the Upper Tribunal on 19 October 2015, I have to bear
    in mind that under sub-paragraph (a) (ii) of the  Rule  an  explanation
    should be given about why such evidence was not submitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

12.  In  the  application  it  is  stated  that  the  evidence  proves  the
    appellant's claim to be from the Zaghawa Tribe and is also to "act as a
    response to concerns raised by the First-tier Tribunal".  I do not find
    that those reasons adequately explain  why  further  evidence  was  not
    produced  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  to  expand  upon   or
    strengthen the language conclusions  set  out  in  Mr  Verney's  report
    particularly from paragraphs 46 to 69, inclusive, and  the  conclusions
    section. This is  a  particularly  relevant  omission  when  Mr  Verney
    properly makes it clear that he  is  not  a  speaker  of  the  relevant
    dialect.  As the First-tier Judge  comments  in  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision, there is nothing in the report to  indicate  that  Mr  Verney
    speaks the Beri (Zaghawan)  language  he  ascribes  to  the  appellant.
    Indeed, the appellant's  representative  at  the  hearing,  Ms  Radman,
    accepted that Mr Verney's expert opinion on the language was  an  issue
    even if he was otherwise highly regarded as a country expert.  However,
    Ms Radman did not seek to request an adjournment for  further  evidence
    nor was the Judge obliged to  given  one  of  the  absence  of  such  a
    request. Additionally  there  was  no  request  to  change  the  Arabic
    interpreter provided for the hearing. The Judge does not simply  reject
    Mr Verney's opinion because he is not a Beri speaker but fully analyses
    the report.

13.  For the reasons given above I indicated, at the hearing,  that  I  was
    not prepared to allow the additional evidence to be produced under Rule
    15 (2A). In summary that was because there was no good reason  for  the
    additional explanations  not  being  produced  at  the  hearing  or  an
    application being made to adjourn the hearing for further  evidence  to
    cover the language expertise point.
14. Mr Lane also contends that the Judge's consideration of issues relating
    to the appellant's  claimed  Zaghawan  ethnicity  were  not  adequately
    considered by the Judge.  In particular, it is argued,  with  reference
    to several passages in Mr Verney's report, that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider other evidence supportive of the appellant's ethnicity  claim.
    However, the decision makes it clear that the Judge did not ignore such
    additional evidence.  The Judge gives adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
    the  claim  set  out  in  the  Zaghawa  Community  Association  letter,
    particularly since its author had not shown how he was able to say that
    the appellant was from the Zaghawa Tribe.  It is also evident that  the
    Judge took into consideration the whole of Mr  Verney's  report  before
    reaching his conclusions about its value in supporting the  appellant's
    claims (paragraph 33).  It is also relevant to note that (paragraph 35)
    the Judge  identified  six  specific  cases  of  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's evidence which enabled him to  find  that  the  appellant's
    account was untruthful and that the  appellant  did  not  have  a  well
    founded fear of the Janjweed or being a member of  the  Zaghawa  Tribe.
    The Judge also, properly, refers to  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Budhathoki (Reasons for Decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) where it was
    stated that it is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for a  First-tier
    Tribunal judgement to rehearse every detail or issue in a case.  It is,
    however, necessary for Judges to  identify  and  resolve  conflicts  in
    evidence and explain in clear and brief terms reasons that the  parties
    understand why they have won or lost.  The First-tier Judge clearly did
    this.

15. Notwithstanding the eminence of Mr Verney as an expert, the  Judge  was
    not obliged to accept his expert opinion on the appellant's ability  to
    speak Zaghawan, particularly when it was accepted that the  expert  was
    not able to communicate in that language.  The Judge  was  entitled  to
    rely upon other  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  which
    enabled him to reject the appellant's claims to  be  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm on return.  It is suggested that the appellant should have
    been given the opportunity  to  speak  in  his  native  tongue  at  the
    hearing.  However, it is clear from paragraph 14 of the decision,  that
    the appellant had no difficulty in  communicating  with  the  court  in
    Arabic and his representative, when aware of the  language  issue,  did
    not request any adjournment in order that the appellant could show  his
    ability to speak Zaghawan.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  an  error  on  a
    point of law and shall stand.


Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested nor do I consider it appropriate in this
appeal.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


