
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01681/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 July 2015                        |                On 7 December 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    O D A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Haughhian, Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, ODA, born in 1985 is a female citizen of  Nigeria.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 16  January  2015
    to remove her from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    R Lloyd) in a determination promulgated on 15 April 2015 dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Permission was granted by Judge Robertson on 12  May  2015.   Paragraph
    [3] of Judge Robertson's decision summarises the issue now  before  the
    Upper Tribunal:

         As to ground 2, it is stated the UK has a  duty,  under  the  Anti-
         Trafficking  Convention,  to  provide  assistance,  which  includes
         assistance with physical, psychological and social recovery,  at  a
         point no later than the point at which the decision is made by  the
         Competent Authority that there are conclusive grounds to believe  a
         particular appellant is the victim of trafficking.  It is submitted
         that, as the judge found that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from
         untreated PTSD (post-traumatic stress  disorder)  as  a  result  of
         trafficking, the judge erred in finding that there was no  duty  on
         the UK to provide such assistance simply because the appellant  had
         been to care for herself in the last 7 years.  What  in  effect  is
         being submitted  is  that  the  decision  of  the  judge  that  the
         appellant  was  the  victim  of  trafficking  should  replace   the
         Competent Authority in its conclusive grounds decision.  Whilst the
         duties of the UK clearly arise from a  decision  of  the  Competent
         Authority, it is not clear what, if any, duties there are on the UK
         when a judge has gone behind that decision (or indeed if a judge is
         entitled to go behind that decision) then this ground is arguable.

 3. The Competent Authority had determined that the appellant had not  been
    trafficked.  Judge Lloyd, on the other hand,  made  clear  findings  of
    fact that the  appellant  had  been  trafficked.   Indeed,  it  is  not
    entirely clear from her decision that Judge Lloyd was  aware  that  she
    was, in effect, reversing the decision of the  Competent  Authority  by
    finding the appellant had been trafficked.  At [24],  the  judge  noted
    that "the Competent Authority found that there were reasonable  grounds
    to consider that the appellant had been  trafficked  to  the  UK."   At
    [35], the judge wrote:

         In finding that the appellant had been trafficked I have considered
         the decision by the Competent Authority.   This  found  that  there
         were  reasonable  grounds  to  consider  the  appellant  had   been
         trafficked.  I also agree with the  Competent  Authority  that  the
         appellant does not need protection or  assistance  offered  by  the
         Anti-Trafficking Convention.  This is due to the  fact  that  seven
         years had passed since the appellant was thrown out by [her "aunt"]
         and she has managed to care for  herself  and  her  children  since
         then.

 4.  It  is  clear  from  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can
    examine, in certain circumstances, whether an appellant before  it  has
    or has not been trafficked.  At [14], the Court of Appeal observed:

         If the First Tier Tribunal is  entitled  to  take  into  account  a
         decision that an appellant is (or has been) a victim of trafficking
         it seems odd that, if a perverse decision has been reached that  an
         appellant has not been a victim of trafficking, the Tribunal cannot
         consider whether the facts of the case do, in fact, show  that  the
         appellant was a victim of trafficking. Abdi is  authority  for  the
         proposition that a failure by the Secretary of State to  apply  her
         own policy is an error of law in  the  sense  that  she  will  have
         failed to take a relevant consideration into account. If in fact AS
         has been trafficked but the Secretary of State  ignores  that  fact
         she will have failed to apply the relevant policy  in  relation  to
         victims of trafficking. The mere fact that the Competent  Authority
         has made a decision which on analysis is  perverse  cannot  prevent
         the First Tier Tribunal judge from considering the  evidence  about
         trafficking which is placed before him; nor can it, in my judgment,
         be relevant that no judicial review proceedings have been taken  by
         the applicant in respect of the Competent Authority's decision. The
         FTT judge should consider the matter for himself.




 5. The Court of Appeal concluded at [18]:

         In this context it is important to be  aware  that  a  decision  to
         refuse asylum is not  itself  an  immigration  decision  appealable
         pursuant to section  82(2)  of  the  2002  Act  (any  more  than  a
         trafficking decision is such a decision). The relevant  immigration
         decision is the decision to remove the appellant under  section  10
         of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (see s.82(2)(g) of the  2002
         Act). It is in reaching the decision to remove that  the  Secretary
         of State must consider relevant matters including (where  relevant)
         whether an applicant for asylum is  a  victim  of  trafficking.  No
         doubt, if a conclusive decision has been reached by  the  Competent
         Authority, First Tier Tribunals will be astute not (save perhaps in
         rare circumstances) to allow an appellant to re-run a case  already
         decided against him on  the  facts.  But  where,  as  here,  it  is
         arguable that, on  the  facts  found  or  accepted,  the  Competent
         Authority has reached a decision which was not  open  to  it,  that
         argument should be heard and taken into account.

 6. In her rule 24 response, the Secretary of State, relying on AS,  argues
    that only where the Competent Authority's decision is perverse may  the
    First-tier Tribunal re-examine the  trafficking  decision.   The  judge
    clearly found, relying on evidence given  by  the  appellant  that  the
    appellant had been thrown out by her "aunt" after living for  a  period
    as a prostitute in the United Kingdom [34].  The judge found also  that
    [32] the appellant had given a materially consistent account of  events
    both in Nigeria and in the United Kingdom.  The judge did not find  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum  or  her  failure  to  report  her
    "aunt" to the police undermined her credibility given that  she  had  a
    clear diagnosis of PTSD, a diagnosis which the judge noted had not been
    challenged by the respondent.

 7. In addition, the appellant also argues that the trafficking decision is
    not in accordance with the respondent's own  policies.   The  appellant
    asserts that  "necessary  information"  about  trafficking  and  health
    issues had not been sought from the appellant  before  the  trafficking
    decision was issued.  There  had  been  no  speedy  resolution  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim; the Competent Authority's decision  is  dated
    19 April 2012 that the asylum decision was not determined until 23 July
    2014.  The appellant also asserts that the Competent  Authority  failed
    to pass information to the police or to consult with relevant agencies.



 8. Whether or not Judge Lloyd was under the impression that the  Competent
    Authority had decided  that  the  appellant  was  trafficked,  she  has
    subjected the evidence to a thorough analysis and has reached  findings
    which  were  clearly  available  to  her.   The  Court  of  Appeal   in
    AS(Afghanistan) were clearly reluctant to suggest that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would  seek  to  go  behind  all  trafficking  decisions  but,
    equally, it was within the competence of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    in this appeal to "consider the matter for herself".  In the particular
    circumstances of this case, I find that there is nothing wrong  in  law
    in the findings made by  Judge  Lloyd  that  this  appellant  has  been
    trafficked.

 9. However, as the appellant's grounds indicate, that it not  the  end  of
    the matter.  The appellant's grounds  challenge  the  judge's  decision
    (quoted above) that, given she has  lived  with  her  children  in  the
    United Kingdom for more than seven years, the appellant is not in  need
    of the assistance which the United Kingdom government should provide in
    the  light  of  her  unchallenged  diagnosis  of  PTSD,  an  obligation
    summarised by the Upper Tribunal in EK (Article 4 ECHR Anti-Trafficking
    Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 313 (IAC) at head note [4]:

    The duties arising under the Convention include an obligation to  adopt
    such measures as may be necessary to assist victims in their  physical,
    psychological and social recovery (Article 12 paragraph 1) and to issue
    a renewable residence permit to victims  if  their  stay  is  necessary
    owing to their personal situation  (Article  14),  which  must  include
    consideration of his or her medical needs.

10. There is, as the grounds assert, no evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    made any recovery from her severe PTSD notwithstanding  the  length  of
    time she has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  the  light  of  the
    trafficking decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  find  that  the
    Tribunal erred in law by simply assuming that  the  appellant  did  not
    require any assistance  with  her  psychological  and  social  recovery
    simply because she had been able to live in the country for seven years
    with her children.  She may, of course, have continued to suffer during
    that period and may continue to do so in the future  if  assistance  is
    not provided to her.  In consequence, the Tribunal should have  allowed
    the appellant's appeal and return this matter to the Secretary of State
    to consider what period of leave would be appropriate  to  assist  this
    appellant with her recovery.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination and have  remade  the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal to the extent that the matter is returned to  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider her obligations under Article 12, paragraph 1 of  the
    Anti-Trafficking Convention.  In setting aside the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, I have preserved all the findings of fact therein.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15 April 2015 is  set
aside.  All  the  findings  of  fact  are  preserved.   I  have  remade  the
decision.  The appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  matter
is returned to the Secretary of State to consider such period  of  leave  to
remain in the United Kingdom should be granted to the  appellant  to  fulfil
the United Kingdom's obligations under the Anti-Trafficking  Convention,  in
particular Article 12, paragraph 1.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
