

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01327/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 4 July 2013                                |On 24 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Harrington instructed by Avon and Bristol Law
Centre

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hart TD) allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision made on 1 February  2013  to
      remove  VK  by  way  of  directions  to  Namibia  under  s.10  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

   3. For convenience, I will hereinafter  refer  to  the  parties  as  they
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal

   4. In  dismissing  the  appellant's  claim  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection grounds, the Judge accepted that  the  appellant  was  gay.
      However, on the basis of the background evidence, the  Judge  did  not
      accept that there was a real likelihood that the  appellant  would  be
      persecuted or suffer serious harm rather than discrimination on return
      to Namibia.  The Judge also dismissed the appellant's appeal under the
      "private life" provisions in para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  (HC
      395 as amended)  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      establish that he had "no ties" with Namibia and therefore  the  Judge
      found that the appellant  would  not  meet  the  requirement  in  para
      276ADE(iv). However having reached his finding  in  relation  to  para
      276ADE the Judge went on to consider whether the  appellant's  removal
      would breach Article 8 at paras 102-115  of  his  determination.   The
      Judge concluded that the appellant's removal would interfere with  his
      private life in the UK and given that interference and the  "difficult
      circumstances" that the appellant would face  in  Namibia,  the  Judge
      found that his removal would not be proportionate.

Permission to Appeal

   5. On 16 April 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) granted the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal against the  Judge's  decision
      in favour of the appellant under Article  8.   Those  grounds  are  as
      follows:

           "1)   The Immigration Judge has allowed the appeal on Article  8
                 grounds, having dismissed the appeal on Asylum,  Article  3
                 and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
                 submitted that the Immigration Judge's reasons for allowing
                 the appeal on Article 8 grounds was taken together with his
                 negative findings are inadequate.   The  Immigration  Judge
                 finds at  paragraph  104  of  the  determination  that  the
                 appellant has established a family life.  It is  not  clear
                 who the appellant has established a family life  here  with
                 as he is not currently in a relationship  although  he  has
                 friends in the community.  The Immigration Judge's findings
                 that the appellant has established family life is wrong  in
                 law.

              2)  The  Immigration  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant   has
                 established a private life, however it  is  submitted  that
                 this private life  was  established  at  a  time  when  the
                 appellant's immigration status was precarious, further  his
                 private life is of the sort that can be  continued  through
                 modern means  of  communication,  the  appellant  has  been
                 working in the UK illegally and has undergone training,  he
                 has gained from such  illegality  however  can  take  these
                 skills back to Namibia to  assist  him  in  finding  a  job
                 there.  The  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  will  find
                 rejection from his community in Namibia  as  he  has  here,
                 therefore it is submitted that his  removal  would  not  be
                 disproportionate as he can find the same support mechanisms
                 within the Anglican Church as he has in the UK.   There  is
                 no evidence that the appellant cannot continue  to  receive
                 medical assistance for  his  depression  in  Namibia.   The
                 appellant spent his formative years in Namibia and came  to
                 the UK as an adult, the Immigration Judge found that he has
                 not severed all ties with Namibia even if the ties with his
                 family  might  be  strained  due  to  his  sexuality.   The
                 Immigration  Judge  has  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
                 finding   that   the   appellant's   removal    would    be
                 disproportionate...."

The Rule 24 Issue

   6. The appellant (as respondent) to this appeal did not  serve  a  notice
      under rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      (SI 2008/2698) and did not seek permission to appeal  challenging  the
      Judge's decision to dismiss the  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection grounds and under para 276ADE of the Rules.

   7. At the hearing before me, Ms Harrington, who represented the appellant
      sought to introduce a notice under rule 24 in which it was argued that
      the Judge had erred in law in dismissing the appeal under para 276ADE.
       Ms Harrington accepted that the notice was out of time and was unable
      to offer, on instructions, any explanation as to why a rule 24  notice
      had not previously been served.  Ms Harrington applied to rely on  the
      notice out of  time  to  challenge  the  Judge's  adverse  finding  in
      relation to para 276ADE.

   8. I drew to the representatives' attention the recent  decision  of  the
      Upper Tribunal in EG and NG (UT Rule 17: Withdrawal; Rule  24:  Scope)
      Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 (IAC) as relevant  to  the  issue  of  what
      matters may be  raised  in  a  rule  24  notice.   Having  given  both
      representatives  an  opportunity  to  consider  EG  and  NG,  both  Ms
      Harrington and Mr Hibbs made submissions in relation to the case.

   9. Ms Harrington submitted that EG and NG did not prevent  the  appellant
      challenging in a rule 24 notice the alternative finding of  the  Judge
      made against the appellant under para 276ADE.  She  accepted  that  if
      the appellant had sought to  challenge  the  adverse  asylum  decision
      then, on the basis of EG and NG, that challenge could not  be  brought
      through the mechanism of a rule 24 notice.  The appellant  could  only
      do that by seeking, for himself, permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  She submitted that the appellant's challenge  to  the  para
      276ADE decision was not a different matter from  that  raised  by  the
      Secretary of State in challenging  the  decision  in  the  appellant's
      favour under Article 8.  Although the application was about six  weeks
      out of time, Ms Harrington submitted that I should extend time.

  10. Mr Hibbs did not resist Ms Harrington's application as  being  out  of
      time.  Instead, he submitted that on the basis of EG and NG  at  [45]-
      [47], this was in  effect  a  cross  appeal  by  the  appellant  on  a
      different matter not raised by the Secretary of State's appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal.  The challenge could only be brought by the  appellant
      seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

  11. I begin with the relevant provision in the Upper  Tribunal  Procedural
      Rules which is rule 24(3).  It states what  a  notice  under  rule  24
      served by a respondent in  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  contain.   Rule
      24(2)(e) provides that the response must state:

           "The grounds on which the respondent relies, including  (in  the
           case of an appeal against the decision of another Tribunal), any
           grounds  on  which  the  respondent  was  unsuccessful  in   the
           proceedings which are the subject of the appeal, but intends  to
           rely on in the appeal;..."

  12. On the face of it, that provision would appear to allow the respondent
      (here the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  to  set  out
      "grounds" upon which she was unsuccessful in the  First-tier  Tribunal
      proceedings.  Such a ground could, conceivably, be a claim  under  the
      Immigration Rules, namely para 276ADE upon which he was  unsuccessful.
      The position is not, however, that straightforward.

  13. In EG and NG,  the  appellants  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      succeeded under Article 3 of the ECHR.   However,  their  appeals  had
      been dismissed on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   The
      Secretary of State appealed the decision under  Art  3.   One  of  the
      issues which the Upper Tribunal had to decide was whether, in  a  rule
      24 notice, those appellants (now respondents in the Upper Tribunal  to
      the Secretary of State's appeal against the Article 3 decision)  could
      in a rule 24 notice challenge the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
      dismiss their appeals on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds.
      The Upper Tribunal held that they could not do  so.   Such  challenges
      could only be brought by the unsuccessful claimants (on those grounds)
      themselves appealing against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

  14. The Upper Tribunal rejected the submission that rule  24  permitted  a
      respondent to raise any points that failed to impress  the  First-tier
      Tribunal including a point which could itself have been the subject of
      an appeal.  At [46], the Upper Tribunal said this:

           "46.  Rule 24 does not create a right of appeal to a  party  who
                 has not asked for permission to appeal.  Rule 24 is not  in
                 any way to do with seeking permission to appeal and is  not
                 an alternative to seeking permission  where  permission  is
                 needed.  It is to do  with  giving  notice  about  how  the
                 respondent intends  to  respond  to  the  appeal  that  the
                 appellant has permission to pursue.  If a respondent  wants
                 to argue that the First-tier Tribunal should have reached a
                 materially different conclusion then the  respondent  needs
                 permission to appeal."

  15. At [47], the Upper Tribunal went on to state:

           "47.   This  is  probably  more  significant  in   international
                 protection cases than  entry  clearance  cases  because  an
                 appeal can be allowed on different grounds.   An  appellant
                 may have shown, for example, alternatively, that  he  is  a
                 refugee, or entitled to  humanitarian  protection  or  that
                 removal is contrary to his rights under article  8  of  the
                 European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The   beneficial
                 consequences of success would be different  in  each  case.
                 For example, a person found to be entitled to  humanitarian
                 protection may want to  argue  that  he  should  have  been
                 recognised as a refugee whilst the Secretary of  State  may
                 want to argue that the appeal should only have been allowed
                 with reference to article 8.  In such  cases  both  parties
                 would want a  result  materially  different  from  the  one
                 decided by the Tribunal and both should seek permission  to
                 appeal.

  16.  In  my  judgement,  that  last  illustration  equally  captures   the
      circumstances of this appeal.

  17. The situation in this appeal is to be distinguished from the situation
      contemplated in para 46 of EG  and  NG.   There,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      identified a situation where a respondent may properly raise in a rule
      24 notice an issue upon which he was unsuccessful  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  The example concerns an entry clearance  application  by  a
      husband who successfully persuades a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
      the accommodation requirements are met but is unsuccessful in  respect
      of the maintenance requirements of the spousal entry rule.  On  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal by the husband against the decision  to  dismiss
      his appeal under the Rules because he did  not  meet  the  maintenance
      requirements, the Upper Tribunal recognised that the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer could, in a rule 24 notice, seek to  argue  that  the  Judge's
      finding in the appellant's favour on the accommodation requirement was
      flawed.  The Upper Tribunal said this:

          "46.    Suppose a man seeks  entry  clearance  as  a  husband  and
                 suppose that the Entry Clearance Officer finds that he  has
                 not shown that he can be either accommodated or  maintained
                 in accordance with the rules.  A First-tier Tribunal  Judge
                 may decide, arguably wrongly, that the husband can  satisfy
                 the accommodation  requirements  but  not  the  maintenance
                 requirements.  In that event the judge  would  dismiss  the
                 appeal.  The Entry Clearance Officer would have no interest
                 in appealing.  He is content with the decision  to  dismiss
                 the appeal.  The husband however may want to challenge  the
                 decision.  He might want to argue that the decision that he
                 did not satisfy the maintenance requirements was  wrong  in
                 law and he may be given  permission  to  appeal.   In  that
                 event the Entry Clearance Officer may well  want  to  argue
                 not only that the decision that the husband  did  not  meet
                 the  maintenance  requirements  was  right  but  that   the
                 decision that he did meet  the  accommodation  requirements
                 was  wrong.  In  short,  without  wanting  to  appeal   the
                 decision, the Entry Clearance Officer may want to rely on a
                 ground that failed before the First-tier Tribunal.  Rule 24
                 permits the Entry Clearance Officer to give notice  of  his
                 intention to raise such a point in a reply."

  18. By contrast, what is sought by the appellant  here  is  a  "materially
      different conclusion" to that reached by the First-tier Tribunal.  The
      appellant wishes to succeed under the Immigration Rules which, if made
      good, brings with it its own scheme of leave that would  be  initially
      granted and route to indefinite leave (see paras 276BE and  276DE).  I
      will deal below with the submissions made concerning the scope of  any
      claim under Article 8 where an individual cannot succeed under the new
      so-called Article 8 Rules.  It suffices to say here that there is  not
      a complete overlap between the Rules and Article 8 both  in  principle
      and in the instant case.

  19. For these reasons, I refuse Ms Harrington's application to rely  in  a
      rule 24 notice, even if time is extended,  upon  a  challenge  to  the
      Judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under para  276ADE.



Article 8

  20. I now turn to the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the  Judge's
      decision to allow the appeal under Article 8.

  21. Mr Hibbs essentially made two submissions.  First, he relied upon  the
      decision of the Inner House of the Court  of  Session  in  MS  v  SSHD
      [2013] SCIH 52 at [26].  He submitted that the Judge,  having  decided
      the appellant's appeal  against  him  under  para  276ADE,  there  was
      nothing left to decide under Article 8 as the "private life"  rule  in
      para  276ADE  covered  all  relevant  matters.   Secondly,  Mr   Hibbs
      submitted that, in any  event,  the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons  for  finding  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   be
      disproportionate.  He submitted that the Judge had concentrated unduly
      upon the effect of the appellant's return to Namibia rather  than  any
      interference with his private life in the UK.  He submitted  that  the
      Judge  had,  in  effect,  in  para  114  resolved  the  issue  in  the
      appellant's favour improperly on the basis that he was  "deserving  of
      sympathy and recognition of his problems".  Mr Hibbs candidly accepted
      that the reference in the grounds  to  the  Judge  appearing  to  make
      inconsistent findings in paras 103 and 104 that the appellant had both
      "no family life"  and  also  had  "family  life"  in  the  UK  had  no
      substance.  That concession was, in my view, wholly justified.  It  is
      clear that the Judge found that the appellant had no  family  life  in
      the UK in para 103 and his reference to him having established "family
      life" in para 104 is clearly a typographic error  with  the  reference
      being obviously to "private life" in the UK as the remainder  of  that
      paragraph makes plain.

  22. Ms Harrington submitted that the Judge's reasons at paras 102-114 were
      adequate.   She  submitted  that  para   276ADE   did   not   preclude
      consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules.    She  submitted  that
      para 276ADE was focussed on life in the UK with the  single  exception
      of determining whether the appellant could establish that he  had  "no
      ties" with his home country.  Ms Harrington submitted that  the  Judge
      had looked at the appellant's circumstances in the UK at paras 104-105
      and had been entitled to  look  at  the  circumstances  in  which  the
      appellant would live on return to Namibia.   She  submitted  that  the
      Judge had taken everything into account and his  end  point  that  the
      appellant's removal was disproportionate was one properly open to him.



  23. I deal first with Mr Hibbs' submission that there was, in  effect,  no
      issue for the Judge to  decide  under  Article  8  given  his  adverse
      finding under para 276ADE.

  24. In MS v SSHD at [26], the Inner House of the Court  of  Session  cited
      with approval [30] of the judgement of Sales J in  R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD
      [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);

           "26.  In R (Nagre) v Home Secretary, supra,  Sales  J  indicated
                 his general agreement with that statement of the  law,  but
                 added (at paragraph 30)

                    "The only slight modification  I  would  make,  for  the
                    purposes of clarity,  is  to  say  that  if,  after  the
                    process of applying the new rules and finding  that  the
                    claim for leave to remain under them fails, the relevant
                    official or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  clear  that
                    consideration under the rules has  fully  addressed  any
                    family life or private life issues arising under Article
                    8, it would be sufficient simply to say that; they would
                    not have to go on, in addition,  to  consider  the  case
                    separately from the Rules.   If  there  is  no  arguable
                    case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave
                    to remain outside the rules by reference to  Article  8,
                    there would be no point  in  introducing  full  separate
                    consideration of Article 8 again after having reached  a
                    decision on application of the rules".

                 We agree with that qualification.  It seems to us that  the
                 new rules are likely to  deal  adequately  with  the  great
                 majority of cases where the article 8 right to  private  or
                 family life is put in issue.  In that event,  there  is  no
                 need to go on to consider article 8 separately,  using  the
                 type of analysis set out in R (Razgar)  v  Home  Secretary,
                 supra.

  25. In [27], the Court of Session noted that:

           "In some cases, however, the new rules may not adequately  cover
           an applicant's Article 8 right to private or family life".

  26. The reliance upon Nagre and  MS  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  to
      criticise the Judge for following the two stage process set out in the
      Upper Tribunal's jurisprudence in MF (Article 8 - New  Rules)  Nigeria
      [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC); Ogundimu (Article  8  -  New  Rules)  Nigeria
      [2013] UKUT 0060 (IAC) and Izuazu (Article 8 - New Rules) [2013]  UKUT
      0045 (IAC).  The two stage approach  is  that  first  a  Judge  should
      consider  whether  an  individual  can  succeed  under  the   relevant
      immigration rule (here para 276ADE).  If the  individual  can  succeed
      there is no reason to carry  on  and  consider  whether  he  can  also
      succeed under Article 8.  But,  secondly,  if  the  individual  cannot
      succeed under the relevant  new  rule  then  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      should consider whether the appellant  can  succeed  under  Article  8
      applying the relevant Strasbourg jurisprudence and that of the  senior
      courts in the UK as to its proper application.

  27. In Nagre and MS, the courts recognised a caveat to that where it would
      be unnecessary, even if  an  individual  was  unsuccessful  under  the
      Rules, to consider private and family life  issues  under  Article  8.
      More recently, in Green (Article 8 -  New  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  00254
      (IAC), the Upper Tribunal, in a deportation  appeal,  recognised  that
      the relevant Immigration Rule (there para 398) did not deal  with  the
      particular issue raised in that appeal, namely that  the  offences  in
      question had been committed when the individual was a  juvenile  which
      was a matter considered to  be  of  specific  relevance  in  assessing
      proportionality by the Strasbourg Court in  Maslov  v  Austria  [2008]
      ECHR 546.  The Upper Tribunal concluded that  Art  8  should  also  be
      considered and the caveat in Nagre did not apply.

  28. In this appeal, the appellant relied essentially on two different, and
      discrete, matters as demonstrating a level of  interference  with  his
      private life which resulted in  his  removal  being  disproportionate.
      Those were: first, the impact on his life in the UK in particular  his
      acceptance within the Anglican Church and his sexual  orientation  and
      secondly, the impact upon him of returning to  Namibia  where  he  has
      been ostracised by his family and his sexual orientation would not  be
      tolerated.  I accept Ms Harrington's submission that, in this  appeal,
      the latter factor is not the focus of  para  276ADE.   As  regards  an
      individual's  circumstances  in  her  home  country,  para  276ADE(vi)
      focuses  exclusively  upon  whether  that  individual  has  "no   ties
      (including social, cultural or family)" with the country to which they
      have  been  returned.   There  is  no  obvious  place  there   for   a
      consideration of the impact upon the appellant of living in Namibia as
      an openly  gay  man.   Those  circumstances  were,  in  my  judgement,
      patently relevant to the Judge's assessment of whether the appellant's
      removal would be proportionate despite the Judge's finding  (which  is
      not challenged) that any impact upon the appellant would not reach the
      level of severity to amount to persecution or  serious  ill  treatment
      falling within Article 3 of the ECHR.  In the settled case law of  the
      Strasbourg Court in Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 1179; �ner  v
      The Netherlands [2007] Imm AR 303 and Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR  47
      the Court has recognised that all the circumstances of the  individual
      in the country  of  origin  are  to  be  taken  into  account  in  any
      assessment of proportionality.

  29. Consequently, I reject Mr Hibb's submission that  the  Judge  was,  in
      effect, not required to consider Article 8 outside the  new  rules  in
      the case of this appellant.

  30. Turning now to the Judge's reasoning in relation to Article  8,  I  do
      not  accept  Mr  Hibbs'  submission  that  the  Judge's  reasons  were
      inadequate.  Mr Hibbs did not submit that the Judge's  conclusion  was
      not open to him, namely that it was irrational  or  perverse.   Though
      ground 2, which I set out above, criticises the Judge for reaching his
      finding despite the fact that the appellant's immigration  status  was
      precarious, his private life could be continued through  modern  means
      of communication, that he was working in the UK illegally and that  he
      could seek the support of the Anglican Church as he had in the UK, the
      ground rests itself upon the error being the Judge's failure  to  give
      "adequate reasons" for his finding on proportionality.

  31. It is important to see the Judge's reasons given at paras  104-114  in
      the light of  his  consideration  of  the  evidence  and  findings  in
      relation to para 276ADE which is at paras 98-104.   In  my  judgement,
      the Judges' reference  to  the  appellant's  "deserving  sympathy  and
      recognition  of  his  problems"  was  not  a  yardstick  by  which  he
      determined whether the appellant's removal  was  proportionate.   That
      remark was made in the context of a sentence in which the Judge  noted
      that he had found that any harm to the appellant  on  return  did  not
      reach a level of severity to amount  to  persecution  or  serious  ill
      treatment contrary to Article 3.  In paras 98-99 and 101 and  109  and
      113, the Judge accepted that there was a level of  discrimination  and
      intolerance in Namibia against inter alia, gay  men.   He  also  noted
      that the appellant's family had disowned him  because  of  his  sexual
      orientation.  He noted that the appellant would be unlikely to  access
      the

           "white gay scene in Namibia, although he had been welcomed  into
           the Anglican Church in this country,  the  Christian  Church  in
           Namibia  may  have  difficulties  of  its   own   in   affording
           recognition to the LGBT community".

  32. Although, in relation to para 276ADE, the Judge found  that  it  could
      not be said that the appellant had lost "all  ties"  in  Namibia,  the
      Judge nevertheless went on in para 101 to note:

           "[h]e has some ties but would find it difficult to renew them if
           he returned."

  33. In  reaching  the  finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
      disproportionate, the Judge clearly had in mind that the appellant had
      been in the UK for 9 years but that he had overstayed  since  November
      2007 (see paras 104 and 106).  In taking into account the strength  of
      the appellant's private life in the UK (see para 104) and  the  impact
      upon him of returning to Namibia where family had disowned him,  there
      would be difficulties in renewing any ties that he had not lost and he
      would return to a "hostile environment", in my judgement, it cannot be
      said that the Judge failed to take all relevant matters into  account.
      The balancing exercise inherent in proportionality  was  one  for  the
      Judge to carry out subject to his not reaching  a  finding  which  was
      irrational or perverse.  As I have already indicated, both the grounds
      and Mr Hibbs firmly put the Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the
      Judge's decision on a "reasoned basis".  In my  judgement,  the  Judge
      gave adequate reasons for striking the proportionality balance in  the
      appellant's favour.

Decision

  34. The Judge did not err in law in allowing the appellant's appeal  under
      Art 8.

  35. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, accordingly,
      dismissed.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















