
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01654/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2016                           |On 12 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Beeberg Gichki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, instructed by Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Beeberg Gichki, was born on 24 August 1992 and is a male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He had  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 16 January 2015 to refuse to grant him asylum  and  to
    give directions for his removal from the United  Kingdom.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Siddiqi) in a decision promulgated on 22 May  2015
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing at Manchester on 11 February 2016, both  parties  before
    me agreed that the judge had erred in law such that his  decision  fell
    to be set aside.  I directed that the decision should be remade in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Mr McVeety, for the respondent, requested further time
    in order to make submissions  and  so  I  further  directed  that  both
    parties should file and serve written submissions and gave a  timetable
    for that process.  Mr McVeety filed and served his written  submissions
    by 19 February 2016 as directed but, as a result of the  administrative
    problem, Mr O'Ryan filed and served his written submissions at a  later
    date.  Notwithstanding the delay, I am grateful  to  both  parties  for
    their helpful submissions.  Since I had these in electronic and written
    form, it seems to me appropriate that I should set out the  submissions
    in full in this decision rather than seek to summarise them.

 3. Mr McVeety's submissions were as follows:

         The Respondent continues to rely on the Reasons for Refusal  letter
         dated 16/01/2015.

         The Respondent submits that in respect of the alleged recent attack
         on the Appellant's  brother,  the  Appellant  has  not  provided  a
         credible account. The Respondent notes that prior to this  incident
         there had been no attacks on the Appellant's family since 2011. The
         Respondent submits that it is not credible that if the family  were
         of such a high political profile, that it would  be  over  4  years
         since they were last attacked,  and  particularly  since  it  would
         appear from the nature of the attack that those seeking to harm the
         Appellant are aware of where he and his family are located.

         The Respondent further submits that the account given  of  how  the
         Appellant's brother was attacked is also not credible. It is  noted
         that the Appellant's brother appears to have  been  attacked  in  a
         very public place, seemingly with many witnesses, and in  a  manner
         that very much left to chance whether  or  not  his  brother  would
         actually be killed. The Respondent submits that this public  attack
         does not sit with the Appellant's explanation as  to  why,  if  the
         Security Services wanted the Appellant and his  family  dead,  they
         did not just attack his home, which the Appellant explained was due
         to them not wanting to create a "scene".

         The Respondent submits that if the Tribunal does  accept  that  the
         Appellant's account has been entirely credible, and  that  he  does
         face a genuine risk in his home area, that the Appellant  would  be
         able to relocate away from Baluchistan. The Respondent submits that
         it is pure speculation  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  those
         seeking to harm the Appellant and his family are directly  involved
         and  connected  to  the  Intelligence  and  Security  services   in
         Pakistan. The Respondent submits that the  evidence  would  suggest
         otherwise, due to the random nature of the  attacks  and  the  fact
         that no attacks occurred over a number of years, when there was  no
         indication from the Appellant that his family had ceased  political
         activity. The Respondent submits that it is  evident  the  Security
         Services know the location of the Appellant's family and yet at  no
         time have they sought to attack the Appellant's family  home  where
         seemingly most of his family still live.

         The Respondent notes that  following  the  alleged  attack  on  the
         Appellant's brother, he was taken to Karachi where he  was  clearly
         given exceptional levels of care by the medical  services,  if  the
         account of the extent of the injuries suffered  by  him  is  to  be
         believed. There was evidently no attempt  against  the  Appellant's
         brother whilst he remained in Karachi, which the Respondent submits
         is clearly not consistent with a threat to the Appellant  from  the
         Intelligence and Security Services.

         In respect of the Appellant's membership of a student  organisation
         called AZAD, the Respondent questions whether the  Appellant  still
         maintains membership of this organisation, as he  is  evidently  no
         longer a student. The Respondent notes that the  Appellant  was  at
         best a very low level member of the organisation, and that  despite
         the authorities now banning the party, he was  able  to  attend  at
         least 6 protests, during and after which he encountered no problems
         from the authorities. The Respondent  submits  the  fact  that  the
         Government has banned a party clearly demonstrates they  have  must
         have been monitoring its activities, and  yet  the  Appellant,  who
         appears to be from a high profile  political  family,  suffered  no
         consequences as a result of his membership. The Respondent  submits
         this is another clear indication that the  alleged  threat  to  the
         Appellant does not come from the Government or  from  any  national
         Security or Intelligence Agency.

         The Respondent relies  on  paragraphs  40-49  of  the  Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter in respect of UK based political activities  and  in
         respect  of  the  availability  and  reasonableness   of   internal
         relocation in Pakistan.

         In  terms  of  any  alleged  political  activities  on  return  the
         Respondent relies on the unchallenged findings of FTTJ  Siddiqi  at
         paragraphs 42 and 43 of  the  determination  that  demonstrate  the
         Appellant's "political zeal" is not as strong as the Appellant  has
         claimed.

 4. Mr O'Ryan supplied a chronology and written submissions.   His  written
    submissions were as follows:

         The Appellant avers that the second, third and  fourth  grounds  of
         appeal are interlinked - the assessment of risk of harm was  flawed
         due  to  the  FTT's  failure  to  perform  that  task  having   due
         consideration to country  information  relating  to  (ii)  risk  to
         Baluchi nationalists, and BSO-Azad members in particular, and (iii)
         to risk to such persons outside Baluchistan, and (iv) having failed
         to give adequate reasons for finding no political  motive  for  the
         killings of the Appellant's family members.

         18   The Appellant avers that the findings set out  at  para  6(i)-
         (vi) above should be retained. However, in light  of  the  accepted
         errors in the FTT decision, including its failure to make a finding
         as to whether the Appellant's brother had been shot in April  2015,
         the Appellant avers that the following findings  as  summarised  at
         para 6 above need to be set aside and re-made:

         (viii)   the Appellant had not established that there had been  any
         change in the level of risk faced by his family  in  Karachi  since
         the Appellant came to the UK [33];

         (ix) whilst the documents that the Appellant  relied  on  supported
         his claim that members  of his family were  killed,  they  did  not
         directly support his claim that  they  were  killed  for  political
         reasons [39];

         (x)  the Appellant speculates that the deaths of his  grandfather's
         brother, and his grandfather, occurred at the behest of the  police
         or ISI; the Appellant  had  not  established,  even  on  the  lower
         standard, that these deaths were linked to the authorities [39];

         (xii)    although the Appellant and his brother  were  shot  at  in
         2011, the Judge was not persuaded that this could be attributed  to
         the Pakistani authorities [41(b)];

         (xv) the Appellant would not be at risk (impliedly,  by  reason  of
         his association with his family) in Karachi [44].

         Reason for attacks

         19   The Appellant avers that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood that the killings of his relatives  were  committed  for
         political reasons, for the following reasons:

         (i)  the roles/positions of the persons killed, and the Appellant's
         relationship to them, is no longer disputed: (referring here to the
         dramatis personae):

         E    Aslam Jahn Gichki          Maternal Grandfather's brother

         'Noted Baloch leader' (AB1 page 55)

         Killed 9.6.02: SEF q 82; WS1 para 11-12; AB1 [55]

         F    Hassan Gichki         A's maternal uncle

         An activist of Baluchistan National Party  and  close  relative  of
         Akhtar Mengal (see press at AB1 50)

         Killed in prison 26.1.06: SEF q 92; WS1 para 13-14; autopsy  report
         AB1 [36-39]; Article in 'Dawn' 15.5.06 AB1 [50-52]; AB1  [53];  AB1
         [70]

         G    'Sardar' (an  honorary  title)  Nadir  Jan  Gichki         A's
         maternal Grandfather

         The 'Sardar' of Tump, and related to the Mengal family  (see  press
         at AB1 page 54)

         His house raided by Frontier Corps and intelligence members in  Feb
         2010; - 'looking for  insurgents':   -  A's  WS1  para  15;  killed
         18.8.10: SEF q 100; WS1 para 18; AB1 [54]; AB2 [6]

         H    Murad Gichki               Cousin of C

         Son of Ayub Gichki, BNP Central Committee member; cousin of  Akhtar
         Mengal  (see press at AB1 page 51-53)

         Killed 1.12.10: SEF q 106; WS1 para 20; AB1 [53]

         I    Zubari Gichki              Cousin of C

         Son of Ayub Gichki, BNP Central Committee member; cousin of  Akhtar
         Mengal  (see press at AB1 page 51-53)

         Killed 1.12.10: SEF q 106; WS1 para 20; AB1[53]

         J    Naseer Gichki              A's 2nd Cousin

         A member of BSO Azad and part of its Central  Committee.  Lives  in
         Tump. Ambushed and shot at in Feb 2010 - same day that  Appellant's
         grandfather's house was raided : WS1 para 16

         (ii) attacks upon  this  number  of  persons  all  related  to  the
         Appellant are, as a matter of probability, extremely unlikely to be
         for any explicable reason, other than  their  involvement  in  pro-
         Baluchi politics/being related to persons involved in such matters;



         (iii)     no  other  explanation  is  indicated  anywhere  in   the
         Appellant's evidence for the attacks upon such persons, other  than
         their political positions, and the Respondent does not advance  any
         other plausible explanation for such attacks;

         (iv) press reports attribute political motive to the killings;  and
         the fact that a press report discloses a political stance  (eg  the
         reference in  Examiner.com to 'Pakistan's sleazy interior minister'
         at AB1  page  51)  does  not  establish,  without  more,  that  the
         information contained within a report is unreliable; British  press
         has historically been strongly politically partisan .

         Recent attack

         20   The Appellant avers that the account of his brother being shot
         in April 2015 is credible. The attacks and deaths of the members of
         the Appellant's family have taken place over a number of years; the
         fact that there had not been a direct attack on  the  Appellant  or
         his family between 2011  and  2015  is  not  determinative  of  the
         credibility of the Appellant's account;  the  country  information,
         set out in detail below, establishes that the  Pakistan  government
         is involved  in  a  very  long  term  campaign  against  actual  or
         perceived Baloch students and activists. The  Appellant's  account,
         given in his second witness  statement  and  in  oral  evidence  is
         clear, and not implausible.

         21   Contrary to the written submission of  the  Respondent,  there
         was no long sojourn in Karachi whilst receiving 'exceptional levels
         of care' for his wounds - the Appellant's witness statement  stated
         that his brother was treated and discharged on the same  day,  with
         his foot in plaster, and the injury to  his  chest  being  a  light
         flesh would only.

         22   The Respondent's assertion  that  it  is  not  plausible  that
         assailants would have launched an attack on the Appellant's brother
         in a public place, is simply not made out on  the  evidence  -  see
         reference at eg [75] to abductions regularly being carried  out  in
         broad daylight with multiple witnesses. Further, if, as seems to be
         the case, assailants of Baluchi activists care  not  whether  their
         actions are witnessed, then logic would suggest  that it is  easier
         to shoot someone in the street than trying  to  enter  a  persons's
         house to do so, contrary to the Respondent's submission.

         23   Further, the continued interest in the Appellant's  family  is
         explained by their status as well  known  campaigners  for  Baluchi
         rights, and the deterioration  in  the  country  conditions  in  or
         around 2014 - referred to below.

         Future risk

         24   The Appellant relies on the following evidence in  support  of
         the proposition that  as  a  family  member  of  his  wider  family
         network, and/or himself being a member and supporter of  BSO  Azad,
         there would remain a real risk of serious harm to him in  Pakistan,
         whether in Baluchistan,  or  Karachi,  or  indeed  elsewhere,  such
         evidence not having been taken adequately into account by the FTT:

         (i)   General  human  rights  situation/dangers   for   pro-Baluchi
         sympathisers  and   campaigners,  BSO  Azad  members/supporters  in
         particular (Ground 2)

         (a)  Respondent's refusal letter paras 13-31;

         (b)   Appellant's  bundle  AB1  pages:  (and  NB  page   [266]   in
         particular):

         [75]  "These  cases   show   that   Pakistan's   security   forces,
         particularly  its  intelligence  agencies,  targeted  for  enforced
         disappearance ethnic Baloch suspected of involvement in the  Baloch
         nationalist movement"

         [75]  "The  victims  of  enforced  disappearances  in   the   cases
         documented were predominantly men in their  mid  20s  to  mid  40s.
         Three of the disappeared were children, the youngest of whom was 12
         years old at the time of the abduction. In three cases, the victims
         were over 60 years old. Most victims appear to have  been  targeted
         because of alleged participation in Baloch nationalist parties  and
         movements, including the  Baloch  Republican  Party  (BRP),  Baloch
         National  Front  (BNF),  Baloch   National   Movement   (BNM)   and
         Baluchistan National Party (BNP), as well  as  the  Baloch  Student
         Organization (Azad) (BSO Azad)."

         [77]      "In  seven  cases  documented  by  Human  Rights   Watch,
         Pakistani authorities attempted  to  legitimize  disappearances  by
         bringing criminal charges against  the  missing  persons.  In  some
         cases, the detainees were then transferred into police custody  and
         brought to trial." (and see  the  relevance  of  that  evidence  in
         relation to Appellant's uncle Hassan Gichki, killed in detention in
         'trumped up' drugs charges).

         [96]     "The security forces have also targeted students  involved
         in political activities, particularly members of the Baloch Student
         Organisation Azad (BSO Azad). Many of the student leaders and their
         supporters  have  been  arrested   at   university   campuses   and
         subsequently disappeared."

         [96] "From information provided  by  released  detainees  to  Human
         Rights Watch,  individuals  seem  to  have  been  targeted  because
         authorities believed them to be involved in the Baloch  nationalist
         movement  (though  often  without  basis)."   (Emphasis   added   -
         therefore, the Appellant submits, the Appellant, even if active  at
         a 'low level', on the FTT's findings, would remain at risk).

         [205]    HRW Report 2014: see short section on Baluchistan

         [213]    HRW Report 2015 "The human rights situation in Baluchistan
         remained abysmal" (and see rest of that passage).

         [219]    HRW Press: 13.7.11 "Upsurge in Killings in Baluchistan ...
         Across Baluchistan since January 2011 at least 150 people have been
         abducted and killed and their bodies abandoned."

         [252]    Global Voices, reference to BSO Azad being banned in  2013
         for alleged 'terrorism'.

         [254]      Global  Voices,  reference  to  bodies  of  hundreds  of
         Baluchistan's missing men turning up with torture marks since 2010.



         [258]    HRW 29.8.14 Impunity marks global day for  disappeared"  -
         reference in middle of pages to  disappearances  and  bodies  being
         found with torture marks (ie 2014 evidence)

         [266]    Guardian 29.3.11 'Pakistan's dirty war'  - see  at  [269]:
         "At a Quetta safehouse I meet Asad Baloch,  a  wiry,  talkative  22
         year old activist with the Baloch  Students'  Organisation  (Azad).
         "We provide moral and political support to the fighters," he  says.
         "We are making people aware. When they are aware, they act." It  is
         a risky business: about one third of all "kill  and  dump"  victims
         were members of the BSO."

          [293]   UNPO briefing note, 'The Plight of the Baloch', see 'Human
         Rights Concerns' reference to late January 2014, mass  graves  were
         discovered in Khuzdar district in Baluchistan, uncovering  hundreds
         of bodies (and therefore supporting Appellant's assertion at SEF  q
         124,  explaining why he had claimed asylum, due to a  deterioration
         in the situation in Pakistan, and referring to the mass graves).

         (ii) Evidence of abuses in or around Karachi in particular  (Ground
         3):

         (a)  Appellant's bundle AB1, page:

         [74] Abdul Ghaffar Lango abducted in Karachi ...On  July  1,  2011,
         Lango's corpse was found in an abandoned hotel near Lakbado area of
         Gadani town in the Lasbela district of Baluchistan

         [75]     "The problem of disappearances in Pakistan  is  widespread
         and is not limited to Baluchistan province."

         [95] "Human Rights Watch documented several cases  in  which  local
         police assisted intelligence agencies in carrying out arrests  that
         resulted in enforced disappearances. For example, on April 2, 2010,
         two police cars and two Toyota Hilux cars stopped a public  bus  in
         which Mehboob Wadela, 32, was travelling to Karachi  from  Gwadar."
         (or possibly from Karachi to Gwadar - see top of  [134]  -  placing
         abduction at a bus terminal at outskirts of Karachi).

         [102]    "A leading member of the BSO Azad, Naseem Baloch was first
         forcibly disappeared in 2005 along with two other men. He was  kept
         for three months by the authorities in unacknowledged detention  in
         Karachi and Quetta." And see [132] reference to Naseem  Baloch  and
         others being detained in Karachi).

         [107]    "Abdul Qayuum Baloch was disappeared for  four  months  in
         2001 and then transferred to Karachi central jail. His mother  said
         that when she met her son in jail, his entire body was swollen from
         beatings."

         [110]    "Two brothers, Aziz Khan Bugti, 30, and Megla Khan  Bugti,
         35, went missing in April 2005 as they travelled from Hyderabad  in
         Sindh province to Karachi.."

         [110]    "Abdul Qayyum Baloch and Abdul Waheed from Quetta had been
         abducted in Karachi in January 2001

         [275]    The Express Tribune, 11.12.11 "Baloch activist gunned down
         in Karachi: example of a Balochi activist being stopped in  a  car;
         he tried to run away; was shot and killed (and  see  relevance  for
         Appellant's account that he was shot at in his car in 2010).

         [277-279]     Dawn.com 28.10.14 "Three 'missing'  Baloch  activists
         found shot dead (see report - kidnapped elsewhere  and  detained  -
         bodies dumped in Karachi).

         [281]    Dawn.com 3.5.13 "Another 'missing' Baloch  activist  turns
         up dead". See report; body found in Karachi.

         [284-287]      Crisisbaluchistan.com:  22.2.13:   "Karachi:   Extra
         judicial abductions". See item - Manzoor Ahmed Qalandarani, son  of
         a tribal elder of Tootak, Baluchistan, abducted whilst studying  at
         university in Karachi. Following 4 pages gives details of  4  other
         Karachi students who had been abducted, all named 'Baloch'.

         [295]    BBC News Asia: 20.5.14 "Abduction of activist Zahid Baloch
         highlights Baluchistan plight"  (describes  a  protest  and  hunger
         strike in  Karachi  of  persons  protesting  the  abduction  of  an
         activist  in  Quetta)  -  evidence  of  Baluchi  political   issues
         manifesting themselves in Karachi.

         Internal flight

         25   Baluchistan and Karachi are  unsafe  for  the  Appellant.  The
         Appellant is involved in Baluchi political matters in the UK.

         26   Requiring  the  Appellant  to  relocate  to  another  part  of
         Pakistan, there being no evidence of presence of ethnic Baluchi  in
         other areas of Pakistan, and no evidence of any social or political
         Baluchi  organisations  anywhere  outside  the  Baluchistan/Karachi
         area, it would be unreasonable and  unduly  harsh  to  require  the
         Appellant to relocate to another area of Pakistan.  To do so  would
         be require him to give up  his  Baluchi  identity;  this  would  be
         contrary to the Refugee Convention: HJ (Iran) v  SSHD  [2010]  UKSC
         31.

         27    In  any  event,  going  to  another  area  of  Pakistan   and
         campaigning on the issue of Baluchi  rights  would  make  him  more
         visible, not less, due to his relative rarity in  another  area  of
         Pakistan, and he would remain at real risk of serious harm  in  any
         area.

Retained Findings from the First-Tier Tribunal

 5.  I  agree  with  Mr  O'Ryan  [6]  that  the  findings  summarised   his
    subparagraphs (i) - (vi) survive the setting aside  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  It is accepted, therefore, that the appellant is  a
    member of the BSO Azad and that the Pakistani authorities  had  visited
    the appellant's home in November 2010 and the appellant and his brother
    had been shot at in 2011.  It was also accepted that the appellant  has
    attended protests in Pakistan connected with Baluchistan  politics  and
    that he has not experience problems as  a  result  of  attending  those
    meetings.

The Shooting of the Appellant's Brother: 5 April 2015

 6. Mr McVeety has submitted that the account given of the  attack  on  the
    appellant's brother was not credible.   This was because it  had  taken
    place in a "very public place" and that the attack had taken place some
    four years since the family had last been the subject  of  attack.   Mr
    O'Ryan, on the other hand, refers  to  background  material  indicating
    that the Pakistan government had been "involved  in  a  very  long-term
    campaign against actual perceived Balloch students and activists."  The
    appellant's brother had been discharged from the hospital on  the  same
    day following  the  shooting  and  had  not  received  (as  Mr  McVeety
    submitted) "exceptional levels of care" for his wound.  Mr O'Ryan  also
    refers to  the  background  material  indicating  that  abductions  are
    carried out "in broad daylight with multiple witnesses".  [22].

 7. Acknowledging that the burden of proof is on  the  appellant  (I  heard
    brief evidence from him at Manchester on  11  February  2016)  and  the
    standard of proof is whether there is a  real  risk  that  he  will  be
    exposed to persecution or ill-treatment in Pakistan, I  have  concluded
    that the appellant's brother was shot in April 2015  as  the  appellant
    claimed.  I find that it is important  to  view  the  claimed  shooting
    against the background of previous attacks on  the  appellant's  family
    which had taken place over a number of years and are which are detailed
    in Mr O'Ryan's submissions in [19]. I am not satisfied that the  public
    nature of the attack can  be  described  as  out  of  the  ordinary  by
    reference to the evidence referred to by Mr O'Ryan.

Who Killed Members of the Appellant's Family?

 8. I refer above to [19] of Mr O'Ryan's submissions and the  lengthy  list
    of the appellant's family members who have been the subject of  attacks
    over a period of years.   Mr  O'Ryan  submits  that  it  is  "extremely
    unlikely to be for any explicable reason, other than their  involvement
    in pro-Baluchi politics/being  related  to  persons  involved  in  such
    matters." [19(ii)].  Having considered all the evidence, I  agree  with
    Mr O'Ryan.  I acknowledge Mr McVeety's submission that the  attacks  on
    the appellant's family have taken place over a lengthy  period  raising
    the question as to why, had they  wished  to  prevent  the  appellant's
    family's activities, those seeking to harm the appellant's  family  had
    not concentrated their attacks upon the  family.   However,  given  the
    pattern of murders and the fact that each of  the  family  members  has
    been involved in Baluchi separatist politics then,  considered  against
    the background material cited at length in Mr O'Ryan's  submissions,  I
    find it is reasonably likely that each of the family members  has  been
    the victim of individuals or organisations  opposed  to  the  political
    opinions of those family members.

The Risk to the Appellant

 9. It is important that I seek to characterise the appellant in  order  to
    be in a position to assess the likely risk to him upon  return  to  his
    home area of Pakistan.  I find that the appellant has  been  active  in
    pro-Baluchi politics both in  Pakistan  whilst  he  lived  there,  also
    whilst in the United Kingdom.  I find that he is a member of BSO  Azad.
    I find that, over a period of years, members of the appellant's  family
    have been killed on account of  their  pro-Baluchi  political  opinion.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddiqi,  whilst  acknowledging  the  deaths,
    found that there was no evidence to show that they were linked  to  the
    Pakistani  authorities.   Having  very  carefully  considered  all  the
    background material, I consider that there is a  reasonable  likelihood
    that the deaths of the appellant's family members have been perpetrated
    by the Pakistani security services or by individuals acting  on  behalf
    of those services and influenced probably controlled by  them.   I  say
    that for the following reasons.  I refer  to  Mr  O'Ryan's  submissions
    [24] identified the common thread running through the various citations
    of background material relate to attacks upon pro-Baluchi activists  by
    agencies of the Pakistani  government.   There  appears  to  be  little
    evidence if  any  at  all  that  individuals  or  organisations  acting
    independently  of  the  Pakistani  authorities   have   targeted   pro-
    Baluchistan activists.  That the Baluchi political  organisations  are,
    in essence,  separatist  organisations  and  for  obvious  reasons  are
    opposed by the central Pakistan state is axiomatic.  It is  clear  also
    from the background material that, whilst the Pakistani authorities  do
    not openly claim the murders of pro-Baluchi activists, they are engaged
    in what is described in the Guardian article of  29  March  2011  as  a
    "dirty war".  It is,  therefore,  reasonably  likely  that  pro-Baluchi
    activists who are attacked in Pakistan are the victims of the  Pakistan
    authorities either acting directly or through agencies.

10.  Given  that  the  appellant  is   a   genuine   pro-Baluchi   activist
    notwithstanding the fact that he may have attended meetings in the past
    had not led to persecution, I find that the appellant would continue to
    pursue pro-Baluchi activities on return to Baluchistan and/or  Karachi,
    in consequence, he would be at real risk of  persecution  or  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

Internal Flight Alternative

11. The question remains whether the appellant may re-locate  elsewhere  in
    Pakistan outside Baluchistan and/or Karachi whether he would be at risk
    in such areas and also whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him
    to relocate.  Mr O'Ryan's submission [26-27] focuses on  the  assertion
    that  there  are  no  Baluchi  organisations  operating   outside   the
    Baluchistan/Karachi area and that the appellant would  be  required  to
    "give up his Baluchi identity" (HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31).   I  do  not
    find that submission particularly persuasive.  Outside his  home  area,
    the appellant would live in an  area  of  Pakistan  where  Baluchistani
    organisations are likely to be entirely absent and it seems very likely
    that his activities would, at the very least, be limited.  Having  said
    that,  I   find   that   the   appellant,   if   he   was   living   in
    Baluchistan/Karachi,  would  remain  at  real   risk   of   persecution
    perpetrated by the Pakistani authorities.   The  Pakistani  authorities
    operate throughout the geographical extent of Pakistan  notwithstanding
    the activities  of  insurgents  in  some  areas.   Mr  O'Ryan's  second
    submission [27] that campaigning on "the issue of Baluchi rights  would
    make [the appellant] more visible not less" is a persuasive one.   Even
    if the appellant were living outside Baluchistan  or  Karachi,  I  find
    that he would still seek to express firmly-held pro-Baluchi  sentiments
    and that, for the reason given by Mr O'Ryan,  the  expression  of  such
    sentiments may well attract attention.  If that  occurred,  I  find  it
    likely the appellant would come to  the  attention  of  the  police  or
    security forces of Pakistan within the area of the country where he may
    reside.  It might be argued that,  outside  Baluchistan,  the  Pakistan
    authorities may have little interest in lone voices supporting  Baluchi
    separatism but, given the  fact  that  the  Pakistani  authorities  are
    willing  to  persecute  and  even   kill   pro-Baluchi   activists   in
    Baluchistan, I find that it is dangerous and probably wrong  to  assume
    that the  authorities  would  ignore  the  appellant  and  dismiss  his
    opinions and activities as harmless.  There is nothing in the papers to
    indicate that pro-Baluchi activists living outside  Baluchistan/Karachi
    have been persecuted, I find that there remains a reasonable likelihood
    that, if he actively expressed his pro-Baluchi views, the appellant  is
    likely to suffer harm from the Pakistani  authorities  anywhere  within
    Pakistan.  It follows that if he refrained from  expressing  his  views
    because of a fear of persecution,  he  would  be  entitled  to  refugee
    status on HJ (Iran) principles.  It further follows that  the  internal
    flight alternative is not available to this appellant.

12. In the circumstances, I find that the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 16 January 2015 should be  allowed  on
    asylum/Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  22  May
2015 is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  16  January  2015  is
allowed on asylum grounds and Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 27 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



