


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/01341/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |   Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28th January 2016                      |   On 30th March 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     A R
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr G Hodgetts (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co)
For the Respondent:      Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
       permission, against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Dhaliwal promulgated on 13th April 2015 in which she  dismissed  his
       appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
       asylum claim in a decision taken on 6th January 2015.

    2. The Appellant is an Afghan national born on 6th  January  1996.  His
       date of birth was established after a  social  work  assessment.  He
       arrived in the UK and claimed asylum in February 2010.  That  asylum
       claim was rejected by the Secretary of State and dismissed on appeal
       by the First-tier Tribunal. In accordance with her  policy  however,
       the Secretary of State granted the Appellant discretionary leave  as
       he was then aged 15. He then became a "looked after child"  and  was
       the responsibility of Worcestershire County Council. He  was  placed
       in emergency accommodation and after two  false  starts  was  placed
       with his present foster family with whom he has remained ever since.

    3. Prior to the expiry of his discretionary leave the Appellant made  a
       further application to remain on asylum and Human Rights grounds and
       it is the refusal of that decision  that  was  the  subject  of  the
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  asylum  claim  on  the  same
       grounds that it was dismissed in 2010 and for the same reasons found
       the Appellant was not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  or  to
       succeed under Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.  Those decisions were not
       challenged before us.

    5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the
       Appellant's private and family life claim. She  noted  that  neither
       Appendix FM nor paragraph 276ADE could assist him, a matter that was
       accepted by those  representing  him.   The  Judge  then  considered
       Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. It is not argued  that  she
       was wrong to do so. The Judge accepted the Appellant  must  have  an
       established private life due to the length of  stay  in  the  United
       Kingdom (from age 14 to 19 at the date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing). She found that Article 8 was clearly engaged in the appeal
       and moved on to the issue of proportionality. However, at  paragraph
       51 of her decision the Judge did not accept that family life existed
       in this case due to the fact that the Appellant was a  foster  child
       and repeated in paragraph 67 that the Appellant had no  family  life
       in  the  UK.  She  found  the  Appellant's  private  life  would  be
       interfered with in a manner which would engage Article  8  but  that
       the  interference  was  proportionate  when  balanced  against   the
       interests of the community as a whole.

    6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       This was initially refused by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal but
       subsequently granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

    7. The Upper Tribunal Judge made an error in the grant by mistaking the
       age of the Appellant as at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing as being 15 when in fact  he  was  19.  So  much  was  quite
       properly pointed out in a note to the Tribunal  by  the  Appellant's
       representatives.  However,  the  main  reason  for  the   grant   of
       permission was that the Judge had arguably erred in finding that the
       Appellant's relationship with his foster parents could not form  the
       basis for a finding that there was family life in the UK.

    8. Before us Mr Wilding accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's
       decision was tainted by material error of law in that regard. It
       was accepted that the case law and in particular the cases
       referred to in the grant of permission, made clear that it was
       possible for family life to exist between a foster child and
       foster parent. Those cases are Kopf and Liberia v Austria
       (Application No. 1598/06), Moretti and Bendetti v Italy
       (Application No. 16318/07), Price v UK (1988) 55DR 224 and Gaskin
       v UK (1990) 12 EHRR 36. Furthermore, in Martin Cebekhula
       Mthokozisi v Secretary of State  for the Home Department [2004]
       EWHC 2964(Admin), the Secretary of State conceded that family life
       could exist between a foster child and a foster parent.

    9. It being accepted that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law
       in its decision and reasons so far as the  Article  8  findings  are
       concerned we set it aside and  go  on  to  redecide  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds only. The other findings were not challenged.

   10. In order to succeed the Appellant needs  to  satisfy  us  both  that
       family  life  exists  between  himself  and   his   foster   parents
       notwithstanding that he is now an adult and that  his  removal  from
       the UK consequent on the Secretary of State's  decision  will  be  a
       disproportionate breach of his right to a private and family life.

   11. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Wilding  was  prepared  to
       accept that the relationship between the Appellant  and  his  foster
       family during his minority amounted to family life for  the  purpose
       of Article 8.

   12. The Appellant needs to  satisfy  us  that  it  continues  to  do  so
       notwithstanding that he is now an adult of 20 years.   The  case  of
       Ghising [2012] UKUT 00161  (IAC),  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,
       states in the headnote:-

         "A review of the jurisprudence discloses that there is  no  general
         proposition that Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights can never be engaged when the family life it  is  sought  to
         establish is between adult siblings living  together.  Rather  than
         applying a blanket rule with regard to adult  children,  each  case
         should be analysed on its own  facts,  to  decide  whether  or  not
         family life exists, within the meaning  of  Article  8(1).   Whilst
         some generalisations are possible, each case is fact-sensitive".


   13. Reliance is also placed on the case of  Gurung  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8
       which approved the  reasoning  in  Ghising  that  the  judgement  in
       Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 had been interpreted  too  restrictively
       in the past and what was required in each case  was  a  highly  fact
       sensitive approach.

   14. Turning to the facts of this case therefore it is accepted that  the
       Appellant has lived with his foster family since he was a  minor  in
       2011. His social worker, Miss Edwards from Worcester County  Council
       has provided various documents. In one undated letter she  indicates
       that she has been working with the Appellant since  June  2011.  She
       indicates that his current placement is his  third  and  has  proved
       very positive for him. He is with a white  British  family  and  has
       integrated well into their family unit, taking part  in  all  family
       activities and he considers them to be his additional family. He has
       settled well into Gloucester and integrated well into the community.
       He actively takes part in family activities and participates in  all
       celebrations such as birthdays, Christmas, family holidays etc.

   15. She indicates that there have been no concerns  about  his  physical
       health but he has struggled with his emotional health at  times  and
       is registered with the Child and Adolescent Mental  Health  Services
       (CAMHS) who indicate that he shows traits of anxiety, post traumatic
       stress syndrome and depression. He suffers from anxiety due  to  his
       concerns about being returned to  Afghanistan  and  his  safety  and
       suffers tremendously from  headaches  which  affect  his  day-to-day
       concentration. This had been highlighted as a concern by his  foster
       carers and CAMHS as a result of which many tests have  been  carried
       out which indicated that the headaches were not due  to  a  physical
       problem. He also suffers from memory loss which  is  linked  to  the
       headaches.

   16. She reports that he has an avid  interest  in  education  and  extra
       curricular  activities  and  that  he   worked   well   in   school,
       communicating well with pupils and teachers. Although his  headaches
       caused distress at school, he always gave his best efforts in class.
       He is very physically active and particularly enjoyed kickboxing and
       won many awards for  his  extracurricular  activities.  His  English
       language skills have developed tremendously since arriving in the UK
       and he can  now  communicate  in  English  easily.  In  addition  to
       education and extracurricular activities he has involved himself  in
       charity work, raising money for charities and has found himself some
       weekend work to earn extra money.

   17. He is said to react positively with professionals and  always  shows
       his social worker and other professionals respect and gratitude.  He
       has a good circle of friends in Gloucester and is  a  very  sociable
       person.

   18.  The  Social  Worker  talked  about  the  prospect  of  him   living
       independently and taking part in Pathway planning  meetings.  He  is
       said to be able to  cook  basic  meals  and  keep  himself  and  his
       environment clean, carrying out general household duties with  ease.
       However she says that he has always had the support  of  his  foster
       family and has never lived independently. The plan  is  for  him  to
       remain with his foster family after he is 18 in Supported  Lodgings.
       This is due to his vulnerability  emotionally.  Because  he  suffers
       from headaches and memory loss experiences with patches  of  anxiety
       and depression he needs ongoing support from  people  he  knows  and
       cares about.  He considers his foster family to be  his  family  and
       would like to remain with them. It is  the  Social  Worker's  stated
       opinion that  he  would  not  manage  independently  and  would  not
       progress well without the ongoing support of his foster family.

   19. There is then a "Best Interests Consideration Pro forma" prepared by
       the same Social Worker in which it is stated how much he values  his
       relationship with his foster family and how  they  actively  support
       him.  That document also refers to the fact that he misses  his  own
       family terribly and does not know whether they are dead or alive. He
       attempted to contact the Red Cross to use the family tracing service
       but after initial discussion and warnings of  the  tactics  the  Red
       Cross used to find family which may not be as discreet as they would
       like, he decided not  to  use  the  service  being  scared  for  his
       family's safety. However, he has continued to express a wish to know
       if his family are well.  He is said to have had no contact with them
       since he came to the UK and there is no suggestion that is untrue.

   20. The Appellant' bundle contains  a  statement  from  the  Appellant's
       foster mother indicating that he is a fully integrated member of the
       family.  They have spent a considerable amount of money funding  his
       appeal  and  stress  the  extra  support  he  needs   due   to   his
       vulnerability.  In particular it is necessary for his foster  mother
       to supervise his medication.

   21. There is a report from a Jeanette Campbell Johnston dated 19th March
       2015. She is an Occupational Therapist in  Mental  Health  currently
       working  as  lead  psychotherapist  at  Gloucestershire  Action  for
       Refugees and Asylum Seekers (GARAS).  The Appellant was referred  to
       her by professionals  who  dealt  with  him  who  had  long-standing
       concerns about his mental and emotional well-being. She met with the
       Appellant for one hour to make an assessment and also spoke  to  his
       foster mother. She concludes:-

          "Trauma  disorganises  and  paralyses  the   psychic   apparatus,
          including the breaking of attachment patterns and in  adolescence
          it also compromises development.  PTSD  and  depressive  symptoms
          remain and have been worsened by the recent appeal procedures.


          A needs to move into a state of more conscious mourning where  he
          can bear his losses with greater  resilience.  He  needs  further
          support and stability in order to feel strong enough to  take  up
          offers of talking and creative therapies for trauma treatment  on
          offer at GARAS. This needs to happen alongside  the  presence  of
          strong attachment figures as stand-in parents, namely his  foster
          mother and father. A  has  gone  a  long  way  towards  making  a
          "recovery" and this has mainly been achieved through the  support
          offered by his foster family, any separation from them is  likely
          to result in even more severe mental health issues."


   22. At the date of the hearing before us the Appellant is now  aged  20.
       He remains under the responsibility of Worcestershire County Council
       having been a "looked after  child."  At  our  request  Mr  Hodgetts
       obtained a copy of his "Pathway Plan" dated 11th January 2016.  That
       document sets out that a Care Pathway Plan  will  set  out  how  the
       young person's needs are to be met and the date by which,  by  whom,
       any action required to implement any aspect of the  plan  is  to  be
       carried out.  It also states that the plan  is  subject  to  regular
       review to react to changing circumstances.


   23. The Plan gives a brief care history as follows:-

         "A arrived in the UK in February 2010. Little is known of A's  past
         prior to this time. From Feb 2010 to March 2011 A was placed  in  4
         placements, 3 of which were foster care  placements.  His  previous
         placement prior to his current one broke down due to a disagreement
         between his foster carer and A. It  transpired  that  there  was  a
         clash of cultures which made  it  difficult  for  A  to  remain  in
         placement.


         A is now placed with a white,  British  family  within  Gloucester.
         This placement has proved very successful and A  has  settled  well
         into the family home. A's care plan is to remain with  this  family
         until independence. Post-18 years old, both A and carers  requested
         that the placement was converted to supported  lodgings  which  has
         now successfully happened-relevant benefits have been  applied  for
         and are up and running.


         A has no family within the UK and has reported no contact with  his
         birth family since leaving Afghanistan."


   24. The overall care plan for the Appellant is said to be:-


          "Long-term placement foster  carers  progressed  to  a  supported
          lodgings placement under staying put whilst a decision is  sought
          from the Home Office with regard to his  stay  in  the  UK-  This
          means that whilst every effort is made to support A's integration
          into UK life we still have to keep on the agenda the consequences
          of a negative Home  Office  decision.  A  has  appropriate  legal
          advice and is being represented through his asylum claim.


          A needs to continue with his acquisition of English skills to aid
          his integration and also to open up his educational possibilities
          - I hope that the short-term gain of a part-time job and  instant
          cash doesn't distract him from his studies. A is  not  immune  to
          the love bug and again I hope  this  doesn't  distract  from  his
          college and he keeps a balance in his life that is proportionate.


          The update to December 2014 is definitely  -  "could  do  better"
          with college attendance and he has been encouraged by myself  and
          Ae regarding this matter.


          Supported Lodgings is agreed on the terms that education/training
          is being pursued.


          June 2015 - update


          It has been a very testing year so far - the Home Office rejected
          his claim and he then appealed that decision - mostly on  Article
          8 grounds and with the financial support of Ae and D -  This  was
          rejected after court and now he is  applying  to  the  courts  to
          appeal that decision - It  is  extremely  stressful  time  as  he
          really doesn't know how/where his future will be.


          Ae and D have paid legal costs for the ongoing appeal and have
          been incredibly supportive.

          A has improved his college attendance and remains very happy in
          placement.

          January 2016

          January 28 --appeal at the High Court is to take place - in
          fairness he cannot concentrate on anything at this time-

          An apprenticeship place is identified and ready to go - A has
          first pass his Level 1 English test to be eligible."

   25. The only major change to his situation is, regrettably, his foster
       parents have, after 30 years of marriage recently separated,
       although he continues to live with his foster mother.

   26. The level of his foster family's commitment to the Appellant is
       demonstrated by their willingness to pay his legal fees and that the
       foster mother is estranged from her own mother as a result of taking
       the Appellant into the home.

   27. We are satisfied overall that the Appellant  in this case has
       significant symptoms of depression and PTSD which manifest
       themselves, amongst other things in continued headaches which have
       affected his education. We accept that he is very reliant on
       emotional support and help with his medication from his foster
       family, particularly his foster mother, notwithstanding that he is
       now over the age of 18. In short we are satisfied that he is a very
       vulnerable individual who is very close to and emotionally dependent
       upon his foster family. Notwithstanding that he is an adult he
       remains at home, not as a matter of choice as is the case with many
       young persons, but out of necessity because of his additional needs
       over and above those of other young persons approaching adulthood.

   28. Looking at the facts of this particular case, as we must, we find
       that his situation with his family is such as not only to constitute
       family life but does so notwithstanding he is now an adult. There is
       clearly a very considerable financial, emotional and physical
       dependency on his foster mother beyond those one would usually find
       with a normal young adult and his parents. Adding to that the
       private life he has established in the United Kingdom since his
       arrival in 2010, six years ago, and the total absence of contact
       with his birth family in Afghanistan, we are satisfied not only that
       Article 8 is engaged but that to remove him would be a
       disproportionate breach of his private and family life given his
       considerable vulnerability.

   29. We would add that this is not one of those considerable numbers of
       cases of Afghan teenagers who travel to the UK for a better life,
       funded by their families with less than credible claims to have no
       further contact with that family and nothing to return to. There is
       clear evidence in this case that he has been quite frank in his wish
       to know about his family and whether they are alive and safe but has
       been unable to do so for fear of jeopardising their safety. There is
       nothing to suggest that he has at any time been dishonest about his
       situation.

   30. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed  on  Human
       Rights grounds.

   31. At the Appellant's request and given his vulnerability  we  make  an
       anonymity direction.


Signed                 Dated 11th March 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
