

                                                       [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
AA/01867/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|   Heard at North Shields             |    Decision Promulgated    |
|   On March 10, 2016                  |    On March 30, 2016       |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        MR DIDIER EMOMO MAKILI NGBOKO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Eteko (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
       (DRC). The appellant claimed to have left the DRC  on  December  17,
       2013 and entered the United Kingdom on December 24, 2013. He claimed
       asylum on February 12, 2014. The respondent refused his asylum claim
       on January 21, 2015 under paragraph 336 HC 395 and  a  decision  was
       taken to remove him by way of directions under  paragraphs  8-10  of
       Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

    2. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 4, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before Judges of the First-tier  Tribunal  Griffiths
       and Fisher on May 28, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on July  6,
       2015 they refused the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

    4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 17,  2015  submitting
       the First-tier Judges had erred in their approach to the  assessment
       of the appellant's claim and the effect  of  the  country  evidence.
       Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Page on July 29, 2015. The appellant renewed his grounds  of  appeal
       to the the Upper Tribunal August 21, 2015 and Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Finch gave permission on September 18, 2015.

    5. In a Rule 24 letter dated October 9, 2015 the respondent opposed the
       appeal.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make no order.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Eteko argues the First-tier Judges had  erred  in  two  respects.
       Firstly, he submitted that  having  accepted  the  appellant  was  a
       member of the Union for Democracy and Social  Progress  (UDPS)  they
       had erred  by  failing  to  consider  the  evidence  that  had  been
       submitted that should have led to them departing  from  the  country
       guidance case of MM (UDPS members, Risk on  return)  DRC  CG  [2007]
       UKIAT 0023. He referred me the appellant's bundle and in  particular
       page 119 of that bundle that dealt with how UDPS members were  dealt
       with. His second  submission  was  that  by  rejecting  the  medical
       evidence based on earlier adverse credibility findings  amounted  to
       an error in law.

    9. Mr Dewison adopted the content of the Rule 24 response in so far  as
       it addressed the first ground of appeal. He submitted the Judges had
       demonstrated an engagement with his account and the  evidence.  With
       regard to the second ground of appeal he submitted  the  report  was
       based on an acceptance of the appellant's claim and  the  author  of
       the report had not shown that she  had  considered  the  appellant's
       account alongside the  respondent's  refusal  letter  or  given  any
       weight to the suggestion  that  the  appellant's  medical  condition
       could be due to the situation he was facing.

   10. I reserved my decision.


DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   11. This was an extremely detailed decision and as indicated to Mr Eteko
       this was not a decision in which the Judges  had  failed  to  engage
       with the written and oral evidence.

   12. In MA v UT 2014 CSIH 111 it was  said  that  a  proper  approach  to
       credibility required an  assessment  of  the  evidence  and  of  the
       general claim. In asylum claims, relevant factors  were,  first  the
       internal  consistency  of   the   claim;   secondly   the   inherent
       plausibility of the claim; and thirdly the consistency of the  claim
       with external  factors  of  the  sort  typically  found  in  country
       guidance.

   13. The Judges in this current case clearly engaged with the appellant's
       claim. They set out in some detail not only his claim but  also  the
       oral evidence he gave at the hearing. Mr Eteko  submitted  that  the
       Judges accepted the appellant was a member of UDPS and this  can  be
       found at paragraph [86] of their  decision.  However,  he  submitted
       they should have departed from the country guidance decision of MM.

   14. The Tribunal in  MM  considered  the  threat  to  UDPS  members  and
       concluded,  "the  UDPS  is  perceived  as  less  of  a  threat  than
       previously, the guidance given in AB and DM Democratic  Republic  of
       Congo CG [2005] UKAIT 00118 and confirmed in MK DRC CG [2006]  UKAIT
       00001 remains correct." At paragraph [250] they stated-

         "Mindful of the  risk  categories  as  identified  in  AB  and  DM,
         confirmed in MK and now re-affirmed by us, we recognise that had we
         found the Appellant to be credible, we would have concluded that as
         a person who had a role in the  UDPS  and  who  was  known  to  the
         authorities and who had been detained and ill-treated by  them  for
         his political opinion and who had escaped from detention, he  would
         arguably, not least to the lower standard of proof, be at  risk  on
         return to the DRC.  Conversely, he would not be  at  real  risk  on
         return, if we found the Appellant to be no more than a mere  member
         of the UDPS."

   15. The Judges considered his claims and they noted  inconsistencies  of
       particular significance that led them  to  conclude  he  was  not  a
       truthful  witness.  However,  before  rejecting   his   claim   they
       considered the evidence submitted (see paragraphs [83] - [84]). They
       made it clear that the mere fact every document was not referred  to
       did not mean no regard had been paid  to  it.  They  considered  his
       membership  of  the  group  "Equality  for  All"  but  concluded  in
       paragraph [85] that he had fabricated  parts  of  his  evidence  and
       importantly had not come to the attention of the  authorities.  They
       then considered from paragraph [86] his involvement  with  UDPS  and
       they set out his  written  and  oral  evidence-highlighting  further
       inconsistencies. Whilst accepting his role as a  youth  co-ordinator
       and the role he played in organising football matches they  rejected
       his claim to be a high profile member. They  gave  detailed  reasons
       and rejected his claim to  have  been  arrested,  detained  or  ill-
       treated as a  result  of  his  membership.  They  engaged  with  the
       documents and whilst not setting out every document they  looked  at
       it is clear, on any reading of the decision, they engaged  with  the
       issues in this appeal.

   16. They then considered the medical evidence and this  was  the  second
       ground of appeal. It was submitted that in assessing his credibility
       the Judges erred by considering the report after making findings.

   17. I have considered this argument and whilst that  submission  can  be
       persuasive I find in this case it has  no  merit.  The  Judges  made
       findings about the conclusions of the report  and  having  read  the
       report myself I am not satisfied that  the  psychological  therapist
       was sent any evidence to  consider.  Her  assessment  was  based  on
       speaking to the appellant  and  listening  to  his  complaints.  The
       therapist  did  not  consider  other  possibilities  including   the
       possibility that his problems were linked to uncertain  status.  Her
       opinion was based solely on what she had  been  told  and  in  those
       circumstances the Judges were entitled to find little weight  should
       be attached to the report itself especially as they  had  considered
       the evidence and rejected his claims.

   18. Two grounds of appeal were advanced and there is nothing  in  either
       ground that persuades me the Judges erred in  law.  With  regard  to
       Ground One the Judges considered the  internal  consistency  of  the
       claim  and  rejected  it.  They   then   considered   the   inherent
       plausibility of the claim and gave reasons for  rejecting  it.  They
       then had regard to the country guidance case  and  found  there  was
       nothing that would lead them to depart from that decision.  Detailed
       reasons were given and I find no  error  on  the  first  ground.  As
       regards the second ground I find no  error  and  refer  back  to  my
       reasons set out in paragraph [17] above.

DECISION

   19. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point of law. I uphold the First-
       tier decision.


Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
