
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 09 December 2015                  |On 07 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                             JEGATHEES NADARAJAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by S. Satha &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum and remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant. The  appellant
    claims that he left Sri Lanka on 17 September  2013.  By  a  circuitous
    route via Malaysia, Iran, Turkey and Egypt he eventually entered the UK
    clandestinely with the assistance of an agent on 07 February  2014.  He
    claimed asylum the same day and  an  initial  screening  interview  was
    carried out. On 25 February 2014 he was interviewed in detail about his
    reasons for claiming asylum. In summary, the appellant claims  that  he
    would be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka as a result of his activities
    for the Tamil National Alliance (TNA) during local elections  in  2013.
    He claims that he was threatened as a result of  these  activities  and
    that unknown people, who he believes were members of the Eelam People's
    Democratic Party (EPDP), came to his family home to find  him.  He  was
    able to escape to Colombo where arrangements were made for him to leave
    the country with the assistance of an agent.

2.    The respondent refused the application in a decision  dated  12  March
    2014. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim to have  been
    attacked by the EPDP due to apparent inconsistencies  in  his  account.
    The  respondent  considered  that  there  was   sufficient   protection
    available in Sri Lanka, or in the alternative, that he would be able to
    relocate to another area. He had already relocated to  Colombo  but  by
    his own admission then told his alleged attackers that  he  was  there.
    The appellant did not otherwise meet any of  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge D. Ross dismissed the appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 October 2014. The First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was
    set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted for a fresh hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuell
    ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in a further decision dated  19  May
    2015. He gave a number of reasons why he found that the  appellant  had
    failed to establish his account of events to the low standard of  proof
    and concluded that he would not be at risk on return.

4.    The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal made a mistake of fact in  finding  that
         the appellant claimed that his only reason for working for the  TNA
         was his desire to earn 300 rupees a day. The mistake  was  material
         to the judge's adverse  credibility  findings  [18].  In  fact  the
         appellant's evidence in interview was that he told the  people  who
         threatened him in the street that he was  only  doing  it  for  the
         money [qu.58].

    (ii)   The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  there  were
         discrepancies between the evidence  given  by  the  appellant,  his
         father, his aunt and the police reports, when in fact there were no
         such discrepancies, or in  the  alternative,  the  judge  erred  in
         failing to give clear or adequate reasons for his findings [18-20].

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to appreciate that  the
         background evidence showed that the EPDP is associated with the Sri
         Lankan authorities, which was material to his assessment of whether
         there were any  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  and  whether  the
         authorities had shown any interest in him [22 & 25].

    (iv)   The judge failed to make clear findings to explain  his  comment
         that the appellant "cannot have been unaware of the  risks  he  was
         running by becoming a participant. He himself admits  that  he  was
         carrying a replica gun when he was threatened by  EPDP  supporters"
         [22].

    (v)    The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  attach  sufficient
         weight to the clinical opinion of Dr Persaud [26].

    (vi)   In assessing the background situation the judge failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for his conclusions  and/or  mischaracterised  the
         evidence relating to the current situation in Sri Lanka [30].

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a material point of law.

6.    While the grounds of appeal make some criticism of the approach  taken
    by the judge in relation to specific findings, after having  considered
    the evidence as a whole, I find that the grounds  really  amount  to  a
    series of complaints and fail to identify any errors of law that  would
    have made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

7.    The judge's finding in paragraph 18 that the  appellant  claimed  that
    his interest in the TNA "derived entirely from the chance to  earn  300
    rupees a day" may well have mischaracterised the evidence but only in a
    fairly minor way. It is clear from his answer at  question  58  of  the
    interview record that the appellant was describing what he said to  the
    men who stopped him and threatened him with a gun in  the  street.  The
    reasonable inference that can be made from what he said is that he  was
    trying to protect himself from attack by seeking to deny that  he  held
    any genuine political beliefs.

8.     Even  if  the  judge  wrongly  assumed  that  the  appellant's   only
    motivation for  carrying  out  election  activities  for  the  TNA  was
    financial reward I find that it made  no  material  difference  to  his
    overall assessment. It seems  clear  from  other  statements  that  the
    appellant made in interview that he did not carry  out  activities  for
    the TNA as a result of his own political opinion or  beliefs.  He  made
    quite clear that he helped the TNA campaign because his  father  was  a
    friend of the local candidate and pressured him to do so even  when  he
    was reluctant to continue the election activities [qu.11, 16, 43 & 64].
    Even if it is arguable that the judge mischaracterised the  appellant's
    main motivation for carrying out the activities it would have  made  no
    material difference to his assessment because it was  open  to  him  to
    conclude, on the appellant's own evidence, that he  did  not  have  any
    particularly strong political opinions of his own and was  unlikely  to
    participate in further political activities now that the elections were
    "well and truly over" [28].

9.    I also accept that the  judge's  apparent  failure  to  recognise  the
    nature  of  the  connection  between  the  EPDP  and  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities is a matter  that  may  have  coloured  his  assessment  of
    whether there were any meaningful  discrepancies  between  the  letters
    provided by the appellant's father and aunt and the police  report.  In
    light of the background evidence that shows that there is  co-operation
    between EPDP paramilitaries and the Sri  Lankan  security  forces,  the
    fact that his father refers to "the  EPDP  and  military  intelligence"
    targeting his son, and his aunt's reference to him  being  "under  army
    investigation", are not wholly inconsistent with one another.  Nor  are
    they inconsistent with the appellant's own belief that the  people  who
    came to his home and threatened his father were likely to be  from  the
    EPDP. As the judge noted, this was broadly consistent with other pieces
    of background evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  which  reported
    that there had been a number of attacks on TNA election  candidates  at
    the time [23].

10.   The appellant has also been able to point to certain  aspects  of  the
    decision where the relevance of the judge's comments are either unclear
    or the findings may not have been clearly reasoned. For example, it  is
    unclear what relevance the fact that the appellant  carried  a  replica
    gun during the election campaign had on his credibility findings  [22].
    Similarly, it is unclear what relevance his findings  relating  to  the
    appellant's apparently pre-existing mental health condition had on  his
    overall credibility findings. The judge appeared  to  question  whether
    the appellant could leave Sri Lanka and travel to the UK if his  mental
    health condition was as bad as he said [26] yet went on to accept  that
    the appellant was likely to have been suffering from  depression  since
    his mother's death [37].

11.   While some of the criticisms of the judge's findings may be  justified
    I find that on a proper reading of the decision as a whole they do  not
    amount to errors of law that would have made any material difference to
    the outcome of the appeal. Despite some of  the  reservations  that  he
    expressed about the reliability of the appellant's  account  the  judge
    went on to make findings in  the  alternative.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant's account was broadly consistent with the background evidence
    relating to violence at election time in Sri Lanka  [23].  His  finding
    that the appellant did not hold any political convictions  of  his  own
    and  was  therefore  unlikely  to  continue  with   further   political
    activities now the elections were over was open to him in light of  the
    appellant's own evidence [28]. The judge took  into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant did not claim to have any connections with the  LTTE
    or other separatists groups  either  in  Sri  Lanka  or  in  the  Tamil
    diaspora in London. Given the fact that the  elections  took  place  in
    September 2013, and the appellant was unlikely to  participate  in  any
    further political activities, it was open to him to conclude  that,  in
    the absence of any background evidence to show that the EPDP  continued
    to target former TNA campaign workers, there was insufficient  evidence
    to show that the appellant would be at risk on return [28].

12.   The judge took into account the most recent  country  guidance  in  GJ
    and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    but in view of his findings relating  to  the  limited  nature  of  the
    appellant's political  activities  during  a  relatively  brief  period
    surrounding an election, and taking into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did not appear to have any political convictions of his  own,
    or any significant political profile, it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the appellant's profile was not such that he  was  likely
    to be viewed as a person with a significant role in post-conflict Tamil
    separatism.

13.   The judge made findings relating to the medical evidence  and  whether
    the appellant's mental health condition was sufficient  to  engage  the
    protection of Article 3 of the European Convention [33-38]. Despite the
    fact that the grounds of appeal appear to challenge those findings,  at
    the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Paramjorthy  confirmed  that
    there was no "stand alone" Article 3  claim.  The  psychiatric  reports
    were adduced to support the argument that  the  appellant  would  be  a
    vulnerable individual if subjected to  questioning  on  return.  Having
    made that concession it is unclear how paragraphs 11-12 of the  grounds
    of appeal, which appear to criticise the judge's  failure  to  consider
    whether adequate psychiatric treatment would be available on return  in
    light of what was said at paragraphs 441-456  of  GJ  and  Others  (Sri
    Lanka) are material.  Those  paragraphs  relate  to  specific  findings
    regarding one of the appellants in GJ and Others (Sri Lanka) and appear
    to make no  general  findings  on  the  background  evidence  save  for
    reference in paragraphs 454-456 to the  information  contained  in  the
    respondent's Operational Guidance Note.

14.   The judge credited Dr Persaud for amending his  report  to  take  into
    account earlier criticism of his first report. He went  on  to  explain
    why he did not  accept  Dr  Persaud's  diagnosis  of  PTSD  because  it
    appeared to be based on the mistaken belief that the appellant had been
    tortured when the appellant made no such claim. The judge  went  on  to
    recognise that the doctor may have been given  limited  information  to
    make his diagnosis. But as a result it was open to him  to  place  less
    weight on Dr Persaud's conclusions [33]. The judge noted that there was
    little evidence to support the appellant's claimed suicide attempts  in
    the UK and that the GP's notes did not mention any suicidal  intent  or
    attempts to harm himself during the period covered by the  notes  [34].
    The judge noted that there may  have  been  witness  to  those  suicide
    attempts but they did not attend to give evidence  [34].  I  also  note
    that the discharge letter written by Stuart Mason (undated  but  states
    discharged 17/12/14) post-dates Dr Persaud's reports  and  states  that
    the appellant had no active intention to commit suicide.

15.   Given the dearth of evidence it is not arguable that the  judge  erred
    in concluding that there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant is actively suicidal. Indeed he went further  and  considered
    that the appellant's claimed suicide attempts  were  no  more  than  an
    attempt to embellish a weak claim taking into account the fact that the
    appellant appeared to show no interest in engaging in therapy that  had
    been offered to him in the UK [36]. While the judge accepted  that  the
    appellant was likely to be  suffering  from  depression,  having  given
    adequate reasons to explain why he placed little weight on some  of  Dr
    Persaud's conclusions, it was open to him to conclude that the root  of
    his condition was more likely to be "a grief reaction" to the death  of
    his mother [37].

16.   In any event, the criticism  of  the  judge's  assessment  of  GJ  and
    Others (Sri Lanka) is unfounded because it is clear from  his  findings
    in paragraph 38 of the decision that he took into account the  evidence
    outlined by the Tribunal at paragraph 450 onwards  [38].  He  concluded
    that the evidence relating to limited psychiatric facilities  available
    in Sri Lanka was not relevant given that he had been unable  to  accept
    that the appellant had any  current  suicidal  ideation.  The  evidence
    indicated that the  appellant  had  failed  to  engage  with  treatment
    offered to him in the UK. Although it  is  still  unclear  whether,  in
    light of the grounds of appeal, the appellant is still pursuing a  case
    on Article 3 grounds, for the reasons given  above,  I  find  that  the
    judge's findings were sustainable on the evidence before him.

17.   Even if the psychiatric evidence is relied upon solely  to  support  a
    claim  that  the  appellant  would  be  vulnerable   during   potential
    questioning on return, in the absence of any evidence to show  that  he
    was likely to be of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  at
    the  date  of  the  hearing,  it  is  unlikely  that  the   appellant's
    vulnerability would have made any material difference  to  the  overall
    outcome of the appeal.

18.   While the appellant's account, taken at its  highest,  indicates  that
    he is likely to have a subjective fear of return, in  my  judgment,  it
    cannot be said  that  the  judge's  alternative  findings  relating  to
    whether his fear is well-founded disclose any material errors of law on
    the particular facts and evidence in this case.

19.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed       [pic]     Date 06 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
